The Project Gutenberg eBook, W.T. Pentateuch 1530-37 and N.T. 1525-26,
translated by William Tyndale


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

** This is a COPYRIGHTED Project Gutenberg eBook, Details Below **
**     Please follow the copyright guidelines in this file.     **


Title: W.T. Pentateuch 1530-37 and N.T. 1525-26

Translator: William Tyndale

Release Date: January 1, 2004  [eBook #10553]
[Most recently updated January 12, 2006]

Language: English

Character set encoding: Latin1





***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK W.T. PENTATEUCH 1530-37 AND N.T. 1525-26***


The Pentateuch first translated from Hebrew to English by William
Tyndale, published in 1530.  This edition has the same wording, but
modernized spelling.  Words found in {[Braquets]} are variants from
either Coverdale 1535 or Matthew's Bible 1537.

Copyright (C) 2003 faithofgod.net
May be quoted and used freely in all non-lucre, non-commercial Scripture
distribution endeavors provided the content is not altered.

If you find any transcription error please contact :
valente@faithofgod.net

----------------------------------------------------------------------

The First Book of Moses, called Genesis

Chapter .j.

In the beginning God created heaven and earth. The earth was void 
and empty, and darkness was upon the deep, and the spirit of god 
moved upon the water. Then God said: let there be light and there 
was light. And God saw the light that it was good: and divided the 
light from the darkness, and called the light day, and the 
darkness night: and so of the evening and morning was made the 
first day. And God said: let there be a firmament between the 
waters, and let it divide the waters asunder. Then God made the 
firmament and parted the waters which were under the firmament, 
from the waters that were above the firmament: And it was so. And 
God called the firmament heaven. And so of the evening and morning 
was made the second day. And God said, let the waters that are 
under heaven gather them selves unto one place, that the dry land 
may appear: And it came so to pass. And God called the dry land 
the earth and the gathering together of waters called he the sea. 
And God saw that it was good. And God said: let the earth bring 
forth herb and grass that sow seed, and fruitful trees that bear 
fruit every one in his kind, having their seed in themselves upon 
the earth. And it came so to pass: And the earth brought forth 
herb and grass sowing seed every one in his kind and trees bearing 
fruit and having their seed in them selves, every one in his kind. 
And God saw that it was good: and then of the evening and morning 
was made the third day. Then said God: let there be lights in the 
firmament of heaven to divide the day from the night, that they 
may be unto signs, seasons, days and years. And let them be lights 
in the firmament of heaven, to shine upon the earth: and so it 
was. And God made two great lights: A greater light to rule the 
day, and a less light to rule the night, and he made stars also. 
And God put them in the firmament of heaven to shine upon the 
earth, and to rule the day and the night, and to divide the light 
from darkness. And God saw that it was good: and so of the evening 
and morning was made the fourth day. And God said, let the water 
bring forth creatures that move and have life, and fowls for to 
flee {fly} over the earth under the firmament of heaven. And God 
created great whales and all manner of creatures that live and 
move, which the waters brought forth in their kinds, and all 
manner of feathered fowls in their kinds. And God saw that it was 
good: and God blessed them saying: Grow and multiply and fill the 
waters of the seas, and let the fowls multiply upon the earth. And 
so of the evening and morning was made the fifth day. And God 
said: let the earth bring forth living creatures in their kinds: 
cattle and worms and beasts of the earth in their kinds, and so it 
came to pass. And God made the beasts of the earth in their kinds, 
and cattle in their kinds, and all manner worms of the earth in 
their kinds: and God saw that it was good. And God said: let us 
make man in our similitude and after our likeness: that he may 
have rule over the fish of the sea, and over the fowls of the air, 
and over cattle, and over all the earth, and over all worms that 
creep on the earth. And God created man after his likeness, after 
the likeness of God created he him: male and female created he 
them. And God blessed them, and God said unto them: Grow and 
multiply and fill the earth and subdue it, and have dominion over 
the fishes of the sea, and over the fowls of the air, and over all 
the beasts that move on the earth. And God said: see, I have given 
yow all herbs that sow seed which are on all the earth, and all 
manner trees that have fruit in them and sow seed: to be meat for 
yow and for all beasts of the earth, and unto all fowls of the 
air, and unto all that creepeth on the earth where in is life, 
that they may have all manner herbs and grass for to eat, and even 
so it was. And God beheld all that he had made, and lo they were 
exceeding good: and so of the evening and morning was made the 
sixth day.

Chapter .ij.

Thus was heaven and earth finished with all their apparel: and in 
the seventh day God ended his work which he had made and rested in 
the seventh day from all his works which he had made. And God 
blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it, for in it he rested 
from all his works which he had created and made. These are the 
generations of heaven and earth when they were created, in the 
time when the LORD God created heaven and earth and all the shrubs 
of the field before they were in the earth. And all the herbs of 
the field before they sprang: for the LORD God had yet sent no 
rain upon the earth, neither was there yet any man to till the 
earth. But there arose a mist out of the ground and watered all 
the face of the earth: Then the LORD God shope man, even of the 
mould of the earth and breathed into his face the breath of life. 
So man was made a living soul. The LORD God also planted a garden 
in Eden from the beginning, and there he set man whom he had 
formed. And the LORD God made to spring out of the earth, all 
manner trees beautiful to the sight and pleasant to eat, and the 
tree of life in the midst {middes} of the garden: and also the 
tree of knowledge of good and evil. And there sprong a river out 
of Eden to water the garden, and thence divided itself, and grew 
into four principal waters. The name of the one is Phison, he it 
is that compasseth all the land of Hevila, where gold groweth. And 
the gold of that country is precious, there is found bedellion and 
a stone called Onyx. The name of the second river is Gihon, which 
compasseth all the land of Inde. And the name of the third river 
is Hidekell, which runneth on the east side of the Assyrians; And 
the fourth river is Euphrates. And the LORD God took Adam and put 
him in the garden of Eden, to dress it and to keep it: And the 
LORD God commanded Adam saying: Of all the trees of the garden see 
thou eat: But of the tree of knowledge of good and bad see that 
thou eat not: For even the same day thou eatest of it, thou shalt 
surely die. {die the death} And the LORD God said: It is not good 
that man should be alone, I will make him an helper to bear him 
company: And after that the LORD God had made of the earth all 
manner beasts of the field, and all manner fowls of the air, he 
brought them unto Adam to see what he would call them. And as Adam 
called all manner living beasts: even so are their names. And Adam 
gave names unto all manner cattle, and unto the fowls of the air, 
and unto all manner beasts of the field. But there was no help 
found unto Adam to bear him company. Then the LORD God cast a 
slumber on Adam, and he slept. And then he took out one of his 
ribs, and in stead thereof he filled up the place with flesh. And 
the LORD God made of the rib which he took out of Adam, a woman, 
and brought her unto Adam. Then said Adam: This is once bone of my 
bones, and flesh of my flesh. This shall be called woman: because 
she was taken of the man. For this cause shall a man leave father 
and mother and cleave unto his wife, and they shall be one flesh. 
And they were either of them naked, both Adam and his wife, and 
were not ashamed.

Chapter .iij.

But the serpent was subtler than all the beasts of the field which 
the LORD God had made, and said unto the woman: Ah sir, {Yee} that 
God hath said, {[indeed]} ye shall not eat of all manner trees in 
the garden. And the woman said unto the serpent, of the fruit of 
the trees in the garden we may eat, but of the fruit of the tree 
that {yt} is in the midst {myddes} of the garden (said God) see 
that ye eat not, and see that ye touch it not: lest ye die. Then 
said the serpent unto the woman: tush ye shall not die: but God 
doth know, that whensoever ye should eat of it, your eyes should 
be opened and ye should be as God and know both good and evil. And 
the woman saw that it was a good tree to eat of and lusty unto the 
eyes and a pleasant tree for to make wise. And took of the fruit 
of it and ate, and gave unto her husband also with her, and he 
ate. And the eyes of both them were opened, that they understood 
how that they were naked. Then they sewed fig leaves together and 
made them aprons. And they heard the voice of the LORD God as he 
walked in the garden in the cool of the day. And Adam hid himself 
and his wife also from the face of the LORD God, among the trees 
of the garden. And the LORD God called Adam and said unto him 
where art thou? And he answered: Thy voice I heard in the garden, 
but I was afraid because I was naked, and therefore hid myself. 
And he said: Who told thee that thou wast naked? hast thou eaten 
of the tree, of which I bade thee that thou shouldest not eat? And 
Adam answered: The woman which thou gavest to bear me company, she 
took me of the tree, and I ate. And the LORD God said unto the 
woman: Wherefore didst thou so? And the woman answered: The 
serpent deceived me and I ate. And the LORD God said unto the 
serpent because thou hast so done most cursed be thou of all 
cattle and of all beasts of the field: upon thy belly shalt thou 
go: and earth shalt thou eat all days of thy life. Moreover I will 
put hatred between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and 
her seed. And that seed shall tread thee on the head, and thou 
shalt tread it {hit} on the heel. And unto the woman he said: I 
will surely increase thy sorrow and make thee oft with child, and 
with pain shalt thou be delivered: And thy lusts shall pertain 
unto thy husband and he shall rule thee. And unto Adam he said: 
Forasmuch as thou hast obeyed the voice of thy wife, and hast 
eaten of the tree of which I commanded thee, saying: See thou eat 
not thereof: cursed be the earth for thy sake. In sorrow shalt 
thou eat thereof all days of thy life: And it shall bear thorns 
and thistles unto thee. And thou shalt eat the herbs of the field: 
In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread, until thou return 
unto the earth whence thou wast take: for earth thou art, and unto 
earth shalt thou return. And Adam called his wife Heva, because 
she was the mother of all that liveth. And the LORD God made Adam 
and his wife garments of skins, and put them on them. And the LORD 
God said: Lo, Adam is become as it were one of us, in knowledge of 
good and evil. But now lest he stretch forth his hand and take 
also of the tree of life and eat and live ever. And the LORD God 
cast him out of the garden of Eden, to till the earth whence he 
was taken. And he cast Adam out, and set at the entering of the 
garden Eden, Cherubim with a naked sword moving in and out, to 
keep the way to the tree of life.

Chapter .iiij.

And Adam lay with Heva is wife, which conceived and bare Cain, and 
said: I have gotten a man of the LORD. And she proceeded forth and 
bare his brother Abel: And Abel became a shepherd, and Cain became 
a plowman. And it fortuned in process of time, that Cain brought 
of the fruit of the earth: an offering unto the LORD. And Abel, he 
brought also of the firstlings of his sheep and of the fat of 
them. And the LORD looked unto Abel and to his offering: but unto 
Cain and unto his offering, looked he not. And Cain was wroth 
exceedingly, and lowered. And the LORD said unto Cain: why art 
thou angry, and why lowerest thou? Wotest thou not if thou dost 
well thou shalt receive it? But and if thou dost evil, by and by 
thy sin lieth open in the door. Notwithstanding let it be subdued 
unto thee, and see thou rule it. And Cain talked with Abel his 
brother. And as soon as they were in the fields, Cain fell upon 
Abel his brother and slew him. And the LORD said unto Cain: where 
is Abel thy brother? And he said: I can not tell, am I my 
brother's keeper? And he said: What hast thou done? The voice of 
thy brother's blood cryeth unto me out of the earth. And now 
cursed be thou as pertaining to the earth, which opened her mouth 
to receive thy brother's blood of thine hand. For when thou 
tillest the ground she shall henceforth not give her power unto 
thee. A vagabond and a renegade shalt thou be upon the earth. And 
Cain said unto the LORD: my sin is greater, than that it may be 
forgiven. Behold thou castest me out this day from off the face of 
the earth, and from thy sight must I hide myself, and I must be 
wandering and a vagabond upon the earth: Moreover whosoever 
findeth me, will kill me. And the LORD said unto him: Not so, but 
whosoever slayeth Cain shall be punished sevenfold. And the LORD 
put a mark upon Cain that no man that found him should kill him. 
And Cain went out from the face of the LORD, and dwelt in the land 
Nod, on the east side of Eden. And Cain lay with his wife, which 
conceived and bare Henoch. And he was building a city and called 
the name of it after the name of his son, Henoch. And Henoch begat 
Irad. And Irad begat Mahuiael. And Mahuiael begat Mathusael. And 
Mathusael begat Lamech. And Lamech took him two wives: the one was 
called Ada, and the other Zilla: And Ada bare Iabal, of whom came 
they that dwell in tents and possess cattle. And his brother's 
name was Iubal: of him came all that exercise them selves on the 
harp and on the organs. And Zilla she also bare Tubalcain a worker 
in metal and a father of all that grave in brass and iron. And 
Tubalcain's sister was called Naema. Then said Lamech unto his 
wives Ada and Zilla: hear my voice ye wives of Lamech and hearken 
unto my words, for I have slain a man and wounded myself, and have 
slain a young man, and got myself stripes: For Cain shall be 
avenged sevenfold: but Lamech seventy times sevenfold. Adam also 
lay with his wife yet again, and she bare a son and called his 
name Seth For God (said she) hath given me another son for Abel 
whom Cain slew. And Seth begat a son and called his name Enos. And 
in that time began men to call on the name of the LORD.

Chapter .v.

This is the book of the generation of man, in the day when God 
created man and made him after the similitude of God. Male and 
female made he them, and called their names man, in the day when 
they were created. And when Adam was an hundred and thirty years 
old, he begat a son after his likeness and similitude: and called 
his name Seth. And the days of Adam after he begat Seth, were 
eight hundred years, and begat sons and daughters. And all the 
days of Adam which he lived, were nine hundred and thirty years, 
and then he died. And Seth lived an hundred and five years, and 
begat Enos. And after he had begot Enos he lived eight hundred and 
seven years, and begat sons and daughters. And all the days of 
Seth were nine hundred and twelve years, and died. And Enos lived 
ninety years, and begat Kenan. And Enos after he begat Kenan, 
lived eight hundred and fifteen years, and begat sons and 
daughters: and all the days of Enos were nine hundred and five 
years, and then he died. And Kenan lived seventy years, and begat 
Mahalaliel. And Kenan after he had begot Mahalaliel, lived eight 
hundred and forty years, and begat sons and daughters: and all the 
days of Kenan were nine hundred and ten years, and then he died. 
And Mahalaliel lived sixty five years, and begat Iared. And 
Mahalaliel after he had begot Iared lived eight hundred and thirty 
years, and begat sons and daughters: and all the days of 
Mahalaliel were eight hundred ninety and five years, and then he 
died. And Iared lived an hundred and sixty two years, and begat 
Henoch: and Iared lived after he begat Henoch, eight hundred 
years, and begat sons and daughters. And all the days of Iared 
were nine hundred and sixty two years, and then he died. And 
Henoch lived sixty five years, and begat Mathusala. And Henoch 
walked with God after he had begot Mathusalah, three hundred 
years, and begat sons and daughters: And all the days of Henoch 
were three hundred and sixty five years, and then Henoch lived a 
godly life, and was no more seen, for God took him away. And 
Mathusala lived an hundred and eighty seven years and begat 
Lamech: and Mathusala after he had begot Lamech, lived seven 
hundred and eighty two years, and begat sons and daughters. And 
all the days of Mathusala were nine hundred sixty nine years, and 
then he died. And Lamech lived an hundred eighty two years and 
begat a son, and called him Noe saying: This same shall comfort 
us: as concerning our work and sorrow of our hands which we have 
about the earth that the LORD hath cursed. And Lamech lived after 
he had begot Noe, five hundred, ninety and five years, and begat 
sons and daughters. And all the days of Lamech were seven hundred 
seventy seven years, and then he died. And when Noe was five 
hundred years old, he begat Sem, Ham and Iapheth.

Chapter .vi.

And it came to pass, when men began to multiply upon the earth and 
had begot them daughters, the sons of God saw the daughters of men 
that they were fair, and took unto them wives, which they best 
liked among them all. And the LORD {LORd} said: My spirit shall 
not alway strive with man, for they are flesh. Nevertheless I will 
give them yet space, an hundred and twenty years. There were 
tyrants in the world in those days. For after that the children of 
God had gone in unto the daughters of men and had begotten them 
children, the same children were the mightiest of the world and 
men of renown. And when the LORD saw that the wickedness of man 
was increased upon the earth, and that all the imagination and 
thoughts of his heart was only evil continually, he repented that 
he had made man upon the earth and sorrowed in his heart. And 
said: I will destroy mankind which I have made, from off the face 
of the earth: both man, beast, worm and fowl of the air, for it 
repenteth me that I have made them. But yet Noe found grace in the 
sight of the LORD. These are the generations of Noe. Noe was a 
righteous man and uncorrupt in his time, and walked with God. And 
Noe begat three sons: Sem, Ham and Iapheth. And the earth was 
corrupt in the sight of God, and was full of mischief. And God 
looked upon the earth, and lo it was corrupt: for all flesh had 
corrupted his way upon the earth. Then said God to Noe: the end of 
all flesh is come before me, for the earth is full of their 
mischief. And lo, I will destroy them with the earth. Make thee an 
ark of pine tree, and make chambers in the ark, and pitch it 
within and without with pitch. And of this fashion shalt thou make 
it. The length of the ark shall be three hundred cubits, and the 
breadth of it fifty cubits, and the height of it thirty cubits. A 
window shalt thou make above in the ark. And within a cubit 
compass shalt thou finish it. And the door of the ark shalt thou 
set in the side of it: and thou shalt make it with three lofts one 
above an other. For behold I will bring in a flood of water upon 
the earth to destroy all flesh from under heaven, wherein breath 
of life is, so that all that is in the earth shall perish. But I 
will make mine appointment with thee, that both thou shalt come in 
to the ark and thy sons, thy wife and thy sons' wives with thee. 
And of all that liveth whatsoever flesh it be, shalt thou bring 
into the ark, of every thing a pair, to keep them alive with thee. 
And male and female see that they be, of birds in their kind, and 
of beasts in their kind, and of all manner of worms of the earth 
in their kind: a pair of every thing shall come unto thee to keep 
them alive. And take unto thee of all manner of meat that may be 
eaten and lay it up in store by thee, that it may be meat both for 
thee and for them: and Noe did according to all that God commanded 
him.

Chapter .vij.

And the LORD said unto Noe: Go into the ark both thou and all thy 
household. For thee have I seen righteous before me in this 
generation. Of all clean beasts take unto thee seven of every kind 
the male and his female, and of unclean beasts a pair, the male 
and his female: likewise of the birds of the air seven of every 
kind, male and female to save seed upon all the earth. For seven 
days hence will I send rain upon the earth forty days and forty 
nights and will destroy all manner of things that I have made, 
from off the face of the earth. And Noe did according to all that 
the LORD {lorde} commanded him: and Noe was six hundred years old, 
when the flood of water came upon the earth: and Noe went and his 
sons and his wife and his sons' wives with him, into the ark from 
the waters of the flood. And of clean beasts and of beasts that 
were unclean and of birds and of all that creepeth upon the earth, 
came in by couples of every kind unto Noe into the ark: a male and 
a female: even as God commanded Noe. And the seventh day the 
waters of the flood came upon the earth. In the six hundredth year 
of Noe's life, in the second month, in the seventeenth day of the 
month, that same day were all the fountains of the great deep 
broken up, and the windows of heaven were opened, and there fell a 
rain upon the earth forty days and forty nights. And the self same 
day went Noe, Sem, Ham and Iapheth, Noe's sons, and Noe's wife and 
the three wives of his sons with them in to the ark: both they and 
all manner of beasts in their kind, and all manner of cattle in 
their kind and all manner of worms that creep upon the earth in 
their kind, and all manner of birds in their kind, and all manner 
of fowls whatsoever had feathers. And they came unto Noe into the 
ark by couples, of all flesh that had breath of life in it. And 
they that came, came male and female of every flesh according as 
God commanded him: and the LORD shut the door upon him. And the 
flood came forty days and forty nights upon the earth, and the 
water increased and bare up the ark and it was lift up from off 
the earth. And the water prevailed and increased exceedingly upon 
the earth: and the ark went upon he top of the waters. And the 
waters prevailed exceedingly above measure upon the earth, so that 
all the high hills which are under all the parts of heaven, were 
covered: even fifteen cubits high prevailed the waters, so that 
the hills were covered. And all flesh that moved on the earth, 
both birds, cattle and beasts perished, with all that crept on the 
earth and all men: so that all that had the breath of life in the 
nostrils of it thorow out all that was on dry land died. Thus was 
destroyed all that was upon the earth, both man, beasts, worms and 
fowls of the air so that they were destroyed from the earth: save 
Noe was reserved only and they that were with him in the ark. And 
the waters prevailed upon the earth, an hundred and fifty days.

Chapter .viij.

And God remembered Noe and all the beasts and all the cattle that 
were with him in the ark; And God made a wind to blow upon the 
earth, and the waters ceased: and the fountains of the deep and 
the windows of heaven were stopped and the rain of heaven was 
forbidden, and the waters returned from off the earth and abated 
after the end of an hundred and fifty days. And the ark rested 
upon the mountains of Ararat, the seventeenth day of the seventh 
month. And the waters went away and decreased until the tenth 
month. And the first day of the tenth month, the tops of the 
mountains appeared. And after the end of forty days, Noe opened 
the window of the ark which he had made, and sent forth a raven, 
which went out, ever going and coming again, until the waters were 
dried up upon the earth. Then sent he forth a dove from him, to 
wete whether the waters were fallen from off the earth. And when 
the dove could find no resting place for her foot, she returned to 
him again unto the ark, for the waters were upon the face of all 
the earth. And he put out his hand and took her and pulled her to 
him into the ark. And he abode yet seven days mo, and sent out the 
dove again out of the ark, and the dove came to him again about 
eventide, and behold: there was in her mouth a leaf of an olive 
tree which she had plucked, whereby Noe perceived that the waters 
were abated upon the earth. And he tarried yet seven other days, 
and sent forth the dove, which from thence forth came no more 
again to him. And it came to pass, the six hundred and one year 
and the first day of the first month, that the waters were dried 
up upon the earth. And Noe took off the hatches of the ark and 
looked: and behold, the face of the earth was dry. So by the 
twenty seventh day of the second month the earth was dry. And God 
spake unto Noe saying: Come out of the ark, both thou and thy wife 
and thy sons and thy sons' wives with thee. And all the beasts 
that are with thee whatsoever flesh it be, both fowl and cattle 
and all manner worms that creep on the earth, bring out with thee, 
and let them move, grow and multiply upon the earth. And Noe came 
out, and his sons and his wife and his sons' wives with him. And 
all the beasts, and all the worms, and all the fowls, and all that 
moved upon the earth, came also out of the ark, all of one kind 
together. And Noe made an altar unto the LORD, {LORDE} and took of 
all manner of clean beasts and all manner of clean fowls, and 
offered sacrifice upon the altar. And the LORD smelled a sweet 
savour and said in his heart: I will henceforth no more curse the 
earth for man's sake, for the imagination of man's heart is evil 
even from the very youth of him. Moreover I will not destroy from 
henceforth all that liveth as I have done. Neither shall sowing 
time and harvest, cold, and heat, summer and winter, day and night 
cease, as long as the earth endureth.

Chapter .ix.

And God blessed Noe and his sons, and said unto them: Increase and 
multiply and fill the earth. The fear also and dread of yow be 
upon all beasts of the earth, and upon all fowls of the air, and 
upon all that creepeth on the earth, and upon all fishes of the 
sea, which are given unto your hands. And all that moveth upon the 
earth having life, shall be your meat: Even as the green herbs, so 
give I yow all things. Only the flesh with his life which is his 
blood, see that ye eat not. For verily the blood of yow wherein 
your lives are will I require: Even of the hand of all beasts will 
I require it, and of the hand of man and of the hand of every 
man's brother, will I require the life of man: so that he which 
sheddeth man's blood, shall have his blood shed by man again: for 
God made man after his own likeness. See that ye increase, and 
wax, and be occupied upon the earth, and multiply therein. 
Furthermore God spake unto Noe and to his sons with him saying: 
See, I make my bond with you and your seed after you, and with all 
living things that is with you: both fowl and cattle, and all 
manner beast of the earth that is with yow, of all that cometh out 
of the ark what soever beast of the earth it be. I make my bond 
with yow, that henceforth all flesh shall not be destroyed with 
the waters of any flood, and that henceforth there shall not be a 
flood to destroy the earth. And God said: This is the token of my 
bond which I make between me and yow, and between all living thing 
that is with yow for ever: I will set my bow in the clouds, and it 
shall be a sign of the appointment made between me and the earth: 
so that when I bring in clouds upon the earth, the bow shall 
appear in the clouds. And then will I think upon my testament 
which I have made between me and yow, and all that liveth 
whatsoever flesh it be. So that henceforth there shall be no more 
waters to make a flood to destroy all flesh. The bow shall be in 
the clouds, and I will look upon it, to remember the everlasting 
testament between God and all that liveth upon the earth, 
whatsoever flesh it be. And God said unto Noe: This is the sign of 
the testament which I have made between me and all flesh that is 
on the earth. The sons of Noe that came out of the ark were: Sem, 
Ham, and Iapheth. And Ham he is the father of Canaan. These are 
the three sons of Noe, and of these was all the world overspread. 
And Noe being an husbandman, went forth and planted a vineyard, 
and drank of the wine and was drunk, and lay uncovered in the 
middest of his tent. And Ham the father of Canaan saw his father's 
privates, {prevytees} and told his two brethren that were without. 
And Sem and Iapheth took a mantle, and put it on both their 
shoulders and went backward, and covered their father's secrets, 
but their faces were backward, so that they saw not their father's 
nakedness. As soon as Noe was awaked from his wine and wist what 
his youngest son had done unto him, he said: Cursed be Canaan, and 
a servant, of all servants be he to his brethren. And he said: 
Blessed be the LORD God of Sem, and Canaan be his servant. God 
increase Iapheth that he may dwell in the tents of Sem. And Canaan 
be their servant. And Noe lived after the flood three hundred and 
fifty years: So that all the days of Noe were nine hundred and 
fifty years, and then he died.

Chapter .x.

These are the generations of the sons of Noe: of Sem, Ham and 
Iapheth, which begat them children after the flood. The sons of 
Iapheth were: Gomir, Magog, Madai, Iavan, Tuball, Mesech and 
Thyras. And the sons of Gomir were: Ascenas, Riphat and Togarma. 
And the sons of Iavan were: Elisa, Tharsis, Cithim, and Dodanim. 
Of these came the Isles of the gentiles in their countries, every 
man in his speech, kindred and nation. The sons of Ham were: Chus, 
Misraim, Phut and Canaan. The sons of Chus: were Seba, Hevila, 
Sabta, Raima and Sabtema. And the sons of Raima were: Sheba, and 
Dedan. Chus also begot Nimrod, which began to be mighty in the 
earth. He was a mighty hunter in the sight of the LORD: Whereof 
came the proverb: he is as Nimrod that mighty hunter in the sight 
of the LORD. And the beginning of his kingdom was Babell, Erech, 
Achad, and Chalne in the land of Sinear: Out of that land came 
Assur and builded Ninive, and the city Rehoboth, and Calah, and 
Ressen between Nineve and Calah. That is a great city. And Mizrim 
begat Ludim, Enanim, Leabim, Naphtuhim, Pathrusim and Casluhim: 
from whence came the Philistins, and the Caphtherines. Canaan also 
begat Zidon his eldest son and Heth, Iebusi, Emori, Girgosi, Hivi, 
Arki, Sini, Arvadi, Zemari and Harmati. And afterward sprang the 
kindreds of the Cananites. And the coasts of the Cananites were 
from Sidon till thou come to Gerara and to Asa, and till thou come 
to Sodoma, Gomorra, Adama, Zeboim: even unto Lasa. These were the 
children of Ham in their kindreds, tongues, lands and nations. And 
Sem the father of all the children of Eber and the eldest brother 
of Iapheth, begat children also. And his sons were: Elam Assur, 
Arphachsad, Lud and Aram. And the children of Aram were: Ur, Hul, 
Gether and Mas. And Arphachsad begat Sala, and Sala begat Eber. 
And Eber begat two sons. The name of the one was Peleg, for in his 
time the earth was divided. And the name of his brother was 
Iaketan. Iaketan begat Almodad, Saleph, Hizarmoneth, Iarah, 
Hadoram, Usal, Dikela, Obal, Abimael, Seba, Ophir, Hevila and 
Iobab. All these are the sons of Iaketan. And the dwelling of them 
was from Mesa until thou come unto Sephara a mountain of the east 
land. These are the sons of Sem in their kindreds, languages, 
countries and nations. These are the kindreds of the sons of Noe, 
in their generations and nations. And of these came the people 
that were in the world after the flood.

Chapter .xi.

And all the world was of one tongue and one language. And as they 
came from the east, they found a plain in the land of Sinear, and 
there they dwelled. And they said one to another: come on, let us 
make brick and burn it with fire. So brick was their stone and 
slime was their mortar. And they said: Come on, let us build us a 
city and a tower, that the top may reach unto heaven. And let us 
make us a name, for peradventure we shall be scattered abroad over 
all the earth. And the LORD came down to see the city and the 
tower which the children of Adam had builded. And the LORD said: 
See, the people is one and have one tongue among them all: And 
this have they begun to do, and will not leave off from all that 
they have purposed to do. Come on, let us descend and mingle their 
tongue even there, that one understand not what another sayeth. 
Thus the LORD scattered them from thence upon all the earth. And 
they left off to build the city. Wherefore the name of it is 
called Babel, because that the LORD there confounded the tongue of 
all the world. And because that the LORD from thence, scattered 
them abroad upon all the earth. These are the generations of Sem: 
Sem was an hundred year old and begat Arphachsad two years after 
the flood. And Sem lived after he had beget Arphachsad five 
hundred years and begot sons and daughters. And Arphachsad lived 
thirty five years and begat Sala, and lived after he had begot 
Sala four hundred years and three and begat sons and daughters. 
And Sala was thirty years old and begat Eber, and lived after he 
had begot Eber four hundred and three years, and begat sons and 
daughters. When Eber was thirty four years old, he begat Peleg, 
and lived after he had begot Peleg, four hundred and thirty years, 
and begat sons and daughters. And Peleg when he was thirty years 
old begat Regu, and lived after he had begot Regu two hundred and 
nine years, and begat sons and daughters. And Regu when he had 
lived thirty two years begat Serug, and lived after he had begot 
Serug two hundred and seven years, and begat sons and daughters. 
And when Serug was thirty years old, he begat Nahor, and lived 
after he had begot Nahot two hundred years, and begat sons and 
daughters. And Nahor when he was twenty nine years old, begat 
Terah, and lived after he had begot Terah, an hundred and nineteen 
years, and begat sons and daughters. And when Terah was seventy 
years old, he begat Abram, Nahor and Haran. And these are the 
generations of Terah. Terah begat Abram, Nahor and Haran. And 
Haran begat Lot. And Haran died before Terah his father in the 
land where he was born, at Ur in Chaldea. And Abram and Nahor took 
them wives. Abram's wife was called Sarai. And Nahor's wife Milkah 
the daughter of Haran which was father of Milca and of Iisca. But 
Sarai was barren and had no child. Then took Terah Abram his son 
and Lot his son Haran's son, and Sarai his daughter-in-law his son 
Abram's wife. And they went with him from Ur in Chaldea, to go 
into the land of Chanaan. And they came to Haran and dwelled 
there. And when Terah was two hundred year old and five he died in 
Haran.

Chapter .xij.

Then the LORD said unto Abram: Get thee out of thy country and 
from thy kindred, and out of thy father's house, into a land which 
I will shew thee. And I will make of thee a mighty people, and 
will bless thee, and make thy name great, that thou mayst be a 
blessing. And I will bless them that bless thee, and curse them 
that curse thee. And in thee shall be blessed all the generations 
of the earth. And Abram went as the LORD bade him, and Lot went 
with him. Abram was seventy five years old, when he went out of 
Haran. And Abram took Sarai his wife and Lot his brother's son, 
with all their goods which they had gotten and souls which they 
had begotten in Haran. And they departed to go into the land of 
Chanaan. And when they were come into the land of Chanaan, Abram 
went forth into the land till he came unto a place called Sichem, 
and unto the oak of More. And the Cananites dwelled then in the 
land. Then the LORD appeared unto Abram and said: unto thy seed 
will I give this land. And he builded an altar there unto the LORD 
which appeared to him. Then departed he thence unto a mountain 
that lieth on the east side of BETHEL and pitched his tent: BETHEL 
being on the west side, and Ay on the east: and he builded there 
an altar unto the LORD, and called on the name of the LORD. And 
then Abram departed and took his journey southward. After this 
there came a dearth in the land. And Abram went down into Egypt to 
sojourn there, for the dearth was sore in the land. And when he 
was come nye for to enter into Egypt, he said unto Sarai his wife. 
Behold, I know that thou art a fair woman to look upon. It will 
come to pass therefore when the Egyptians see thee, that they will 
say: she is his wife. And so shall they slay me and save thee. Say 
I pray thee therefore that thou art my sister, that I may fare the 
better by reason of thee, and that my soul may live for thy sake. 
As soon as he came into Egypt, the Egyptians saw the woman that 
she was very fair. And Pharao's lords saw her also, and praised 
her unto Pharao: So that she was taken into Pharao's house, which 
entreated Abram well for her sake, so that he had sheep, oxen and 
he asses, men servants, maid servants, she asses and camels. But 
GOD {|The LORDE|} plagued Pharao and his house with great plagues, 
because of Sarai Abram's wife. Then Pharao called Abram and said: 
Why hast thou thus dealt with me? Wherefore toldest thou me not 
that she was thy wife? Why saidest thou that she was thy sister, 
and causedest me to take her to my wife? But now lo, there is thy 
wife, take her and be walking. Pharao also gave a charge unto his 
men over Abram, to lead him out, with his wife and all that he 
had.

Chapter .xiij.

Then Abram departed out of Egypt, both he and his wife and all 
that he had, and Lot with him unto the south. Abram was very rich 
in cattle, silver and gold. And he went on his journey from the 
south even unto BETHEL, and unto the place where his tent was at 
the first time between BETHEL and Ay, and unto the place of the 
altar which he made before. And there called Abram upon the name, 
of the LORD. Lot also which went with him had sheep, cattle and 
tents: so that the land was not able to receive them that they 
might dwell together, for the substance of their riches was so 
great, that they could not dwell together. And there fell a strife 
between the herdmen of Abram's cattle, and the herdmen of Lot's 
cattle. Moreover the Cananites and the Pherisites dwelled at that 
time in the land. Then said Abram unto Lot: Let there be no strife 
I pray thee between thee and me and between my herdmen and thine, 
for we be brethren. Is not all the hole land before thee? Depart I 
pray thee from me. If thou wilt take the left hand, I will take 
the right: or if thou take the right hand I will take the left. 
And Lot lift up his eyes and beheld all the country about Iordan, 
which was a plenteous country of water every where, before the 
LORD destroyed Sodom and Gomorra, even as the garden of the LORD, 
and as the land of Egypt till thou come to Zoar. Then Lot chose 
all the coasts of Iordan and took his journey from the east. And 
so departed the one brother from the other. Abram dwelled in the 
land of Canaan: And Lot in the cities of the plain, and tented 
till he came to Sodom. But the men of Sodom were wicked and sinned 
exceedingly against the LORD. And the LORD said unto Abram, after 
that Lot was departed from him: Lift up thine eyes and look from 
the place where thou art, northward, southward, eastward and 
westward, for all the land which thou seest will I give unto thee 
and to thy seed for ever. And I will make thy seed, as the dust of 
the earth: so that if a man can number the dust of the earth, then 
shall thy seed also be numbered. Arise and walk about in the land, 
in the length of it and in the breadth for I will give it unto 
thee. Then Abram took down his tent, and went and dwelled in the 
oak grove of Mamre which is in Ebron and builded there an altar to 
the LORD.

Chapter .xiiij.

And it chanced within a while, that Amraphel king of Sinear, 
Arioch king of Ellasar, Kedorlaomer king of Elam and Thydeall king 
of the nations: made war with Bera king of Sodom, and with Birsa 
king of Gomorra. And with Sineab king of Adama, and with Semeaber 
king of Zeboim, and with the king of Bela which Bela is called 
Zoar. All these came together unto the vale of Siddim, which is 
now the salt sea. Twelve years were they subject to king 
Kedorlaomer, and in the thirteenth year rebelled. Therefore in the 
fourteenth year came Kedorlaomer and the kings that were with him, 
and smote the Raphaims in Astaroth Karnaim, and the Susims in Ham, 
and the Emims in Sabe Kariathaim, and the Horims in their own 
mount Seir unto the plain of Pharan, which bordereth upon the 
wilderness. And then turned they and came to the well of judgement 
which is Cades, and smote all the country of the Amalekites, and 
also the Amorites that dwell in Hazezon Thamar. Then went out the 
king of Sodom, and the king of Gomorra, and the king of Adama and 
the king of Zeboiim, and the king of Bela now called Zoar. And set 
their men in array to fight with them in the vale of Siddim, that 
is to say, with Kedorlaomer the king of Elam and with Thydeall 
king of the Nations, and with Amraphel king of Sinear. And with 
Arioch king of Ellasar: four kings against five. And that vale of 
Siddim was full of slime pits. And the kings of Sodom and Gomorra 
fled, and fell there. And the residue fled to the mountains. And 
they took all the goods of Sodom and Gomorra and all their 
vitailles, and went their way. And they took Lot also Abram's 
brother's son and his goods (for he dwelled at Sodom) and 
departed. Then came one that had escaped, and told Abram the 
Hebrew which dwelt in the oak grove of Mamre the Amorite, brother 
of Eschol and Aner: which were confederate with Abram. When Abram 
heard that his brother was taken, he harnessed his servants born 
in his own house three hundred and eighteen, and followed till 
they came at Dan. And set himself and his servants in array, and 
fell upon them by night, and smote them, and chased them away unto 
Hoba: which lieth on the left hand of Damasco, and brought again 
all the goods and also his brother Lot, and his goods, the women 
also and the people. And as he returned again from the slaughter 
of Kedorlaomer and of the kings that were with him, then came the 
king of Sodom against {to meet} him unto the vale of Saue which 
now is called king's dale. Then Melchisedech king of Salem brought 
forth bread and wine. And he being the priest of the most highest 
God, blessed him saying: Blessed be Abram unto the most highest 
God, possessor of heaven and earth. And blessed be God the most 
highest, which hath delivered thine enemies into thy hands. And 
Abram gave him tithes of all. Then said the king of Sodom unto 
Abram: Give me the souls, and take the goods to thy self. And 
Abram answered the king of Sodom: I lift up my hand unto the LORD 
God most high possessor of heaven and earth, that I will not take 
of all that is thine, so much as a thread or a shoe latchet, lest 
thou shouldest say I have made Abram rich. Save only that which 
the young men have eaten and the parts of the men which went with 
me. Aner, Eschol and Mamre. Let them take their parts.

Chapter .xv.

After these deeds, the word of GOD {|the LORDE|} came unto Abram 
in a vision saying fear not Abram, I am thy shield, and thy reward 
shall be exceeding great. And Abram answered: Lord Iehouah what 
wilt thou give me: I go childless, and the cater of mine house, 
this Eleasar of Damasco hath a son. And Abram said: See, to me 
hast thou given to seed: lo, a lad born in my house shall be mine 
heir. And behold, the word of the LORD spake unto Abram saying: He 
shall not be thine heir, but one that shall come out of thine own 
body shall be thine heir. And he brought him out at the doors and 
said: Look up unto heaven and tell the stars, if thou be able to 
number them. And said unto him: Even so shall thy seed be. And 
Abram believed the LORD, and it was counted to him for 
righteousness. And he said unto him: I am the LORD that brought 
thee out of Ur in Chaldea to give thee this land to possess it. 
And he said: Lord GOD, {LORde God} whereby shall I know that I 
shall possess it? And he said unto him: take an heifer of three 
years old, and a she goat of three years old, and a three year old 
ram, a turtle dove and a young pigeon. And he took all these and 
divided them in the midst, and laid every piece, one over against 
another. But the fowls divided he not. And the birds fell on the 
carcasses, but Abram drove them away. And when the sun was down, 
there fell a slumber upon Abram. And lo, fear and great darkness 
came upon him. And he said unto Abram: know this of a surety, that 
thy seed shall be a stranger in a land that pertaineth not unto 
them. And they shall make bondmen of them and entreat them evil 
four hundred years. But the nation whom they shall serve, will I 
judge. And afterward shall they come out with great substance. 
Nevertheless thou shalt go unto thy fathers in peace, and shalt be 
buried when thou art of a good age: and in the fourth generation 
they shall come hither again, for the wickedness of the Amorites 
is not yet full. When the sun was down and it was waxed dark: 
behold, there was a smoking furnace and a fire brand that went 
between the said pieces. And that same day the LORD made a 
covenant with Abram saying: unto thy seed will I give this land, 
from the river of Egypt, even unto the great river Euphrates: the 
Kenites, the Kenizites, the Cadmonites, the Hethites, the 
Pherezites, the Raphaims, the Amorites, the Cananites, the 
Gergesites and the Iebusites.

Chapter .xvi.

Sarai Abram's wife bare him no children. But she had an hand maid 
an Egyptian, whose name was Hagar. Wherefore she said unto Abram: 
Behold the LORD hath closed me, that I can not bear. I pray thee 
go in unto my maid, peradventure I shall be multiplied by means of 
her; And Abram heard the voice of Sarai. Then Sarai Abram's wife 
took Hagar her maid the Egyptian (after Abram had dwelled ten 
years in the land of Canaan) and gave her to her husband Abram, to 
be his wife. And he went in unto Hagar, and she conceived. And 
when she saw that she had conceived her mistress was despised in 
her sight. Then said Sarai unto Abram: Thou dost me unright, for I 
have given my maid into thy bosom: and now because she seeth that 
she hath conceived, I am despised in her sight: the LORD judge 
between thee and me. Then said Abram to Sarai: behold, thy maid is 
in thy hand, do with her as it pleaseth thee. And because Sarai 
fared foul with her, she fled from her. And the Angel of the LORD 
found her beside a fountain of water in the wilderness: even by a 
well in the way to Sur. And he said: Hagar Sarai's maid, whence 
comest thou and whither wilt thou go? And she answered: I flee 
from my mistress Sarai. And the Angel of the LORD said unto her: 
return to thy mistress again, and submit thyself under her hands. 
And the angel of the LORD said unto her: I will so increase thy 
seed, that it shall not be numbered for multitude. And the LORD's 
angel said further unto her: see, thou art with child and shalt 
bear a son, and shalt call his name Ismael: because the LORD hath 
heard thy tribulation. He will be a wild man, and his hand will be 
against every man, and every man's hand against him. And yet shall 
he dwell fast by all his brethren. And she called the name of the 
LORD that spake unto her: thou art the God that lookest on me, for 
she said: I have of a surety seen here the back parts of him that 
seeth me. Wherefore she called the well, the well of the living 
that seeth me which well is between Cades and Bared. And Hagar 
bare Abram a son, and Abram called his son's name which Hagar bare 
Ismael. And Abram was eighty six years old, when Hagar bare him 
Ismael.

Chapter .xvij.

When Abram was ninety years old and nine, the LORD appeared to him 
saying: I am the almighty God: walk before me and be uncorrupt. 
And I will make my bond between thee and me, and will multiply 
thee exceedingly. And Abram fell on his face. And God talked 
moreover with him saying: I am, behold my testament is with thee, 
that thou shalt be a father of many nations. Therefore shalt thou 
no more be called Abram, but thy name shall be Abraham: for a 
father of many nations have I made thee, and I will multiply thee 
exceedingly, and will make nations of thee: yea and kings shall 
spring out of thee. Moreover I will make my bond between me and 
thee, and thy seed after thee, in their times to be an everlasting 
testament, so that I will be God unto thee and to thy seed after 
thee. And I will give unto thee and to thy seed after thee, the 
land wherein thou art a stranger: even all the land of Canaan, for 
an everlasting possession, and will be their God. And God said 
unto Abraham: See thou keep my testament, both thou and thy seed 
after thee in their times: This is my testament which ye shall 
keep between me and you and thy seed after thee, that ye 
circumcise all your men children. Ye shall circumcise the foreskin 
of your flesh, and it shall be a token of the bond betwixt me and 
you. And every manchild when it is eight days old, shall be 
circumcised among you in your generations, and all servants also 
born at home or bought with money though they be strangers and not 
of thy seed. The servant born in thy house, and he also that is 
bought with money, must needs be circumcised, that my testament 
may be in your flesh, for an everlasting bond. If there be any 
uncircumcised manchild, that hath not the foreskin of his flesh 
cut off, his soul shall perish from his people: because he hath 
broken my testament. And God said unto Abraham. Sarai thy wife 
shall no more be called Sarai: but Sara shall her name be. For I 
will bless her and give thee a son of her and will bless her: so 
that people, yea and kings of people shall spring of her. And 
Abraham fell upon his face and laughed, and said in his heart: 
shall a child be born unto him that is an hundred year old, and 
shall Sara that is ninety years old, bear: And Abraham said unto 
God. O that Ismael might live in thy sight. Then said God: nay, 
Sara thy wife shall bear thee a son, and thou shalt call his name 
Isaac. And I will make my bond with him, that it shall be an 
everlasting bond unto his seed after him. And as concerning Ismael 
also, I have heard thy request: lo, I will bless him and increase 
him, and multiply him exceedingly. Twelve princes shall he {be} 
beget, and I will make a great nation of him. But my bond will I 
make with Isaac, which Sara shall bear unto thee: even this time 
twelve month. And God left off talking with him, and departed up 
from Abraham. And Abraham took Ismael his son and all the servants 
born in his house and all that was bought with money as many as 
were men children among the men of Abraham's house, and 
circumcised the foreskin of their flesh, even the selfsame day, as 
God had said unto him. Abraham was ninety years old and nine when 
he cut off the foreskin of his flesh. And Ismael his son was 
thirteen year old, when the foreskin of his flesh was circumcised. 
The self same day was Abraham circumcised and Ismael his son. And 
all the men in his house, whether they were born in his house or 
bought with money (though they were strangers) were circumcised 
with him.

Chapter .xviij.

And the LORD appeared unto him in the oak grove of Mamre as he sat 
in his tent door in the heat of the day. And he lift up his eyes 
and looked: and lo, three men stood not far from him. And when he 
saw them, he ran against {to meet} them from the tent door, and 
fell to the ground and said: Lord {LORde} if I have found favour 
in thy sight, go not by thy servant. Let a little water be 
fetched, and wash your feet, and rest your selves under the tree: 
And I will fetch a morsel of bread, to comfort your hearts withal. 
And then go your ways, for even therefore are ye come to your 
servant. And they answered: Do even so as thou hast said. And 
Abraham went a pace into his tent unto Sara and said: make ready 
at once three pecks of fine meal, knead it, and make cakes. And 
Abraham ran unto his beasts and fetched a calf that was tender and 
good, and gave it unto a young man which made it ready at once. 
And he took butter and milk and the calf which he had prepared, 
and set it before them, and stood himself by them under the tree: 
and they ate. And they said unto him: Where is Sara thy wife? And 
he said: in the tent. And he said: I will come again unto thee as 
soon as the fruit can live. And lo: Sara thy wife shall have a 
son. That heard Sara, out of the tent door which was behind his 
back. Abraham and Sara were both old and well stricken in age, and 
it ceased to be with Sara after the manner as it is with wives. 
And Sara laughed in her self saying: Now I am waxed old, shall I 
give my self to lust, and my lord old also? Then said the LORD 
unto Abraha: wherefore doth Sara laugh saying: shall I of a surety 
bear a child, now when I am old? is the thing too hard for the 
LORD to do? In the time appointed will I return unto thee, as soon 
as the fruit can have life. And Sara shall have a son. Then Sara 
denied it saying: I laughed not, for she was afraid. But he said: 
yes thou laughtest. Then the men stood up from thence and looked 
toward Sodom. And Abraham went with them to bring them on the way. 
And the LORD said: Can I hide from Abraham that thing which I am 
about to do, seeing that Abraham shall be a great and a mighty 
people, and all the nations of the earth shall be blessed in him? 
For I know him that he will command his children and his household 
after him, that they keep the way of the LORD, to do after right 
and conscience, that the LORD may bring upon Abraham that he hath 
promised him. And the LORD said: The cry of Sodom and Gomorra is 
great, and their sin is exceeding grievous. I will go down and see 
whether they have done altogether according to that cry which is 
come unto me or not, that I may know. And the men departed thence 
and went to Sodomward. But Abraham stood yet before the LORD, and 
drew near and said Wilt thou destroy the righteous with the 
wicked? If there be fifty righteous within the city, wilt thou 
destroy it and not spare the place for the sake of fifty righteous 
that are therein? That be far from thee, that thou shouldest do 
after this manner, to slay the righteous with the wicked, and that 
the righteous should be as the wicked: that be far from thee. 
Should not the Iudge of all the world do according to right? And 
the LORD said: If I find in Sodom fifty righteous within the city, 
I will spare all the place for their sakes. And Abraham answered 
and said: behold I have taken upon me to speak unto the Lord, 
{LORde} and yet am but dust and ashes. What though there lack five 
of fifty righteous, wilt thou destroy all the city for lack of 
five? And he said: If I find there forty and five I will not 
destroy them. And he spake unto him yet again and said: what if 
there be forty found there: And he said: I will not do it for 
forty's sake. And he said: O let not my Lord {LORde} be angry, 
that I speak. What if there be found thirty there? And he said: I 
will not do it, if I find thirty there. And he said: Oh, see, I 
have begun to speak unto my Lord, {LORde} what if there be twenty 
found there? And he said: I will not destroy them for twenty's 
sake. And he said: O let not my Lord {LORde} be angry, that I 
speak yet, but even once more only. What if ten be found there? 
And he said: I will not destroy them for ten's sake. And the LORD 
went his way as soon as he had left communing with Abraham. And 
Abraham returned unto his place.

Chapter .xix.

And there came two angels to Sodom at even. And Lot sat at the 
gate of the city. And Lot saw them, and rose up against {to meet} 
them, and he bowed himself to the ground with his face. And he 
said: See lords, turn in I pray you in to your servant's house and 
tarry all night and wash your feet, and rise up early and go on 
your ways. And they said: nay, but we will bide in the streets all 
night. And he compelled them exceedingly. And they turned in unto 
him and entered into his house, and he made them a feast and did 
bake sweet cakes, and they ate. But before they went to rest, the 
men of the city of Sodom compassed the house round about both old 
and young, all the people from all quarters. And they called unto 
Lot and said unto him: where are the men which came into thy house 
to night? bring them out unto us that we may do our lust with 
them. And Lot went out at doors unto them and shut the door after 
him and said: nay for god's {goddes} sake brethren, do not so 
wickedly. Behold I have two daughters which have known no man, 
them will I bring out unto you: do with them as it seemeth you 
good: Only unto these men do nothing, for therefore came they 
under the shadow of my roof. And they said: come hither. And they 
said: camest thou not in to sojourn, and wilt thou be now a judge? 
we will surely deal worse with thee than with them. And as they 
preased sore upon Lot and began to break up the door, the men put 
forth their hands and pulled Lot into the house to them and shut 
to the door. And the men that were at the door of the house, they 
smote with blindness both small and great: so that they could not 
find the door. And the men said moreover unto Lot: If thou have 
yet here any son-in-law or sons or daughters or whatsoever thou 
hast in the city, bring it out of this place: for we must destroy 
this place, because the cry of them is great before the LORD. 
Wherefore he hath sent us to destroy it. And Lot went out and 
spake unto his sons-in-law which should have married his 
daughters, and said: stond up and get yow out of this place, for 
the LORD will destroy the city. But he seemed as though he had 
mocked, unto his sons-in-law. And as the morning arose the angels 
caused Lot to speed him saying. Stond up, take thy wife and thy 
two daughters and that that is at hand, lest thou perish in the 
sin of the city. And as he prolonged the time, the men caught both 
him, his wife and his two daughters by the hands, because the LORD 
was merciful unto him, and they brought him forth and set him 
without the city. When they had brought them out, they said: Save 
thy life and look not behind thee neither tarry thou in any place 
of the country, but save thyself in the mountain, lest thou 
perish. Then said Lot unto them: Oh nay my Lord: {lorde} behold, 
inasmuch as thy servant hath found grace in thy sight, now make 
thy mercy great which thou shewest unto me in saving my life. For 
I can not save myself in the mountains, lest some misfortune fall 
upon me and I die. Behold, here is a city by, to flee unto, and it 
is a little one, let me save myself therein: is it not a little 
one, that my soul may live? And he said to him: see I have 
received thy request as concerning this thing, that I will not 
overthrow this city for the which thou hast spoken. Haste thee, 
and save thyself there, for I can do nothing till thou be come in 
thither. And therefore the name of the city is called Zoar. And 
the sun was upon the earth when Lot was entered into Zoar. Then 
the LORD rained upon Sodom and Gomorra, brimstone and fire from 
the LORD out of heaven, and overthrew those cities and all the 
region, and all that dwelled in the cities, and that that grew 
upon the earth. And Lot's wife looked behind her, and was turned 
in to a pillar of salt. Abraham rose up early and got him to the 
place where he stood before the LORD, and looked toward Sodom and 
Gomorra and toward all the land of that country. And as he looked: 
behold, the smoke of the country arose as it had been the smoke of 
a furnace. But yet when God destroyed the cities of the region, he 
thought upon Abraha: and sent Lot out from the danger of the 
overthrowing, when he overthrew the cities where Lot dwelled. And 
Lot departed out of Zoar and dwelled in the mountains and his two 
daughters with him for he feared to tarry in Zoar: he dwelt 
therefore in a cave, both he and his two daughters also. Then said 
the elder unto the younger our father is old, and there are no 
more men in the earth to come in unto us after the manner of all 
the world. Come therefore, let us give our father wine to drink, 
and let us lie with him that we may save seed of our father. And 
they gave their father wine to drink that same night. And the 
elder daughter went and lay with her father. And he perceived it 
not, neither when she lay down, neither when she rose up. And on 
the morrow the elder said unto the younger: behold, yesternight 
lay I with my father. Let us give him wine to drink this night 
also, and go thou and lie with him, and let us save seed of our 
father. And they gave their father wine to drink that night also. 
And the younger arose and lay with him. And he perceived it not: 
neither when she lay down, neither when she rose up. Thus were 
both the daughters of Lot with child by their father. And the 
elder bare a son and called him Moab, which is the father of the 
Moabites unto this day. And the younger bare a son and called him 
Ben Ammi, which is the father of the children of Ammon unto this 
day.

Chapter .xx.

And Abraham departed thence toward the south country and dwelled 
between Cades and Sur and sojourned in Gerar. And Abraham said of 
Sara his wife, that she was his sister. Then Abimelech king of 
Gerar sent and fetched Sara away. And God came to Abimelech by 
night in a dream and said to him: See, thou art but a dead man for 
the woman's sake which thou hast taken away, for she is a man's 
wife. But Abimelech had not yet come nye her, and therefore said: 
Lord {lorde} wilt thou slay righteous people? said not he unto me, 
that she was his sister? yea and said not she herself that he was 
her brother? with a pure heart and innocent hands have I done 
this. And God said unto him in a dream. I wot it well that thou 
didst it in the pureness of thy heart: And therefore I kept thee 
that thou shouldest not sin against me, neither suffered I thee to 
come nigh her. Now therefore deliver the man his wife again, for 
he is a prophet. And let him pray for thee that thou mayst live. 
But and if thou deliver her not again, be sure that thou shalt die 
the death, with all that thou hast. Then Abimelech rose up be 
times in the morning and called all his servants, and told all 
these things in their ears, and the men were sore afraid. And 
Abimelech called Abraham and said unto him: What hast thou done 
unto us, and what have I offended thee, that thou shouldest bring 
on me and on my kingdom so great a sin? thou hast done deeds unto 
me that ought not to be done. And Abimelech said moreover unto 
Abraham: What sawest thou that moved thee to do this thing? And 
Abraham answered. I thought that peradventure the fear of God was 
not in this place, and that they should slay me for my wife's 
sake: yet in very deed she is my sister, the daughter of my 
father, but not of my mother: and became my wife. And after God 
caused me to wander out of my father's house, I said unto her: 
This kindness shalt thou shew unto me in all places where we come, 
that thou say of me, how that I am thy brother. Then took 
Abimelech sheep and oxen, menservants and womenservants and gave 
them unto Abraham, and delivered him Sara his wife again. And 
Abimelech said: behold the land lieth before thee, dwell where it 
pleaseth thee best. And unto Sara he said: See I have given thy 
brother a thousand pieces of silver, behold he {this thing} shall 
be a covering to thine eyes unto all that are with thee and unto 
all men and an excuse. And so Abraham prayed unto God, and God 
healed Abimelech and his wife and his maidens, so that they bare. 
For the LORD had closed to, all the matrices of the house of 
Abimelech, because of Sara Abraham's wife.

Chapter .xxj.

The lord visited Sara as he had said and did unto her according as 
he had spoken. {promised} And Sara was with child and bare Abraham 
a son in his old age even the same season which the Lorde {|God|} 
had appointed. And Abraham called his son's name that was born 
unto him which Sara bare him Isaac: and Abraham circumcised Isaac 
his son when he was eight days old, as God commanded him. And 
Abraham was an hundred year old, when his son Isaac was born unto 
him. And Sara said: God hath made me a laughing stock: for all 
that hear, will laugh at me. She said also: who would have said 
unto Abraham, that Sara should have given children suck, or that I 
should have borne him a son in his old age: The child grew and was 
weaned, and Abraham made a great feast, the same day that Isaac 
was weaned. Sara saw the son of Hagar the Egyptian which she had 
borne unto Abraham, a mocking. Then she said unto Abraham: put 
away this bondmaid and her son: for the son of this bondwoman 
shall not be heir with my son Isaac: But the word seemed very 
grievous in Abraham's sight, because of his son. Then the Lorde 
{|God|} said unto Abraham: let it not be grievous unto thee, 
because of the lad and of thy bondmaid: But in all that Sara hath 
said unto thee, hear her voice, for in Isaac shall thy seed be 
called. Moreover of the son of the bondwoman will I make a nation, 
because he is thy seed. And Abraham rose up early in the morning 
and took bread and a bottle with water, and gave it unto Hagar, 
putting it on her shoulders with the lad also, and sent her away. 
And she departed and wandered up and down in the wilderness of 
Berseba. When the water was spent that was in the bottle, she cast 
the lad under a bush and went and sat her out of sight a great 
way, as it were a bowshot off: For she said: I will not see the 
lad die. And she sat down out of sight, and lift up her voice and 
wept. And God heard the voice of the child. And the angel of God 
called Hagar out of heaven and said unto her: What aileth thee 
Hagar? Fear not, for God hath heard the voice of the child where 
he lieth. Arise and lift up the lad, and take him in thy hand, for 
I will make of him a great people. And God opened her eyes and she 
saw a well of water. And she went and filled the bottle with 
water, and gave the boy drink. And God was with the lad, and he 
grew and dwelt in the wilderness, and became an archer. And he 
dwelt in the wilderness of Pharan. And his mother got him a wife 
out of thee, land of Egypt. And it chanced the same season, that 
Abimelech and Phicol his chief captain spake unto Abraham saying: 
God is with thee in all that thou doest. Now therefore swear unto 
me even here by God, that thou wilt not hurt me nor my children, 
nor my children's children. But that thou shalt deal with me and 
the country where thou art a stranger, according unto the kindness 
that I have shewed thee. Then said Abraham: I will swear. And 
Abraham rebuked Abimelech for a well of water, which Abimelech's 
servants had taken away. And Abimelech answered I wist not who did 
it: Also thou toldest me not, neither heard I of it, but this day. 
And Abraham took sheep and oxen and gave them unto Abimelech. And 
they made both of them a bond together. And Abraham set seven 
lambs by them selves. And Abimelech said unto Abraham: what mean 
these seven lambs which thou hast set by them selves. And he 
answered: seven lambs shalt thou take of my hand, that it may be a 
witness unto me, that I have digged this well: Wherefore the place 
is called Berseba, because they sware both of them. Thus made they 
a bond together at Berseba. Then Abimelech and Phicol his chief 
Captain rose up and turned again unto the land of the Philistines. 
And Abraham planted a wood in Berseba, and called there, on the 
name of the LORD, the everlasting God: and dwelt in the Philistine 
land a long season.

Chapter .xxij.

After these deeds, God did prove Abraham and said unto him: 
Abraham. And he answered: here am I. And he said: take thy only 
son Isaac whom thou lovest, and get thee unto the land of Moria, 
and sacrifice him there for a sacrifice upon one of the mountains 
which I will shew thee. Then Abraham rose up early in the morning 
and saddled his ass, and took two of his meiny with him, and Isaac 
his sonne: and clove wood for the sacrifice, and rose up and got 
him to the place which God had appointed him. The third day 
Abraham lift up his eyes and saw the place afar off, and said unto 
his young men: bide here with the ass. I and the lad will go 
yonder and worship and come again unto you. And Abraham took the 
wood of the sacrifice and laid it upon Isaac his son, and took 
fire in his hand and a knife. And they went both of them together. 
Then spake Isaac unto Abraham his father and said: My father? And 
he answered here am I my son. And he said: See here is fire and 
wood, but where is the sheep for sacrifice? And Abraham said: my 
son, God will provide him a sheep for sacrifice. So went they both 
together. And when they came unto the place which God shewed him, 
Abraham made an altar there and dressed the wood, and bound Isaac 
his son and laid him on the altar, above upon the wood. And 
Abraham stretched forth his hand, and took the knife to have 
killed his son. Then the angel of the LORD called unto him from 
heaven saying: Abraham, Abraham?. And he answered: here am I. And 
he said: lay not thy hands upon the child, neither do anything at 
all unto him, for now I know that thou fearest God, in that thou 
hast not kept thine only son from me. And Abraham lifted up his 
eyes and looked about: and behold, there was a ram caught by the 
horns in a thicket. And he went and took the ram and offered him 
up for a sacrifice in the stead of his son. And Abraham called the 
name of the place, the LORD will see: wherefore it is a common 
saying this day: in the mount will the LORD be seen. And the angel 
of the LORD cried unto Abraham from heaven the second time saying: 
by myself have I sworn (saith the LORD) because thou hast done 
this thing and hast not spared thy only son, that I will bless 
thee and multiply thy seed as the stars of heaven and as the sand 
upon the sea side. And thy seed shall possess the gates of his 
enemies. And in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be 
blessed, because thou hast obeyed my voice. So turned Abraham 
again unto his young men, and they rose up and went together to 
Berseba. And Abraham dwelt at Berseba. And it chanced after these 
things, that one told Abraham saying: Behold, Milcha she hath also 
born children unto thy brother Nachor: Hus his eldest son and Bus 
his brother, and Kemuel the father of the Sirians, and Cesed, and 
Haso, and Pildas, and Iedlaph, and Bethuel. And Bethuel begat 
Rebecca. These eight did Milcha bear to Nachor Abraham's brother. 
And his concubine called Rheuma she bare also Tebah, Gaham, Thaas 
and Maacha.

Chapter .xxiij.

Sara was an hundred and twenty seven years old (for so long lived 
she) and then died in a head city called Hebron in the land of 
Canaan. Then Abraham came to mourn Sara and to weep for her. And 
Abraham stood up from the corpse, and talked with the sons of Heth 
saying: I am a stranger and a foreigner among yow, give me a 
possession to bury in with you, that I may bury my dead out of my 
sight. And the children of Heth answered Abraham saying unto him: 
Hear us lord, thou art a prince of God among us. In the chiefest 
of our sepulchers bury thy dead: None of us shall forbid thee his 
sepulchre, that thou shouldest not bury thy dead therein. Abraham 
stood up and bowed himself before the people of the land the 
children of Heth. And he communed {comoned} with them saying: If 
it be your minds that I shall bury my dead out of my sight, hear 
me and speak for me to Ephron the son of Zoar: and let him give me 
the double cave which he hath in the end of his field, for as much 
money as it is worth, let him give it me in the presence of you, 
for a possession to bury in. For Ephron dwelled among the children 
of Heth. Then Ephron the Hethite answered Abraham in the audience 
of the children of Heth and of all that went in at the gates of 
his city, saying: Not so, my lord, but hear me: The field give I 
thee, and the cave that therein is, give I thee also. And even in 
the presence of the sons of my people give I it thee to bury thy 
dead in. Then Abraham bowed himself before the people of the land, 
and spake unto Ephron in the audience of the people of the country 
saying: I pray thee hear me, I will give silver for the field, 
take it of me, and so will I bury my dead there. Ephron answered 
Abraham saying unto him: My lord, hearken unto me. The land is 
worth four hundredth sicles of silver: But what is that betwixt 
thee and me? bury thy dead. And Abraham hearkened unto Ephron and 
weighed him the silver which he had said in the audience of the 
sons of Heth. Even four hundred silver sicles of current money 
among merchants. Thus was the field of Ephron wherein the double 
cave is before Mamre: even the field and the cave that is therein 
and all the trees of the field which grow in all the borders round 
about, made sure unto Abraham for a possession, in the sight of 
the children of Heth and of all that went in at the gates of the 
city. And then Abraham buried Sara his wife in the double cave of 
the field that lieth before Mamre, otherwise called Ebron in the 
land of Canaan. And so both the field and the cave that is 
therein, was made unto Abraham, a sure possession to bury in, of 
the sons of Heth.

Chapter .xxiiij.

Abraham was old and stricken in days, and the LORD had blessed him 
in all things. And he said unto his eldest servant of his house 
which had the rule over all that he had: Put thy hand under my 
thigh that I may make thee swear by the LORD that is God of heaven 
and God of the earth, that thou shalt not take a wife unto my son, 
of the daughters of the Cananites, among which I dwell. But shalt 
go unto my country and to my kindred, and there take a wife unto 
my son Isaac. Then said the servant unto him: what and if the 
woman will not agree to come with me unto this land, shall I bring 
thy son again unto the land which thou camest out of? And Abraham 
said unto him: beware of that, that thou bring not my son thither. 
The LORD God of heaven which took me from my father's house and 
from the land where I was born, and which spake unto me and sware 
unto me saying: unto thy seed will I give this land, he shall send 
his angel before thee, that thou mayest take a wife unto my son 
from thence. Nevertheless if the woman will not agree to come with 
thee then shalt thou be without danger of this oath. But above all 
things bring not my son thither again. And the servant put his 
hand under the thigh of Abraham and sware to him as concerning 
that matter. And the servant took ten camels of the camels of his 
master and departed, and had of all manner goods of his master 
with him, and stood up and went to Mesopotamia, unto the city of 
Nahor. And made his camels to lie down without the city by a 
well's side of water, at even: about the time that women come out 
to draw water, and he said: LORD God of my master Abraham, send me 
good speed this day, and shew mercy unto my master Abraham. Lo I 
stond here by the well of water and the daughters of the men of 
this city will come out to draw water: Now the damsel to whom I 
say, stoop down thy pitcher, and let me drink. If she say: Drink, 
and I will give thy camels drink also, the same is she that thou 
hast ordained for thy servant Isaac: yea and thereby shall I know 
that thou hast shewed mercy on my master. And it came to pass yer 
he had left speaking, that Rebecca came out, the daughter of 
Bethuel, son to Milkah the wife of Nahor Abraham's brother, and 
her pitcher upon her shoulder: The damsel was very fair to look 
upon, and yet a maid and unknown of man. And she went down to the 
well and filled her pitcher and came up again. Then the servant 
ran unto her and said: let me sip a little water of thy pitcher. 
And she said: drink my lord. And she hasted and let down her 
pitcher upon her arm and gave him drink. And when she had given 
him drink, she said: I will draw water for thy camels also, until 
they have drunk enough. And she poured out her pitcher into the 
trough hastily, and ran again unto the well, to fetch water: and 
drew for all his camels. And the fellow wondered at her. But held 
his peace, to wete whether the LORD had made his journey 
prosperous or not. And as the camels had left drinking, he took an 
earing of half a sicle weight, and two bracelets for her hands, of 
ten sicles weight of gold, and said unto her: Whose daughter art 
thou? tell me: is there room in thy father's house, for us to 
lodge in? And she said unto him: I am the daughter of Bethuel the 
son of Milkah which she bare unto Nahor: and said moreover unto 
him: we have litter and provender enough and also room to lodge 
in. And the man bowed himself and worshipped the LORD, and said: 
blessed be the LORD God of my master Abraham which ceaseth not to 
deal mercifully and truly with my master. And {|For the LORDe|} 
hath brought me the way to my master's brother's house. And the 
damsel ran and told them of her mother's house these things. And 
Rebecca had a brother called Laban. And Laban ran out unto the 
man, to the well: for as soon as he had seen the earings and the 
bracelets upon his sister's hands, and heard the words of Rebecca 
his sister saying thus said the man unto me, then he went out unto 
the man. And lo, he stood yet with the camels by the well side. 
And Laban said: come in thou blessed of the LORD. Wherefore 
stondest thou without? I have dressed the house and made room for 
the camels. And then the man came in to the house: and he 
unbridled the camels: and brought litter and provender for the 
camels, and water to wash his feet and their feet that were with 
him, and there was meat set before him to eat. But he said: I will 
not eat, until I have said mine errand: And he said: say on; And 
he said: I am Abraham's servant, and the LORD hath blessed my 
master out of measure that he is become great and hath given him 
sheep, oxen, silver and gold, menservants, maidservants, camels 
and asses. And Sara my master's wife bare him a son, when she was 
old: and unto him hath he given all that he hath. And my master 
made me swear saying: Thou shalt not take a wife to my son, among 
the daughters of the Cananites in whose land I dwell. But thou 
shalt go unto my father's house and to my kindred, and there take 
a wife unto my son. And I said unto my master: What if the wife 
will not follow me? And he said unto me: The LORD before whom I 
walk, will send his angel with thee, and prosper thy journey that 
thou shalt take a wife for my son, of my kindred and of my 
father's house. But and if (when thou comest unto my kindred) they 
will not give thee one, then shalt thou bear no peril of mine 
oath. And I came this day unto the well and said: O LORD, the God 
of my master Abraham, if it be so that thou makest my journey 
which I go, prosperous: behold, I stond by this well of water, and 
when a virgin cometh forth to draw water, and I say to her: give 
me a little water of thy pitcher to drink, and she say again to 
me: drink thou, and I will also draw water for thy camels: that 
same is the wife, whom the LORD hath prepared for my master's son. 
And before I had made an end of speaking in mine heart: behold 
Rebecca came forth, and her pitcher on her shoulder, and she went 
down unto the well and drew. And I said unto her give me drink. 
And she made haste, and took down her pitcher from off her, and 
said: drink, and I will give thy camels drink also. And I drank, 
and she gave the camels drink also. And I asked her saying: whose 
daughter art thou? And she answered: the daughter of Bathuel 
Nahor's son, whom Milkah bare unto him. And I put the earing upon 
her face and the bracelets upon her hands. And I bowed myself, and 
worshipped the LORD, and blessed the LORD God of my master Abraham 
which had brought me the right way, to take my master's brother's 
daughter unto his son. Now therefore if ye will deal mercifully 
and truly with my master, tell me: And if not, tell me also: that 
I may turn me to the right hand or to the left. Then answered 
Laban and Bathuel saying: The thing is proceeded even out of the 
LORD, {lorde} we can not therefore say unto thee, either good or 
bad: Behold Rebecca before thy face, take her and go, and let her 
be thy master's son's wife, even as the LORD hath said. And when 
Abraham's servant heard their words, he bowed himself unto the 
LORD, flat upon the earth. And the servant took forth jewels of 
silver and jewels of gold and raiment, and gave them to Rebecca: 
But unto her brother and to her mother, he gave spices. And then 
they ate and drank, both he and the men that were with him, and 
tarried all night and rose up in the morning. And he said: let me 
depart unto my master. But her brother and her mother said: let 
the damsel abide with us a while, and it be but even ten days, and 
then go thy ways. And he said unto them, hinder me not: for the 
LORD {lorde} hath prospered my journey. Send me away that I may go 
unto my master. And they said: let us call the damsel, and wit 
what she saith to the matter. And they called forth Rebecca and 
said unto her: wilt thou go with this man? And she said: Yea. Then 
they brought Rebecca their sister on the way and her nurse and 
Abraham's servant, and the men that were with him. And they 
blessed Rebecca and said unto her: Thou art our sister, grow into 
thousand thousands, and thy seed possess the gates of their 
enemies. And Rebecca arose and her damsels, and sat them up upon 
the camels and went their way after the man. And the servant took 
Rebecca and went his way. And Isaac was a coming from the well of 
the living and seeing, for he dwelt in the south country, and was 
gone out to walk in his meditations before the even tide. And he 
lift up his eyes and looked, and behold the camels were coming. 
And Rebecca lift up her eyes, and when she saw Isaac, she lighted 
off the camel, and said unto the servant: what man is this that 
cometh against us in the field? And the servant said: it is my 
master. And then she took her mantle, and put it about her. And 
the servant told Isaac all that he had done. Then Isaac brought 
her in to his mother Sara's tent, and took Rebecca and she became 
his wife, and he loved her: and so was Isaac comforted over his 
mother.

Chapter .xxv.

Abraham took him another wife called Ketura, which bare him 
Simran, Iacksan, Medan, Midian, Iesback and Suah. And Iacksan 
begat Seba and Dedan. And the sons of Dedan were Assurim, Letusim 
and Leumim. And the sons of Midian were Epha, Epher, Hanoch, Abida 
and Elda. All these were the children of Bethura. {Ketura} But 
Abraham gave all that he had unto Isaac. And unto the sons of his 
concubines he gave gifts, and sent them away from Isaac his son 
(while he yet lived) eastward, unto the east country. These are 
the days of the life of Abraham which he lived: an hundred and 
seventy five year and then fell sick and died, in a lusty age 
(when he had lived enough) and was put unto his people. And his 
sons Isaac and Ismael buried him in the double cave in the field 
of Ephron son, of Zoar the Hethite before Mamre. Which field 
Abraham bought of the sons of Heth: There was Abraham buried and 
Sara his wife. And after the death of Abraham God blessed Isaac 
his son, which dwelt by the well of the living and seeing. These 
are the generations of Ismael Abraham's son, which Hagar the 
Egyptian Sara's handmaid bare unto Abraham. And these are the 
names of the sons of Ismael, with their names in their kindreds. 
The eldest son of Ismael, Nevatoth, then Redar, Adbeel, Mibsam, 
Misma, Duma, Masa, Hadar, Thema, Ietur, Naphis and Kedma. These 
are the sons of Ismael, and these are their names, in their towns 
and castles twelve princes of nations. And these are the years of 
the life of Ismael: an hundred and thirty seven years, and then he 
fell sick and died, and was laid unto his people. And he dwelt 
from Evila unto Sur that is before Egypt, as men go toward the 
Assyrians. And he died in the presence of all his brethren. And 
these are the generations of Isaac Abraham's son: Abraham begat 
Isaac. And Isaac was forty years old when he took Rebecca to wife 
the daughter of Bethuel the Sirian of Mesopotamia and sister to 
Laban the Sirian. And Isaac made intercession unto the LORD for 
his wife: because she was barren: and the LORD was entreated of 
him, and Rebecca his wife conceived: and the children strove 
together within her. Then she said: if it should go so to pass, 
what helpeth it that I am with child? And she went and asked the 
LORD. And the LORD said unto her there are two manner of people in 
thy womb, and two nations shall spring out of thy bowels, and the 
one nation shall be mightier than the other and the eldest shall 
be servant unto the younger. And when her time was come to be 
delivered: behold there were two twins in her womb. And he that 
came out first, was red and rough over all as it were an hide: and 
they called his name Esau. And afterward his brother came out and 
his hand holding Esau by the heel. Wherefore his name was called 
Iacob. And Isaac was forty years old when she bare them: and the 
boys grew, and Esau became a cunning hunter and a tillman. But 
Iacob was a simple man and dwelled in the tents. Isaac loved Esau 
because he did eat of his venison, but Rebecca loved Iacob. Iacob 
sod pottage, and Esau came from the field and was fainty, and said 
to Iacob: let me sip of that red pottage, for I am fainty. And 
therefore was his name called Edom. And Iacob said: sell me this 
day thy birthright. And Esau answered: Lo I am at the point to 
die, and what profit shall this birthright do me? And Iacob said, 
swear to me then this day. And he swore to him and sold his 
birthright unto Iacob. Then Iacob gave Esau bread and pottage of 
red rice. And he ate and drank and rose up and went his way. And 
so Esau regarded not his birthright.

Chapter .xxvi.

And there fell a dearth in the land, passing the first dearth that 
fell in the days of Abraham. Wherefore Isaac went unto Abimelech 
king of the Philistines unto Gerar. Then the LORD appeared unto 
him and said: go not down into Egypt, but bide in the land which I 
say unto thee: Sojourn in this land, and I will be with thee, and 
will bless thee: for unto thee and unto thy seed I will give all 
these countries. And I will perform the oath which I swore unto 
Abraham thy father, and will multiply thy seed as the stars of 
heaven, and will give unto thy seed all these countries. And 
thorow thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed, 
because that Abraham hearkened unto my voice and kept mine 
ordinances, commandments, statutes and laws. And Isaac dwelled in 
Gerar. And the men of the place asked him of his wife, and he said 
that she was his sister: for he feared to call her his wife lest 
the men of the place should have killed him for her sake, because 
she was beautiful to the eye. And it happened after he had been 
there long time, that Abimelech king of the Philistines looked out 
at a window, and saw Isaac sporting with Rebecca his wife. And 
Abimelech sent for Isaac and said: see, she is of a surety thy 
wife, and why saidest thou that she was thy sister? And Isaac said 
unto him: I thought that I might peradventure have died for her 
sake. Then said Abimelech: why hast thou done this unto us? one of 
the people might lightly have lain by thy wife and so shouldest 
thou have brought sin upon us. Then Abimelech charged all his 
people saying: he that toucheth this man or his wife, shall surely 
die for it. And Isaac sowed in the land, and found in the same 
year an hundred bushels: for the LORD blessed him, and the man 
waxed mighty, and went forth and grew till he was exceeding great, 
that he had possession of sheep, of oxen and a mighty household: 
so that the Philistines had envy at him: Insomuch that they 
stopped and filled up with earth, all the wells which his father's 
servants digged in his father Abraham's time. Then said Abimelech 
unto Isaac: get thee from me, for thou art mightier than we a 
great deal. Then Isaac departed thence, and pitched his tent in 
the valley Gerar and dwelt there. And Isaac digged again, the 
wells of water which they digged in the days of Abraham his father 
which the Philistines had stopped after the death of Abraham, and 
gave them the same names which his father gave them. As Isaac's 
servants digged in the valley, they found a well of springing 
{living} water. And the herdmen of Gerar did strive with Isaac's 
herdmen saying: the water is ours. Then called he the well Eseck 
because they strove with him. Then digged they another well, and 
they strove for that also. Therefore called he it Sitena. And then 
he departed thence, and digged another well for the which they 
strove not: therefore called he it Rehoboth, saying: the LORD hath 
now made us room, and we are increased upon the earth. Afterward 
departed he thence and came to Berseba. And the LORD appeared unto 
him the same night and said: I am the God of Abraham thy father, 
fear not for I am with thee, and will bless thee, and multiply thy 
seed for my servant Abraham's sake. And then he builded an altar 
there and called upon the name of the LORD, and there pitched his 
tent. And there Isaac's servants digged a well. Then came 
Abimelech to him from Gerar and Ahusath his friend and Phicoll his 
chief captain. And Isaac said unto them: wherefore come ye to me, 
seeing ye hate me and have put me away from you? Then said they: 
we saw that the LORD was with thee, and therefore we said that 
there should be an oath betwixt us and thee, and that we would 
make a bond with thee: that thou shouldest do us no hurt, as we 
have not touched thee, and have done unto thee nothing but good, 
and send thee away in peace: for thou art now the blessed of the 
LORD. And he made them a feast, and they ate and drank. And they 
rose up by times in the morning and sware one to another. And 
Isaac sent them away. And they departed from him in peace. And the 
same day came Isaac's servants, and told him of a well which they 
had digged: and said unto him, that they had found water. And he 
called it Seba, wherefore the name of the city is called Berseba 
unto this day. When Esau was forty years old, he took to wife 
Iudith the daughter of Bery an Hethite, and Basmath the daughter 
of Elon an Hethite also, which were disobedient unto Isaac and 
Rebecca.

Chapter .xxvij.

And it came to pass that Isaac waxed old and his eyes were dim, so 
that he could not see. Then called he Esau his eldest son and said 
unto him: my son. And he said unto him: here am I. And he said: 
behold, I am old and know not the day of my death: Now therefore 
take thy weapons, thy quiver and thy bow, and get thee to the 
fields, and take me some venison, and make me meat such as I love, 
and bring it me and let me eat that my soul may bless thee before 
that I die. But Rebecca heard when Isaac spoke to Esau his son. 
And as soon as Esau was gone to the field to catch venison, and to 
bring it, she spake unto Iacob her son saying: Behold I have heard 
thy father talking with Esau thy brother and saying: bring me 
venison and make me meat, that I may eat and bless thee before the 
LORD yer I die. Now therefore my son hear my voice in that which I 
command thee: get thee to the flock, and bring me thence two good 
kids, and I will make meat of them for thy father, such as he 
loveth. And thou shalt bring it to thy father and he shall eat, 
that he may bless thee before his death. Then said Iacob to 
Rebecca his mother: Behold Esau my brother is rough and I am 
smooth. My father shall peradventure feel me, and I shall seem 
unto him as though I went about to beguile him, and so shall he 
bring a curse upon me and not a blessing: and his mother said unto 
him. Upon me be thy curse my son, only hear my voice, and go and 
fetch me them. And Iacob went and fetched them and brought them to 
his mother. And his mother made meat of them, according as his 
father loved. And she went and fetched goodly raiment of her 
eldest son Esau which she had in the house with her, and put them 
upon Iacob her youngest son, and she put the skins upon his hands 
and upon the smooth of his neck. And she put the meat and bread 
which she had made in the hand of her son Iacob. And he went in to 
his father saying: my father. And he answered: here am I, who art 
thou my son? And Iacob said unto his father: I am Esau thy eldest 
son, I have done according as thou baddest me, up and sit and eat 
of my venison, that thy soul may bless me. But Isaac said unto his 
son: How cometh it that thou hast found it so quickly my son? He 
answered: The LORD thy God brought it to my hand. Then said Isaac 
unto Iacob: come near and let me feel thee my son, whether thou be 
my son Esau or not. Then went Iacob to Isaac his father, and he 
felt him and said the voice is Iacob's voice, but the hands are 
the hands of Esau. And he knew him not, because his hands were 
rough as his brother Esau's hands and so he blessed him. And he 
asked him, art thou my son Esau? And he said: that I am. Then said 
he: bring me and let me eat of my son's venison, that my soul may 
bless thee. And he brought him, and he ate. And he brought him 
wine also, and he drank. And his father Isaac said unto him: come 
near and kiss me my son. And he went to him and kissed him. And he 
smelled the savour of his raiment and blessed him, and said See, 
the smell of my son is as the smell of a field which the LORD 
{lorde} hath blessed. God give thee of the dew of heaven, and of 
the fatness of the earth and plenty of corn and wine. People be 
thy servants and nations bow unto thee. Be lord over thy brethren, 
and thy mother's children stoop unto thee. Cursed be he that 
curseth thee, and blessed {lessed} be he that blesseth thee. As 
soon as Isaac had made an end of blessing Iacob, and Iacob was 
scarce gone out from the presence of Isaac his father: then came 
Esau his brother from his hunting: and had made also meat, and 
brought it in unto his father and said unto him: Arise my father 
and eat of thy son's venison, that thy soul may bless me. Then his 
father Isaac said unto him: Who art thou? he answered I am thy 
eldest son Esau. And Isaac was greatly astonied out of measure, 
and said: Where is he then that hath hunted venison and brought it 
me, and I have eaten of all before thou camest, and have blessed 
him, and he shall be blessed still. When Esau heard the words of 
his father, he cried out greatly and bitterly above measure, and 
said unto his father: bless me also my father. And he said thy 
brother came with subtlety, and hath taken away thy blessing. Then 
said he: He may well be called Iacob, for he hath undermined me 
now two times, first he took away my birthright: and see, now hath 
he taken away my blessing also. And he said, hast thou kept never 
a blessing for me? Isaac answered and said unto Esau: behold I 
have made him thy lord, {LORde} and all his mother's children have 
I made his servants. Moreover with corn and wine have I stablished 
him, what can I do unto thee now my son? And Esau said unto his 
father: hast thou but that one blessing my father? bless me also 
my father: so lifted up Esau his voice and wept. Then Isaac his 
father answered and said unto him: Behold thy dwelling place shall 
have of the fatness of the earth, and of the dew of heaven from 
above. And with thy sword shalt thou live and shalt be thy 
brother's servant; But the time will come, when thou shalt get the 
mastery, and lowse his yoke from off thy neck. And Esau hated 
Iacob, because of the blessing that his father blessed him withal, 
and said in his heart: The days of my father's sorrow are at hand, 
for I will slay my brother Iacob. And these words of Esau her 
eldest son, were told to Rebecca. And she sent and called Iacob 
her youngest son, and said unto him: behold thy brother Esau 
threateneth to kill thee: Now therefore my son hear my voice, make 
thee ready, and flee to Laban my brother at Haran: And tarry with 
him a while, until thy brother's fierceness be swaged, and until 
thy brother's wrath turn away from thee, and he forget that which 
thou hast done to him. Then will I send and fetch thee away from 
thence. Why should I lose you both in one day? And Rebecca spake 
to Isaac: I am weary of my life, for fear of the daughters of 
Heth. If Iacob take a wife of the daughters of Heth, such one as 
these are, or of the daughters of the land, what lust should I 
have to live?

Chapter .xxviij.

Then Isaac called Iacob his son and blessed him, and charged him 
and said unto him: see thou take not a wife of the daughters of 
Canaan, but arise and get thee to Mesopotamia to the house of 
Bethuel thy mother's father: and there take thee a wife of the 
daughters of Laban thy mother's brother. And God almighty bless 
thee, increase thee, and multiply thee that thou mayest be a 
number of people, and give thee the blessing of Abraham: both to 
thee and to thy seed with thee, that thou mayest possess the land 
(wherein thou art a stranger) which God gave unto Abraham. Thus 
Isaac sent forth Iacob, to go to Mesopotamia unto Laban, son of 
Bethuel the Sirien, and brother to Rebecca Iacob's and Esau's 
mother. When Esau saw that Isaac had blessed Iacob, and sent him 
to Mesopotamia, to fetch him a wife thence, and that, as he 
blessed him he gave him a charge saying: see thou take not a wife 
of the daughters of Canaan: and that Iacob had obeyed his father 
and mother, and was gone unto Mesopotamia: and seeing also that 
the daughters of Canaan pleased not Isaac his father: Then went he 
unto Ismael, and took unto the wives which he had, Mahala the 
daughter of Ismael Abraham's son, the sister of Nabaioth to be his 
wife. Iacob departed from Berseba and went toward Haran, and came 
unto a place and tarried there all night, because the son was 
down. And took a stone of the place, and put it under his head, 
and laid him down in the same place to sleep. And he dreamed: and 
behold there stood a ladder upon the earth, and the top of it 
reached up to heaven. And see, the angels of God went up and down 
upon it, yea and the LORD stood upon it and said: I am the LORD 
God of Abraham thy father and the God of Isaac: The land which 
thou sleepest upon will I give thee and thy seed. And thy seed 
shall be as the dust of the earth: And thou shalt spread abroad: 
west, east, north and south. And thorow thee and thy seed shall 
all the kindreds of the earth be blessed. And see I am with thee, 
and will be thy keeper in all places whother thou goest, and will 
bring thee again into this land: Neither will I leave thee until I 
have made good, all that I have promised thee. When Iacob was 
awaked out of his sleep, he said: surely the LORD is in this 
place, and I was not aware. And he was afraid and said how fearful 
is this place? it is none other, but even the house of God and the 
gate of heaven. And Iacob stood up early in the morning and took 
the stone that he had laid under his head, and pitched it up on 
end, and poured oil on the top of it. And he called the name of 
the place Bethel, for indeed the name of the city was called Lus 
before time. And Iacob vowed a vow, saying: If God will be with me 
and will keep me in this journey which I go and will give me bread 
to eat, and clothes to put on, so that I come again unto my 
father's house in safety: then shall the LORD be my God, and this 
stone which I have set up an end, shall be God's {godes} house. 
And of all that thou shalt give me, will I give the tenth unto 
thee.

Chapter .xxix.

Then Iacob lift up his feet, and went toward the east country. And 
as he looked about, behold there was a well in the field, and 
three flocks of sheep lay thereby (for at that well were the 
flocks watered) and there lay a great stone at the well mouth. And 
the manner was to bring the flocks thither, and to roll the stone 
from the well's mouth and to water the sheep, and to put the stone 
again upon the well's mouth unto his place. And Iacob said unto 
them: brethren, whence be ye? And they said: of Haran are we. And 
he said unto them: Know ye Laban the son of Nahor. And they said: 
We know him. And he said unto them: is he in good health? And they 
said: he is in good health: and behold, his daughter Rahel cometh 
with the sheep. And he said: lo, it is yet a great while to night, 
neither is it time that the cattle should be gathered together: 
water the sheep and go and feed them. And they said: we may not, 
until all the flocks be brought together, and the stone be rolled 
from the well's mouth, and so we water our sheep. While he yet 
talked with them, Rahel came with her father's sheep, for she kept 
them. As soon as Iacob saw Rahel, the daughter of Laban his 
mother's brother, and the sheep of Laban his mother's brother, he 
went and rolled the stone from the well's mouth, and watered the 
sheep of Laban his mother's brother. And Iacob kissed Rahel, and 
lift up his voice and wept: and told her also that he was her 
father's brother and Rebecca's son. Then Rahel ran and told her 
father. When Laban heard tell of Iacob his sister's son, he ran 
against him, and embraced him and kissed him and brought him into 
his house. And then Iacob told Laban all the matter. And then 
Laban said: well, thou art my bone and my flesh. Abide with me the 
space of a month. And afterward Laban said unto Iacob: though thou 
be my brother, shouldest thou therefore serve me for nought? tell 
me what shall thy wages be? And Laban had two daughters, the 
eldest called Lea and the youngest Rahel. Lea was tender eyed, but 
Rahel was beautiful and well favored. And Iacob loved her well, 
and said: I will serve thee seven years for Rahel thy youngest 
daughter. And Laban answered: it is better that I give her thee, 
than to another man: bide therefore with me. And Iacob served 
seven years for Rahel, and they seemed unto him but a few days, 
for the love he had to her. And Iacob said unto Laban: give me my 
wife, that I may lie with her. For the time appointed me is come. 
Then Laban bade all the men of that place, and made a feast. And 
when even was come, he took Lea his daughter and brought her to 
him and he went in unto her. And Laban gave unto his daughter Lea, 
Zilpha his maid, to be her servant. And when the morning was come, 
behold it was Lea. Than said he to Laban: wherefore hast thou 
played thus with me? did not I serve thee for Rahel, wherefore 
then hast thou beguiled me? Laban answered: it is not the manner 
of this place, to marry the youngest before the eldest. Pass out 
this week, and then shall this also be given thee for the service 
which thou shalt serve me yet seven years more. And Iacob did even 
so, and passed out that week, and then he gave him Rahel his 
daughter to wife also. And Laban gave to Rahel his daughter, Bilha 
his handmaid to be her servant. So lay he by Rahel also, and loved 
Rahel more than Lea, and served him yet seven years more. When the 
LORD saw that Lea was despised, he made her fruitful: but Rahel 
was barren. And Lea conceived and bare a son, and called his name 
Ruben, for she said: the LORD hath looked upon my tribulation. And 
now my husband will love me. And she conceived again and bare a 
son, and said: the LORD hath heard that I am despised, and hath 
therefore given me this son also, and she called him Simeon. And 
she conceived yet and bare a son, and said: now this once will my 
husband keep me company, because I have borne him three sons: and 
therefore she called his name Levi. And she conceived yet again, 
and bare a son saying: Now will I praise the LORD: therefore she 
called his name Iuda, and left bearing.

Chapter .xxx.

When Rahel saw that she bare Iacob no children, she envied her 
sister and said unto Iacob: give me children, or else I am but 
dead. Then was Iacob wroth with Rahel saying: Am I in God's 
{godes} stead which keepeth from thee the fruit of thy womb? Then 
she said: here is my maid Bilha: go in unto her, that she may bear 
upon my lap, that I may be increased by her. And she gave him 
Bilha her handmaid to wife. And Iacob went in unto her: And Bilha 
conceived and bare Iacob a son. Then said Rahel: God hath given 
sentence on my side, and hath also heard my voice, and hath given 
me a son. Therefore called she him Dan. And Bilha Rahel's maid 
conceived again, and bare Iacob another son. And Rahel said. God 
is turned, and I have made a change with my sister, and have 
gotten the upper hand. And she called his name Naphtali. When Lea 
saw that she had left bearing, she took Silpha her maid, and gave 
her Iacob to wife. And Silpha Lea's maid bare Iacob a son. Then 
said Lea: Good luck: and called his name Gad. And Silpha Lea's 
maid bare Iacob another son. Then said Lea: happy am I, for the 
daughters will call me blessed. And called his name Asser. And 
Ruben went out in the wheat harvest and found mandragoras in the 
fields, and brought them unto his mother Lea. Then said Rahel to 
Lea give me of thy son's mandragoras. And Lea answered: Is it not 
enough, that thou hast taken away my husband, but wouldest take 
away my son's mandragoras also? Then said Rahel well, let him 
sleep with thee this night, for thy son's mandragoras. And when 
Iacob came from the fields at even, Lea went out to meet him, and 
said: come in to me, for I have bought thee with my son's 
mandragoras. And he slept with her that night. And God heard Lea, 
that she conceived and bare unto Iacob the fifth son. Then said 
Lea: God hath given me my reward, because I gave my maiden to my 
husband, and she called him Isachar. And Lea conceived yet again 
and bare Iacob the sixth son. Then said she: God hath endued me 
with a good dowry. Now will my husband dwell with me, because I 
have borne him six sons: and called his name Zabulon. After that 
she bare a daughter, and called her Dina. And God remembered 
Rahel, heard her, and made her fruitful: so that she conceived and 
bare a son, and said God hath taken away my rebuke. And she called 
his name Ioseph saying: The LORD {lorde} give me yet another son. 
As soon as Rahel had borne Ioseph, Iacob said to Laban: Send me 
away that I may go unto mine own place and country, give me my 
wives and my children for whom I have served thee, and let me go: 
for thou knowest what service I have done thee. Then said Laban 
unto him: If I have found favour in thy sight (for I suppose that 
the LORD {|God|} hath blessed me for thy sake) appoint what thy 
reward shall be, and I will give it thee. But he said unto him, 
thou knowest what service I have done thee, and in what taking thy 
cattle have been under me: For it was but little that thou hadst 
before I came, and now it is increased into a multitude, and the 
LORD hath blessed thee for my sake. But now when shall I make 
provision for mine own house also? And he said: what shall I give 
thee? And Iacob answered: thou shalt give me nothing at all, if 
thou wilt do this one thing for me: And then will I turn again and 
feed thy sheep and keep them. I will go about all thy sheep this 
day, and separate from them all the sheep that are spotted and of 
divers colours, and all black sheep among the lambs and the party 
and spotted among the kids: And then such shall be my reward. So 
shall my righteousness answer for me: when the time cometh that I 
shall receive my reward of thee: So that whatsoever is not 
speckled and party among the goats and black among the lambs, let 
that be theft with me. Then said Laban: Lo, I am content, that it 
be according as thou hast said. And he took out that same day the 
he goats that were party and of divers colours, and all the goats 
that were spotted and party coloured, and all that had white in 
them, and all the black among the lambs: and put them in the 
keeping of his sons, and set three days' journey betwixt himself 
and Iacob. And so Iacob kept the rest of Laban's sheep. Iacob took 
rods of green poplar, hazel, and of chestnut trees, and pilled 
white streaks in them and made the white appear in the staves: And 
he put the staves which he had pilled, even before the sheep, in 
the gutters and watering troughs, when the sheep came to drink: 
that they should conceive when they came to drink. And the sheep 
conceived before the staves, and brought forth streaked, spotted 
and party. Then Iacob parted the lambs, and turned the faces of 
the sheep toward spotted things, and toward all manner of black 
things thorow out the flocks of Laban. And he made him flocks of 
his own by them self, which he put not unto the flocks of Laban. 
And alway in the first bucking time of the sheep, Iacob put the 
staves before the sheep in the gutters, that they might conceive 
before the staves: But in the latter bucking time, he put them not 
there: so the last brood was Laban's and the first Iacob's. And 
the man became exceeding rich and had many sheep, maidservants, 
menservants, camels and asses.

Chapter .xxxj.

And Iacob heard the words of Laban's sons how they said: Iacob 
hath taken away all that was our father's, and of our father's 
goods, hath he gotten all this honour. And Iacob beheld the 
countenance of Laban, that it was not toward him as it was in 
times past. And the LORD said unto Iacob: turn again into the land 
of thy fathers and to thy kindred, and I will be with thee. Then 
Iacob sent and called Rahel and Lea to the field unto his sheep, 
and said unto them: I see your father's countenance, that it is 
not toward me as in times past. Moreover the God of my father hath 
been with me. And ye know how that I have served your father with 
all my might. And your father hath deceived {disceaved} me and 
changed my wages ten times: But God suffered him not to hurt me. 
When he said the spotted shall be thy wages, then all the sheep 
bare spotted. If he said, the streaked shall be thy reward, then 
bare all the sheep streaked: thus hath God taken away your 
father's cattle and given them me. For in bucking time, I lifted 
up mine eyes and saw in a dream: and behold, the rams that bucked 
the sheep were streaked, spotted and party. And the angel of God 
spake unto me in a dream saying: Iacob?. And I answered: here am 
I. And he said: lift up thine eyes and see how all the rams that 
leap upon the sheep are streaked, spotted and party: for I have 
seen all that Laban doth unto thee. I am the God of Bethel where 
thou anointedest the stone and where thou vowdest a vow unto me. 
Now arise and get thee out of this country, and return unto the 
land where thou wast born. Then answered Rahel and Lea and said 
unto him: we have no part nor inheritance in our father's house: 
he counteth us even as strangers, for he hath sold us, and hath 
even eaten up the price of us. Moreover all the riches which God 
hath taken from our father, that is ours and our children's. Now 
therefore whatsoever God hath said unto thee, that do. Then Iacob 
rose up and set his sons and wives up upon camels, and carried 
away all his cattle and all his substance which he had gotten in 
Mesopotamia, for to go to Isaac his father unto the land of Canaan 
Laban was gone to shear his sheep, and Rahel had stolen her 
father's images. And Iacob went away unknowing to {Iacob stale 
away the heart of} Laban the Sirian, and told him not that he 
fled. So fled he and all that he had, and made himself ready, and 
passed over the rivers, and set his face straight toward the mount 
Gilead. Upon the third day after, was it told Laban that Iacob was 
fled. Then he took his brethren with him and followed after him 
seven days' journey, and overtook him at the mount Gilead. And God 
came to Laban the Sirian in a dream by night, and said unto him: 
take heed to thyself, that thou speak not to Iacob ought save 
good. And Laban overtook Iacob: and Iacob had pitched his tent in 
that mount. And Laban with his brethren pitched their tent also 
upon the mount Gilead. Then said Laban to Iacob: why hast thou 
this done unknowing to me, {done to steal away my heart} and hast 
carried away my daughters as though they had been taken captive 
with sword? Wherefore wentest thou away secretly unknown to me and 
didst not tell me, that I might have brought thee on the way with 
mirth, singing, timbrels and harps, and hast not suffered me to 
kiss my children and my daughters?. Thou wast a fool to do it, for 
I am able to do you evil. But the God of your father spake unto me 
yesterday saying take heed that thou speak not to Iacob ought save 
good. And now though thou wentest thy way because thou longest 
after thy father's house, yet wherefore hast thou stolen my gods? 
Iacob answered and said to Laba: because I was afraid, and thought 
that thou wouldest have taken away thy daughters from me. But with 
whomsoever thou findest thy gods, let him die here before our 
brethren. Seek that thine is by me, and take it to thee: for Iacob 
wist not that Rahel had stolen them. Then went Laban into Iacob's 
tent, and into Lea's tent, and into two maidens' tents: but found 
them not. Then went he out of Lea's tent, and entered into Rahel's 
tent. And Rahel took the images, and put them in the camel's 
straw, and sat down upon them. And Laban searched all the tent: 
but found them not. Then said she to her father: my lord, be not 
angry that I can not rise up before thee, for the disease of women 
is come upon me. So searched he, but found them not. Iacob was 
wroth, and chode with Laban: Iacob also answered and said to him: 
what have I trespassed or what have I offended, that thou 
followedest after me? Thou hast searched all my stuff, and what 
hast thou found of all thy household stuff? put it here before thy 
brethren and mine, and let them judge betwixt us both. This twenty 
years that I have been with thee, thy sheep and thy goats have not 
been barren, and the rams of thy flock have I not eaten. 
Whatsoever was torn of beasts I brought it not unto thee, but made 
it good myself: of my hand didst thou require it, whether it was 
stolen by day or night. Moreover by day the heat consumed me, and 
the cold by night, and my sleep departed from mine eyes. Thus have 
I been twenty years in thy house, and served thee fourteen years 
for thy two daughters, and six years for thy sheep, and thou hast 
changed my reward ten times. And except the God of my father, the 
God of Abraham, and the God whom Isaac feareth, had been with me: 
surely thou hadst sent me away now all empty. But God beheld my 
tribulation, and the labour of my, hands: and rebuked thee 
yesterday. Laban answered and said unto Iacob: the daughters are 
my daughters, and the children are my children, and the sheep are 
my sheep, and all that thou seest is mine. And what can I do this 
day unto these my daughters, or unto their children which they 
have born? Now therefore come on, let us make a bond, I and thou 
together, and let it be a witness between thee and me. Then took 
Iacob a stone and set it up on end, and said unto his brethren, 
gather stones. And they took stones, and made an heap, and they 
ate there, upon the heap. And Laban called it Zegar Sahadutha, but 
Iacob called Gilead. Then said Laban: this heap be witness between 
thee and me this day (therefore is it called Gilead) and this toot 
hill which the LORD {lorde} seeth (said he) be witness between me 
and thee when we are departed one from another: that thou shalt 
not vex my daughters neither shalt take other wives unto them. 
Here is no man with us: behold, God is witness betwixt thee and 
me. And Laban said moreover to Iacob: behold, this heap and this 
mark which I have set here, betwixt me and thee: this heap be 
witness and also this mark, that I will not come over this heap to 
thee, and thou shalt not come over this heap and this mark, to do 
any harm. The God of Abraham, the God of Nahor and the God of 
their fathers, be judge betwixt us. And Iacob sware by him that 
his father Isaac feared. Then Iacob did sacrifice upon the mount, 
and called his brethren to eat bread. And they ate bread and 
tarried all night in the hill. And early in the morning Laban rose 
up and kissed his children and his daughters, and blessed them and 
departed and went unto his place again.

Chapter .xxxij.

But Iacob went forth on his journey. And the angels of God came 
and met him. And when Iacob saw them, he said: this is God's 
{godes} host: and called the name of that same place Mahanaim. 
Iacob sent messengers before him to Esau his brother, unto the 
land of Seir and the field of Edom. And he commanded them saying: 
see that ye speak after this manner to my lord Esau: thy servant, 
Iacob sayeth thus; I have sojourned and been a stranger with Laban 
unto this time: and have gotten oxen, asses and sheep, menservants 
and womenservants, and have sent to shew it my lord, that I may 
find grace in thy sight. And the messengers came again to Iacob 
saying: we came unto thy brother Esau, and he cometh against thee 
and four hundred men with him. Then was Iacob greatly afraid, and 
wist not which way to turn himself, and divided the people that 
was with him and the sheep, oxen and camels, into two companies, 
and said: If Esau come to the one part and smite it, the other may 
save itself. And Iacob said: O God of my father Abraham, and God 
of my father Isaac: LORD, which saidest unto me, return unto thy 
country and to thy kindred, and I will deal well with thee. I am 
not worthy of the least of all the mercies and truth which thou 
hast shewed unto thy servant. For with my staff came I over this 
Iordan, and now have I gotten two droves. Deliver me from the 
hands of my brother Esau, for I fear him: lest he will come and 
smite the mother with the children. Thou saidest that thou 
wouldest surely do me good, and wouldest make my seed as the sand 
of the sea which can not be numbered for multitude. And he tarried 
there that same night, and took of that which came to hand, a 
present, unto Esau his brother: Two hundred she goats and twenty 
he goats: two hundred sheep and twenty rams: thirty milch camels 
with their colts: forty kine and ten bulls: twenty she asses and 
ten foals and delivered them unto his servants, every drove by 
them selves, and said unto them: go forth before me and put a 
space betwixt every drove. And he commanded the foremost, saying: 
When Esau my brother meeteth thee and asketh thee saying: whose 
servant art thou and whither goest thou, and whose are these that 
go before thee: thou shalt say, they be thy servant Iacob's, and 
are a present sent unto my lord Esau, and behold, he himself 
cometh after us. And so commanded he the second, and even so the 
third, and likewise all that followed the droves saying, of this 
manner see that ye speak unto Esau when ye meet him, and say 
moreover. Behold thy servant Iacob cometh after us, for he said. I 
will pease his wrath with the present that goeth before me and 
afterward I will see him myself, so peradventure he will receive 
me to grace. So went the present before him and he tarried all 
that night in the tent, and rose up the same night and took his 
two wives and his two maidens and his eleven sons, and went over 
the ford Iabok. And he took them and sent them over the river, and 
sent over that he had and tarried behind himself alone. And there 
wrestled a man with him unto the breaking of the day. And when he 
saw that he could not prevail against him, he smote him under the 
thigh, and the sinew of Iacob's thigh shrank as he wrestled with 
him. And he said: let me go, for the day breaketh. And he said: I 
will not let thee go, except thou bless me. And he said unto him: 
what is thy name? He answered: Iacob. And he said: thou shalt be 
called Iacob no more, but Israel. For thou hast wrestled with God 
and with men and hast prevailed. And Iacob asked him saying, tell 
me thy name. And he said, wherefore dost thou ask after my name? 
and he blessed him there. And Iacob called the name of the place 
Pheniel, for I have seen God face to face, and yet is my life 
reserved. And as he went over Peniel, the sun rose upon him, and 
he halted upon his thigh: wherefore the children of Israel eat not 
of the sinew that shrank under the thigh, unto this day: because 
that he smote Iacob under the thigh in the sinew that shrank.

Chapter .xxxiij.

Iacob lift up his eyes and saw his brother Esau come, and with him 
four hundred men. And he divided the children unto Lea and unto 
Rahel and unto the two maidens. And he put the maidens and their 
children foremost, and Lea and her children after, and Rahel and 
Ioseph hindermost. And he went before them and fell on the ground 
seven times, until he came unto his brother. Esau ran against {to 
meet} him and embraced him and fell on his neck and kissed him, 
and they wept. And he lift up his eyes and saw the wives and their 
children, and said: what are these which thou there hast? And he 
said: they are the children which God hath given thy servant. Then 
came the maidens forth, and did their obeisance. Lea also and her 
children came and did their obeisance. And last of all came Ioseph 
and Rahel and did their obeisance. And he said: what meanest thou 
with all the droves which I met? And he answered: to find grace in 
the sight of my lord. And Esau said: I have enough my brother, 
keep that thou hast unto thyself. Iacob answered: oh nay but if I 
have found grace in thy sight, receive my present of my hand: for 
I have seen thy face as though I had seen the face of God: 
wherefore receive me to grace and take my blessing that I have 
brought thee, for God hath given it me freely. And I have enough 
of all things. And so he compelled him to take it. And he said: 
let us take our journey and go, and I will go in thy company. And 
he said unto him: my lord knoweth that I have tender children, 
ewes and kine with young, under mine hand, which if men should 
overdrive but even one day, the whole flock would die. Let my lord 
therefore go before his servant and I will drive fair and softly, 
according as the cattle that goeth before me and the children, be 
able to endure: until I come to my lord unto Seir. And Esau said: 
let me yet leave some of my folk with thee. And he said: what 
needeth it? let me find grace in the sight of my lord. So Esau 
went his way again that same day unto Seir. And Iacob took his 
journey toward Sucoth, and built him an house, and made booths for 
his cattle: whereof the name of the place is called Sucoth. And 
Iacob went to Salem {came peaceably in} to the city of Sichem in 
the land of Canaan, after that he was come from Mesopotamia, and 
pitched before the city, and bought a parcel of ground where he 
pitched his tent, of the children of Hemor Sichem's father, for an 
hundred lambs; And he made there an altar, and there called upon 
the mighty God of Israel.

Chapter .xxxiiij.

Dina the daughter of Lea which she bare unto Iacob, went out to 
see the daughters of the land. And Sichem the son of Hemor the 
Hevite lord of the country, saw her, and took her, and lay with 
her, and forced her: and his heart lay unto Dina the daughter of 
Iacob. And he loved the damsel and spake kindly unto her, and 
spake unto his father Hemor saying, get me this maiden unto my 
wife. And Iacob heard that he had defiled Dina his daughter, but 
his sons were with the cattle in the field, and therefore he held 
his peace, until they were come. Then Hemor the father of Sichem 
went out unto Iacob, to commune with him. And the sons of Iacob 
came out of the field as soon as they heard it, for it grieved 
them, and they were not a little wroth, because he had wrought 
folly in Israel, in that he had lain with Iacob's daughter, which 
thing ought not to be done. And Hemor communed with them saying: 
the soul of my son Sichem longeth for your daughter: give her him 
to wife, and make marriages with us: give your daughters unto us, 
and take our daughters unto you, and dwell with us, and the land 
shall be at your pleasure, dwell and do your business, and have 
your possessions therein. And Sichem said unto her father and her 
brethren: let me find grace in your eyes, and whatsoever ye 
appoint me, that will I give. Ask freely of me both the dowry and 
gifts, and I will give according as ye say unto me, and give me 
the damsel to wife. Then the sons of Iacob answered to Sichem and 
Hemor his father deceitfully, because he had defiled Dina their 
sister. And they said unto them, we can not do this thing, that we 
should give our sister to one that is uncircumcised, for that were 
a shame unto us. Only in this will we consent unto you: If ye will 
be as we be, that all the men children among you be circumcised, 
then will we give our daughter to you and take yours to us, and 
will dwell with you and be one people. But and if ye will not 
hearken unto us to be circumcised, than will we take our daughter 
and go our ways. And their words pleased Hemor and Sichem his son. 
And the young man deferred not for to do the thing, because he had 
a lust to Iacob's daughter: he was also most set by of all that 
were in his father's house. Then Hemor and Sichem went unto the 
gate of their city, and communed with the men of their city 
saying: These men are peaceable with us, and will dwell in the 
land and do their occupation therein; And in the land is room 
enough for them, let us take their daughters to wives and give 
them ours: only herein will they consent unto us for to dwell with 
us and to be one people: if all the men children that are among us 
be circumcised as they are. Their goods and their substance and 
all their cattle are ours, only let us consent unto them, that 
they may dwell with us. And unto Hemor and Sichem his son 
hearkened all that went out at the gate of his city. And all the 
men children were circumcised whatsoever went out at the gates of 
his city. And the third day when it was painful to them, two of 
the sons of Iacob, Simeon and Levi Dina's brethren, took either of 
them his sword and went into the city boldly, and slew all that 
was male, and slew also Hemor and Sichem his son with the edge of 
the sword, and took Dina their sister out of Sichem's house, and 
went their way. Then came the sons of Iacob upon the deed, and 
spoiled the city, because they had defiled their sister: and took 
their sheep, oxen, asses and whatsoever was in the city and also 
in the fields. And all their goods, all their children and their 
wives took they captive, and made havoc of all that was in the 
houses. And Iacob said to Simeon and Levi: ye have troubled me and 
made me stink unto the inhabiters of the land, both to the 
Cananites and also unto the Pherezites. And I am few in number. 
Wherefore they shall gather them selves together against me and 
slay me, and so shall I and my house be destroyed. And they 
answered: should they deal with our sister as with an whore?

Chapter .xxxv.

And God said unto Iacob, arise and get thee up to Bethel, and 
dwell there. And make there an altar unto God that appeared unto 
thee, when thou fleddest from Esau thy brother. Then said Iacob 
unto his household and to all that were with him, put away the 
strange gods that are among you and make your selves clean, and 
change your garments, and let us arise and go up to Bethel, that I 
may make an altar there, unto God which heard me in the day of my 
tribulation and was with me in the way which I went. And they gave 
unto Iacob all the strange gods which were under their hands, and 
all their earings which were in their ears, and Iacob hid them 
under an oak at Sichem. And they departed. And the fear of God 
fell upon the cities that were round about them, that they durst 
not follow after the sons of Iacob. So came Iacob to Lus in the 
land of Canaan, otherwise called Bethel, with all the people that 
was with him. And he builded there an altar, and called the place 
Elbethel: because that God {|the LORDe|} appeared unto him there, 
when he fled from his brother. Then died Debora Rebecca's nurse, 
and was buried beneath Bethel under an oak. And the name of it was 
called the oak of lamentation. And God appeared unto Iacob again 
after he came out of Mesopotamia, and blessed him and said unto 
him: Thy name is Iacob. Notwithstanding thou shalt be no more 
called Iacob, but Israel shall be thy name. And so was his name 
called Israel. And God said unto him: I am God allmighty, grow and 
multiply: for people and a multitude of people shall spring of 
thee, yea and kings shall come out of thy loins. And the land 
which I gave Abraham and Isaac, will I give unto thee, and unto 
thy seed after thee will I give it also. And God departed from him 
in the place where he talked with him. And Iacob set up a mark in 
the place where he talked with him: even a pillar of stone, and 
poured drink offering thereon and poured also oil thereon, and 
called the name of the place where God spake with him, Bethel. And 
they departed from Bethel, and when he was but a field brede from 
Ephrath, Rahel began to travail. And in travailing she was in 
peril. And as she was in pains of her labour, the midwife said 
unto her: fear not, for thou shalt have this son also. Then as her 
soul was departing, that she must die: she called his name Ben 
Oni. But his father called him Ben Iamin. and thus died Rahel and 
was buried in the way to Ephrath which now is called Bethlehem. 
And Iacob set up a pillar upon her grave, which is called Rahel's 
grave pillar unto this day. And Israel went thence and pitched up 
his tent beyond the tower of Eder. And it chanced as Israel dwelt 
in that land, that Ruben went and lay with Bilha his father's 
concubine, and it came to Israel's ear. The sons of Iacob were 
twelve in number. The sons of Lea: Ruben, Iacob's eldest son, and 
Simeon, Levi, Iuda, Isachar, and Zabulon. The sons of Rahel: 
Ioseph and Ben Iamin. The sons of Bilha Rahel's maid: Dan and 
Nephtali. The sons of Zilpha Lea's maid Gad and Asser. These are 
the sons which were born him in Mesopotamia. Then Iacob went unto 
Isaac his father to Mamre a principal city, otherwise called 
Hebron: where Abraham and Isaac sojourned as strangers. And the 
days of Isaac were an hundred and eighty years: and then fell he 
sick and died, and was put unto his people being old and full of 
days. And his sons Esau and Iacob buried him.

Chapter .xxxvi.

These are the generations of Esau which is called Edom. Esau took 
his wives of the daughters of Canaan Ada the daughter of Elon an 
Hethite, and Ahalibama the daughter of Ana, which Ana was the son 
of Zibeon an Hevite; And Basmath Ismael's daughter and sister of 
Nebaioth. And Ada bare unto Esau, Eliphas: and Basmath bare 
Reguel: And Ahalibama bare Ieus, Iaelam and Korah. These are the 
sons of Esau which were born him in the land of Canaan. And Esau 
took his wives, his sons and daughters and all the souls of his 
house: his goods and all his cattle and all his substance which he 
had got in the land of Canaan, and went into a country away from 
his brother Iacob: for their riches was so much, that they could 
not dwell together, and that the land wherein they were strangers, 
could not receive them: because of their cattle. Thus dwelt Esau 
in mount Seir, which Esau is called Edom. These are the 
generations of Esau father of the Edomites in mount Seir, and 
these are the names of Esau's sons: Eliphas the son of Ada the 
wife of Esau, and Reguel the son of Basmath the wife of Esau also. 
And the sons of Eliphas were: Theman, Omar, Zepho, Gaetham and 
Kenas. And Thimna was concubine to Eliphas Esau's son, and bare 
unto Eliphas, Amalek. And these, be the sons of Ada Esau's wife. 
And these are the sons of Reguel: Nahath, Serah, Samma and Misa: 
these were the sons of Basmath Esau's wife. And these were the 
sons of Ahalibama Esau's wife the daughter of Ana son of Zebeon, 
which she bare unto Esau: Ieus, Iaelam and Korah. These were dukes 
of the sons of Esau. The children of Eliphas the first son of Esau 
were these: duke Theman, duke Omar, duke Zepho, duke Kenas, duke 
Korah, duke Gaetham and duke Amaleck: these are the dukes that 
came of Eliphas in the land of Edom, and these were the sons of 
Ada. These were the children of Reguel Esau's sonne: duke Nahath, 
duke Serah, duke Samma, duke Misa. These are the dukes that came 
of Reguel in the land of Edom, and these were the sons of Basmath 
Esau's wife. These were the children of Ahalibama Esau's wife: 
duke Ieus, duke Gaelam, duke Korah these dukes came of Ahalibama 
the daughter of Ana Esau's wife. These are the children of Esau, 
and these are the dukes of them: which Esau is called Edom: These 
are the children of Seir the Horite, the inhabiter of the land: 
Lothan, Sobal, Zibeon, Ana, Dison, Eser and Disan. These are the 
dukes of the Horites the children of Seir in the land of Edom. And 
the children of Lothan were: Hori and Hemam. And Lothan's sister 
was called Thimna. The children of Sobal were these: Alvan, 
Manahath, Ebal, Sepho and Onam. These were the children of Zibeon. 
Aia and Ana, this was that Ana that found the mules in the 
wilderness, as he fed his father Zibeon's asses. The children of 
Ana were these. Dison and Ahalibama the daughter of Ana. These are 
the children of Dison. Hemdan, Esban, Iethran, and Cheran. The 
children of Ezer were these, Bilhan, Seavan and Akan. The children 
of Disan were: Ur and Aran. These are the dukes that came of Hori: 
duke Lothan, duke Sobal, duke Zibeon, duke Ana, duke Dison, duke 
Ezer, duke Disan. These be the dukes that came of Hori in their 
dukedoms in the land of Seir. These are the kings that reigned in 
the land of Edom before there reigned any king among the children 
of Israel. Bela the son of Beor reigned in Edomea, and the name of 
his city was Dinhaba. And when Bela died, Iobab the son of Serah 
out of Bezara, reigned in his stead. When Iobab was dead, Husam of 
the land of Themany reigned in his stead. And after the death of 
Husam, Hadad the son of Bedad which slew the Madianites in the 
field of the Moabites, reigned in his stead, and the name of his 
city was Avith. When Hadad was dead, Samla of Masreka reigned in 
his stead. When Samla was dead, Saul of the river Rehoboth reigned 
in his stead. When Saul was dead, Baal Hanan the son of Achbor 
reigned in his stead. And after the death of Baal Hanan the son of 
Achbor, Hadad reigned in his stead, and the name of his city was 
Pagu. And his wife's name Mehetabeel the daughter of Matred the 
daughter of Mesaab. These are the names of the dukes that came of 
Esau, in their kindreds, places and names: Duke Thimma, duke Alua, 
duke Ietheth, duke Ahalibama, duke Ela, duke Pinon, duke Kenas, 
duke Theman, duke Mibzar, duke Magdiel, duke Iram. These be the 
dukes of Edomea in their habitations, in the land of their 
possessions. This Esau is the father of the Edomites.

Chapter .xxxvij.

And Iacob dwelt in the land wherein his father was a stranger, 
that is to say in the land of Canaan. And these are the 
generations of Iacob: when Ioseph was seventeen years old, he kept 
sheep with his brethren, and the lad was with the sons of Bilha 
and of Zilpha his father's wives. And he brought unto their father 
an evil saying that was of them. And Israel loved Ioseph more than 
all his children, because he begat him in his old age, and he made 
him a coat of many colours. When his brethren saw that their 
father loved him more than all his brethren, they hated him and 
could not speak one kind word unto him. Moreover Ioseph dreamed a 
dream and told it his brethren: wherefore they hated him yet the 
more. And he said unto them hear I pray yow this dream which I 
have dreamed: Behold we were making sheaves in the field: and lo, 
my sheaf arose and stood upright, and yours stood round about and 
made obeisance to my sheaf. Then said his brethren unto him: what, 
shalt thou be our king or shalt thou reign over us? And they hated 
him yet the more, because of his dream and of his words. And he 
dreamed yet another dream and told it his brethren saying: behold, 
I have had one dream more: me thought the sonne and the moon and 
eleven stars made obeisance to me. And when he had told it unto 
his father and his brethren, his father rebuked him and said unto 
him: what meaneth this dream which thou hast dreamed: shall I and 
thy mother and thy brethren come and fall on the ground before 
thee? And his brethren hated him, but his father noted the saying. 
His brethren went to keep their father's sheep in Sichem, and 
Israel said unto Ioseph: do not thy brethren keep in Sichem? come 
that I may send thee to them. And he answered here am I. And he 
said unto him: go and see whether it be well with thy brethren and 
the sheep, and bring me word again: And sent him out of the vale 
of Hebron, for to go to Sichem. And a certain man found him 
wandering out of his way in the field, and asked him what he 
sought. And he answered: I seek my brethren, tell me I pray thee 
where they keep sheep. And the man said, they are departed hence, 
for I heard them say, let us go unto Dothan. Thus went Ioseph 
after his brethren, and found them in Dothan. And when they saw 
him afar off before he came at them, they took counsel {councell} 
against him, for to slay him, and said one to another: Behold this 
dreamer cometh, come now and let us slay him and cast him into 
some pit, and let us say that sonne wicked beast hath devoured 
him, and let us see what his dreams will come to. When Ruben heard 
that, he went about to rid him out of their hands and said, let us 
not kill him. And Ruben said moreover unto them, shed not his 
blood, but cast him into this pit that is in the wilderness, and 
lay no hands upon him: for he would have rid him out of their 
hands and delivered him to his father again. And as soon as Ioseph 
was come unto his brethren, they stripped him out, of his gay coat 
that was upon him, and they took him and cast him into a pit. But 
the pit was empty and had no water therein. And they sat them down 
to eat bread. And as they lift up their eyes and looked about, 
there came a company of Ismaelites from Gilead, and their camels 
laden with spicery, balm, and myrrh, and were going down into 
Egypt. Then said Iuda to his brethren, what availeth it that we 
slay our brother, and keep his blood secret? come on, let us sell 
him to the Ismaelites, and let not our hands be defiled upon him: 
for he is our brother and our flesh. And his brethren were 
content. Then as the Madianites merchant men passed by, they drew 
Ioseph out of the pit and sold him unto the Ismaelites for twenty 
pieces of silver. And they brought him into Egypt. And when Ruben 
came again unto the pit and found not Ioseph there, he rent his 
clothes and went again unto his brethren saying: the lad is not 
yonder, and whither shall I go? And they took Ioseph's coat and 
killed a goat, and dipped the coat in the blood. And they sent 
that gay coat and caused it to be brought unto their father and 
said: This have we found: see, whether it be thy son's coat or no. 
And he knew it saying: it is my son's coat: a wicked beast hath 
devoured him, and Ioseph is rent in pieces. And Iacob rent his 
clothes, and put sack cloth about his loins, and sorrowed for his 
son a long season. Then came all his sons and all his daughters to 
comfort him. And he would not be comforted, but said: I will go 
down into the grave unto my son, mourning. And thus his father 
wept for him. And the Madianites sold him in Egypt unto Putiphar a 
lord of Pharao's: and his chief marshal.

Chapter .xxxviij.

And it fortuned at that time that Iudas went from his brethren and 
gat him to a man called Hira of Odollam, and there he saw the 
daughter of a man called Sua a Cananite. And he took her and went 
in unto her. And she conceived and bare a son and called his name 
Er. And she conceived again and bare a son and called him Onan. 
And she conceived the third time and bare a son, whom she called 
Sela: and he was at Chesib when she bare him. And Iudas gave Er 
his eldest son, a wife whose name was Thamar. But this Er Iuda's 
eldest son was wicked in the sight of the LORD, wherefore the LORD 
slew him. Then said Iudas unto Onan: go in to thy brother's wife 
and marry her, and stir up seed unto thy brother. And when Onan 
perceived that the seed should not be his: therefore when he went 
in to his brother's wife, he spilled it on the ground, because he 
would not give seed unto his brother. And the thing which he did, 
displeased the LORD, wherefore he slew him also. Then said Iuda to 
Thamar his daughter-in-law: remain a widow at thy father's house, 
till Sela my son be grown: for he feared lest he should have died 
also, as his brethren did. Thus went Thamar and dwelt in her 
father's house. And in process of time, the daughter of Sua Iuda's 
wife died. Then Iudas when he had left mourning, went unto his 
sheep shearers to Thimnath with his friend Hira of Odollam. And 
one told Thamar saying: behold, thy father-in-law goeth up to 
Thimnath, to shear his sheep. And she put her widow's garments off 
from her and covered her with a cloak, and disguised herself: And 
sat her down at the entering of Enaim which is by the high way's 
side to Thimnath, for because she saw that Sela was grown, and she 
was not given unto him to wife. When Iuda saw her he thought it 
had been an whore, because she had covered her face. And turned to 
her unto the way and said, come I pray thee, let me lie with thee, 
for he knew not that it was his daughter-in-law. And she said what 
wilt thou give me, for to lie with me? Then said he, I will send 
thee a kid from the flock. She answered: Then give me a pledge 
till thou send it. Then said he, what pledge shall I give thee? 
And she said: thy signet, thy necklace, and thy staff that is in 
thy hand. And he gave it her and lay by her, and she was with 
child by him. And she gat her up and went and put her mantle from 
her, and put on her widow's raiment again. And Iudas sent the kid 
by his neighbour of Odollam, for to fetch out his pledge again 
from the wife's hand. But he found her not. Then asked he the men 
of the same place saying: where is the whore that sat at Enaim in 
the way? And they said: there was no whore here. And he came to 
Iuda again saying: I can not find her, and also the men of the 
place said: that there was no whore there. And Iuda said: let her 
take it to her, lest we be shamed: for I sent the kid and thou 
couldest not find her. And it came to pass that after three 
months, one told Iuda saying: Thamar thy daughter-in-law hath 
played the whore, and with playing the whore is become great with 
child. And Iuda said: bring her forth and let her be brent. And 
when they brought her forth, she sent to her father-in-law saying: 
by the man unto whom these things pertain, am I with child. And 
said also: look whose are this seal, necklace, and staff. And Iuda 
knew them saying: she is more righteous than I, because I gave her 
not to Sela my son. But he lay with her no more. When time was 
come that she should be delivered, behold there was two twins in 
her womb. And as she travailed, the one put out his hand and the 
midwife took and bound a red thread about it saying: this will 
come out first. But he plucked his hand back again, and his 
brother came out. And she said: wherefore hast thou rent a rent 
upon thee? and called him Pharez. And afterward came out his 
brother that had the red thread about his hand, which was called 
Zarah.

Chapter .xxxix.

Ioseph was brought unto Egypt, and Putiphar a lord of Pharao's: 
and his chief marshal an Egyptian, bought him of the Ismaelites 
which brought him thither. And the LORD was with Ioseph, and he 
was a lucky fellow and continued in the house of his master the 
Egyptian. And his master saw that the LORD was with him and that 
the LORD made all that he did prosper in his hand: Wherefore he 
found grace in his master's sight, and served him. And his master 
made him ruler of his house, and put all that he had in his hand. 
And as soon as he had made him ruler over his house and over all 
that he had, the LORD blessed this Egyptian's house for Ioseph's 
sake, and the blessing of the LORD was upon all that he had: both 
in the house and also in the fields. And therefore he left all 
that he had in Ioseph's hand, and looked upon nothing that was 
with him, save only on the bread which he ate. And Ioseph was a 
goodly person and a well favored. And it fortuned after this, that 
his master's wife cast her eyes upon Ioseph and said come lie with 
me. But he denied and said to her: Behold, my master woteth not 
what he hath in the house with me, but hath committed all that he 
hath to my hand. He himself is not greater in the house than I, 
and hath kept nothing from me, but only thee because thou art his 
wife. How then can I do this great wickedness, for to sin against 
God? And after this manner spake she to Ioseph day by day: but he 
hearkened not unto her, to sleep near her or to be in her company. 
And it fortuned about the same season, that Ioseph entered into 
the house, to do his business: and there was none of the household 
by, in the house. And she caught him by the garment saying: come 
sleep with me. And he left his garment in her hand and fled and 
got him out. When she saw that he had left his garment in her 
hand, and was fled out, she called unto the men of the house, and 
told them saying: See, he hath brought in an Hebrew unto us to do 
us shame: for he came in to me, for to have slept with me. But I 
cried with a loud voice. And when he heard, that I lift up my 
voice and cried, he left his garment with me and fled away and got 
him out. And she laid up his garment by her, until her lord came 
home. And she told him according to these words saying. This 
Hebrews' servant which thou hast brought unto us came in to me to 
do me shame. But as soon as I lift up my voice and cried, he left 
his garment with me and fled out. When his master heard the words 
of his wife which she told him saying: after this manner did thy 
servant to me, he waxed wroth. And he took Ioseph and put him in 
prison: even in the place where the king's prisoners lay bound. 
And there continued he in prison, but the LORD was with Ioseph and 
shewed him mercy, and got him favour in the sight of the keeper of 
the prison which committed to Ioseph's hand all the prisoners that 
were in the prison house. And whatsoever was done there, that did 
he. And the keeper of the prison looked unto nothing that was 
under his hand, because the LORD was with him, and because that 
whatsoever he did, the LORD made it come luckily to pass.

Chapter .xl.

And it chanced after this, that the chief butler of the king of 
Egypt and his chief baker had offended their lord the king of 
Egypt. And Pharao was angry with them and put them in ward in his 
chief marshal's house: even in the prison where Ioseph was bound. 
And the chief marshal gave Ioseph a charge with them, and he 
served them. And they continued a season in ward. And they dreamed 
either of them in one night: both the butler and the baker of the 
king of Egypt which were bound in the prison house, either of them 
his dream, and each man's dream of a sundry interpretation. When 
Ioseph came in unto them in the morning, and looked upon them: 
behold, they were sad. And he asked them saying, wherefore look ye 
so sadly today? They answered him, we have dreamed a dream, and 
have no man to declare it. And Ioseph said unto them. Interpreting 
belongeth to God, but tell me yet. And the chief butler told his 
dream to Ioseph and said unto him: In my dream me thought there 
stood a vine before me, and in the vine were three branches, and 
it was as though it budded, and her blossoms shot forth: and the 
grapes thereof waxed ripe. And I had Pharao's cup in my hand, and 
took of the grapes and wrung them into Pharao's cup, and delivered 
Pharao's cup into his hand. And Ioseph said unto him, this is the 
interpretation of it. The three branches are three days: for 
within three days shall Pharao lift up thine head, and restore 
thee unto thine office again, and thou shalt deliver Pharao's cup 
into his hand, after the old manner, even as thou didst when thou 
wast his butler. But think on me with thee, when thou art in good 
case, and shew mercy unto me. And make mention of me to Pharao, 
and help to bring me out of this house: for I was stolen out of 
the land of the Hebrews, and here also have I done nothing at all 
wherefore they should have put me into this dungeon. When the 
chief baker saw that he had well interpreted it, he said unto 
Ioseph, me thought also in my dream, that I had three wicker 
baskets on my head? And in the uppermost basket, of all manner 
bakemeats for Pharao. And the birds ate them out of the basket 
upon my head. Ioseph answered and said: this is the interpretation 
thereof. The three baskets are three days, for this day three days 
shall Pharao take thy head from thee, and shall hang thee on a 
tree, and the birds shall eat thy flesh from off thee. And it came 
to pass the third day which was Pharao's birthday, that he made a 
feast unto all his servants. And he lifted up the head of the 
chief butler and of the chief baker among his servants. And 
restored the chief butler unto his butlership again, and he 
reached the cup into Pharao's hand, and hanged the chief baker: 
even as Ioseph had interpreted unto them. Notwithstanding the 
chief butler remembered not Ioseph, but forgot him.

Chapter .xlj.

And it fortuned at two years' end, that Pharao dreamed, and 
thought that he stood by a river's side, and that there came out 
of the river seven goodly kine and fat fleshed, and fed in a 
meadow. And him thought that seven other kine came up after them 
out of the river evil favored and lean fleshed and stood by the 
other upon the brink of the river. And the evil favored and lean 
fleshed kine: ate up the seven well favored and fat kine: and he 
awoke therewith. And he slept again and dreamed the second time, 
that seven ears of corn grew upon one stalk rank and goodly. And 
that seven thin ears blasted with the wind, sprang up after them: 
and that the seven thin ears devoured the seven rank and full 
ears. And then Pharao awaked: and see, here is his dream. When the 
morning came, his spirit was troubled; And he sent and called for 
all the soothsayers of Egypt and all the wise men thereof, and 
told them his dream: but there was none of them that could 
interpret it unto Pharao. Then spake the chief butler unto Pharao 
saying. I do remember my fault this day. Pharao was angry with his 
servants, and put in ward in the chief marshal's house both me and 
the chief baker. And we dreamed both of us in one night and each 
man's dream of a sundry interpretation. And there was with us a 
young man, an Hebrew born, servant unto the chief marshal. And we 
told him, and he declared our dreams to us according to either of 
our dreams. And as he declared them unto us, even so it came to 
pass. I was restored to mine office again, and he was hanged. Then 
Pharao sent and called Ioseph. And they made him haste out of 
prison. And he shaved himself and changed his raiment, and went in 
to Pharao. And Pharao said unto Ioseph: I have dreamed a dream and 
no man can interpretate it, but I have heard say of thee that as 
soon as thou hearest a dream, thou dost interpretate it. And 
Ioseph answered Pharao saying: God shall give Pharao an answer of 
peace without me. Pharao said unto Ioseph: in my dream me thought 
I stood by a river's side, and there came out of the river seven 
fat fleshed and well favored kine, and fed in the meadow. And then 
seven other kine came up after them, poor and very evil favored 
and lean fleshed: so that I never saw their like in all the land 
of Egypt in evil favoredness. And the seven lean and evil favored 
kine ate up the first seven fat kine. And when they had eaten them 
up, a man could not perceive that they had eaten them: for they 
were still as evil favored as they were at the beginning. And I 
awoke. And I saw again in my dream seven ears spring out of one 
stalk full and good, and seven other ears withered, thin and 
blasted with wind, spring up after them. And the thin ears 
devoured the seven good ears. And I have told it unto the 
soothsayers, but no man can tell me what it meaneth. Then Ioseph 
said unto Pharao: both Pharao's dreams are one. And God doth shew 
Pharao what he is about to do. The seven good kine are seven 
years: and the seven good ears are seven years also, and is but 
one dream. Likewise, the seven thin and evil favored kine that 
came out after them, are seven years: and the seven empty and 
blasted ears shall be seven years of hunger. This is that which I 
said unto Pharao, that God doth shew Pharao what he is about to 
do. Behold there shall come seven year of great plenteousness 
throughout all the land of Egypt. And there shall arise after them 
seven years of hunger. So that all the plenteousness shall be 
forgotten in the land of Egypt. And the hunger shall consume the 
land: so that the plenteousness shall not be once a seen in the 
land by reason of that hunger that shall come after, for it shall 
be exceeding great. And as concerning that the dream was doubled 
unto Pharao the second time, it betokeneth that the thing is 
certainly prepared of God, and that God will shortly bring it to 
pass. Now therefore let Pharao provide for a man of understanding 
and wisdom, and set him over the land of Egypt. And let Pharao 
make officers over the land, and take up the fifth part of the 
land of Egypt in the seven plenteous years and let them gather all 
the food of these good years that come, and lay up corn under the 
power of Pharao: that there may be food in the cities, and there 
let them keep it: that there may be food in store in the land, 
against the seven years of hunger which shall come in the land of 
Egypt, and that the land perish not thorow hunger. And the saying 
pleased Pharao and all his servants. Then said Pharao unto his 
servants: where shall we find such a man as this is, that hath the 
spirit of God in him? wherefore Pharao said unto Ioseph: forasmuch 
as God hath shewed thee all this, there is no man of understanding 
nor of wisdom like unto thee. Thou therefore shalt be over my 
house, and according to thy word shall all my people obey: only in 
the king's seat will I be above thee. And he said unto Ioseph: 
behold, I have set thee over all the land of Egypt. And he took 
off his ring from his finger, and put it upon Ioseph's finger, and 
arrayed him in raiment of byss, and put a golden chain about his 
neck and set him upon the best chariot that he had save one. And 
they cried before him Abrech, and that Pharao had made him ruler 
over all the land of Egypt. And Pharao said unto Ioseph: I am 
Pharao, without thy will, shall no man lift up either his hand or 
foot in all the land of Egypt. And he called Ioseph's name 
Zaphnath Paenea. And he gave him to wife Asnath the daughter of 
Potiphar priest of On. Then went Ioseph abroad in the land of 
Egypt. And he was thirty years old when he stood before Pharao 
king of Egypt. And then Ioseph departed from Pharao, and went 
thorow out all the land of Egypt. And in the seven plenteous years 
they made sheaves and gathered up all the food of the seven 
plenteous years which were in the land of Egypt and put it into 
the cities. And he put the food of the fields that grew round 
about every city: even in the same. And Ioseph laid up corn in 
store, like unto the sand of the sea in multitude out of measure, 
until he left numbering: For it was without number. And unto 
Ioseph were born two sons before the years of hunger came, which 
Asnath the daughter of Potiphar priest of On, bare unto him. And 
he called the name of the first son Manasse, for God (said he) 
hath made me forget all my labour and all my father's household. 
The second called he Ephraim, for God (said he) hath caused me to 
grow in the land of my trouble. And when the seven years of 
plenteousness that was in the land of Egypt were ended, then came 
the seven years of dearth, according as Ioseph had said. And the 
dearth was in all lands: but in the land of Egypt was there yet 
food. When now all the land of Egypt began to hunger, then cried 
the people to Pharao for bread. And Pharao said unto all Egypt: go 
unto Ioseph, and what he saith to you that do. And when the dearth 
was thorow out all the land, Ioseph opened all that was in the 
cities, and sold unto the Egyptians. And hunger waxed sore in the 
land of Egypt. And all countries came to Egypt to Ioseph for to 
buy corn: because that the hunger was so sore in all lands.

Chapter .xlij.

When Iacob saw that there was corn to be sold in Egypt, he said 
unto his sons: why are ye negligent? behold, I have heard that 
there is corn to be sold in Egypt. Get you thither and buy us corn 
from thence, that we may live and not die. So went Ioseph's ten 
brethren down to buy corn in Egypt, for Ben Iamin Ioseph's brother 
would not Iacob send with his other brethren: for he said: some 
misfortune might happen him. And the sons of Israel came to buy 
corn among other that came, for there was dearth also in the land 
of Canaan. And Ioseph was governor in the land, and sold corn to 
all the people of the land. And his brethren came, and fell flat 
on the ground before him. When Ioseph saw his brethren, he knew 
them: But made strange unto them, and spake roughly unto them 
saying: Whence come ye? and they said: out of the land of Canaan, 
to buy vitaille. Ioseph knew his brethren, but they knew not him. 
And Ioseph remembered his dreams which he dreamed of them, and 
said unto them: ye are spies, and to see where the land is weak is 
your coming. And they said unto him: nay, my lord: but to buy 
vitaille thy servants are come. We are all one man's sons, and 
mean truly, and thy servants are no spies. And he said unto them: 
nay verily, but even to see where the land is weak is your coming. 
And they said: we thy servants are twelve brethren, the sons of 
one man in the land of Canaan. The youngest is yet with our 
father, and one no man woteth where he is. Ioseph said unto them, 
that is it that I said unto you, that ye are surely spies. Here by 
ye shall be proved. For by the life of Pharao, ye shall not go 
hence, until your youngest brother be come hither. Send therefore 
one of you and let him fetch your brother, and ye shall be in 
prison in the mean season. And thereby shall your words be proved, 
whether there be any truth in you: or else by the life of Pharao, 
ye are but spies. And he put them in ward three days. And Ioseph 
said unto the third day: This do and live, for I fear God. {Gode} 
If ye mean no hurt, let one of your brethren be bound in the 
prison, and go ye and bring the necessary food unto your 
households, and bring your youngest brother unto me: that your 
words may be believed, and that ye die not; And they did so. Then 
they said one to another: we have verily sinned against our 
brother, in that we saw the anguish of his soul when he besought 
us, and would not hear him: therefore is this trouble come upon 
us. Ruben answered them saying: said I not unto you that ye should 
not sin against the lad? but ye would not hear; And now verily 
see, his blood is required. They were not aware that Ioseph 
understood them, for he spake unto them by an interpreter. And he 
turned from them and wept, and then turned to them again and 
communed with them, and took out Simeon from among them and bound 
him before their eyes, and commanded to fill their sacks with 
corn, and to put every man's money in his sack, and to give them 
vitaille to spend by the way. And so it was done to them. And they 
laded their asses with the corn and departed thence. And as one of 
them opened his sack, for to give his ass provender in the Inn, he 
spied his money in his sack's mouth. And he said unto his 
brethren: my money is restored me again, and is even in my sack's 
mouth. Then their hearts failed them, and were astonied and said 
one to another: how cometh it that God dealeth thus with us? And 
they came unto Iacob their father unto the land of Canaan, and 
told him all that had happened them saying: The lord of the land 
spake roughly to us, and took us for spies to search the country. 
And we said unto him: we mean truly and are no spies. We be twelve 
brethren sons of our father, one is away, and the youngest is now 
with our father in the land of Canaan. And the lord of the country 
said unto us: hereby shall I know if ye mean truly: leave one of 
your brethren here with me, and take food necessary for your 
households and get you away, and bring your youngest brother unto 
me; And thereby shall I know that ye are no spies, but mean truly: 
So will I deliver you your brother again, and ye shall occupy in 
the land. And as they emptied their sacks, behold: every man's 
bundle of money was in his sack. And when both they and their 
father saw the bundles of money, they were afraid. And Iacob their 
father said unto them: Me have ye robbed of my children: Ioseph is 
away, and Simeon is away, and ye will take Ben Iamin away. All 
these things fall upon me. Ruben answered his father saying: Slay 
my two sons, if I bring him not to thee again. Deliver him 
therefore to my hand, and I will bring him to thee again: And he 
said: my son shall not go down with you. For his brother is dead, 
and he is left alone. Moreover some misfortune might happen upon 
him by the way which ye go. And so should ye bring my gray head 
with sorrow unto the grave.

Chapter .xliij.

And the dearth waxed sore in the land. And when they had eaten up 
that corn which they brought out of the land of Egypt, their 
father said unto them: go again and buy us a little food. Then 
said Iuda unto him: the man did testify unto us saying: look that 
ye see not my face except your brother be with you. Therefore if 
thou wilt send our brother with us, we will go and buy the food. 
But if thou wilt not send him, we will not go: for the man said 
unto us: look that ye see not my face, except your brother be with 
you. And Israel said: wherefore dealt ye so cruelly with me, as to 
tell the man that ye had yet another brother? And they said: The 
man asked us of our kindred saying: is your father yet alive? have 
ye not another brother? And we told him according to these words. 
How could we know that he would bid us bring our brother down with 
us? Then said Iuda unto Israel his father: Send the lad with me, 
and we will rise and go, that we may live and not die: both we, 
thou and also our children. I will be surety for him, and of my 
hands require him. If I bring him not to thee and set him before 
thine eyes, then let me bear the blame for ever. For except we had 
made this tarrying: by this we had been there twice and come 
again. Then their father Israel said unto them: if it must needs 
be so now: then do thus, take of the best fruits of the land in 
your vessels, and bring the man a present, a courtesy balm, and a 
courtesy of honey, spices and myrrh, dates and almonds. And take 
as much money more with you. And the money that was brought again 
in your sacks, take it again with you in your hands, peradventure 
it was some oversight. Take also your brother with you, and arise 
and go again to the man. And God almighty give you mercy in the 
sight of the man and send you your other brother and also Ben 
Iamin, and I will be as a man robbed of his children. Thus took 
they the present and twice so much more money with them, and Ben 
Iamin. And rose up, went down to Egypt, and presented themself to 
Ioseph. When Ioseph saw Ben Iamin with them, he said to the ruler 
of his house: bring these men home, and slay and make ready: for 
they shall dine with me at noon. And the man did as Ioseph bade, 
and brought them in to Ioseph's house. When they were brought to 
Ioseph's house, they were afraid, and said: because of the money 
that came in our sacks' mouths at the first time, are we brought, 
to pick a quarrel with us and to lay some thing to our charge: to 
bring us in bondage and our asses also. Therefore came they to the 
man that was the ruler over Ioseph's house, and communed with him 
at the door and said: Sir, we came hither at the first time to buy 
food, and as we came to an inn and opened our sacks: behold, every 
man's money was in his sack with full weight: But we have brought 
it again with us, and other money have we brought also in our 
hands, to buy food, but we can not tell who put our money in our 
sacks. And he said: be of good cheer, fear not: Your God and the 
God of your fathers hath put you that treasure in your sacks, for 
I had your money. And he brought Simeon out to them and led them 
into Ioseph's house, and gave them water to wash their feet, and 
gave their asses provender: And they made ready their present 
against Ioseph came at noon, for they heard say that they should 
dine there. When Ioseph came home, they brought the present into 
the house to him, which they had in their hands, and fell flat on 
the ground before him. And he welcomed them courteously saying: is 
your father that old man which ye told me of, in good health? and 
is he yet alive? they answered: thy servant our father is in good 
health, and is yet alive. And they bowed them selves and fell to 
the ground. And he lift up his eyes and beheld his brother Ben 
Iamin his mother's son, and said: is this your youngest brother of 
whom ye said unto me? And said: God be merciful unto thee my son. 
And Ioseph made haste (for his heart did melt upon his brother) 
and sought for to weep, and entered into his chamber, for to weep 
there. And he washed his face and came out and refrained himself, 
and bade set bread on the table. And they prepared for him by 
himself, and for them by them selves, and for the Egyptians which 
ate with him by them selves, because the Egyptians may not eat 
bread with the Hebrews, for that is an abomination unto the 
Egyptians. And they sat before him: the eldest according unto his 
age, and the youngest according unto his youth. And the men 
marvelled among them selves. And they brought rewards unto them 
from before him: but Ben Iamin's part was five times so much as 
any of theirs. And they ate and they drank, and were drunk with 
him.

Chapter .xliiij.

And he commanded the ruler of his house saying: fill the men's 
sacks with food, as much as they can carry, and put every man's 
money in his bag mouth, and put my silver cup in the sack's mouth 
of the youngest and his corn money also. And he did as Ioseph had 
said. And in the morning as soon as it was light, the men were let 
go with their asses. And when they were out of the city and not 
yet far away, Ioseph said unto the ruler of his house: up and 
follow after the men and overtake them, and say unto them: 
wherefore have ye rewarded evil for good? is that not the cup of 
which my lord drinketh, and doth he not prophesy therein? ye have 
evil done that ye have done. And he overtook them and said the 
same words unto them. And they answered him: wherefore saith my 
lord such words? God forbid that thy servants should do so. 
Behold, the money which we found in our sack's mouths, we brought 
again unto thee, out of the land of Canaa: how then should we 
steal out of my lord's house, either silver or gold? with 
whosoever of thy servants it be found let him die, and let us also 
be my lord's bondmen. And he said: Now therefore according unto 
your words, he with whom it is found, shall be my servant: but ye, 
shall be harmless. And at once every man took down his sack to the 
ground, and every man opened his sack. And he searched, and began 
at the eldest and left at the youngest. And the cup was found in 
Ben Iamin's sack. Then they rent their clothes, and laded every 
man his ass and went again unto the city. And Iuda and his 
brethren came to Ioseph's house, for he was yet there, and they 
fell before him on the ground. And Ioseph said unto them: what 
deed is this which ye have done? wist ye not that such a man as I 
can prophesy? Then said Iuda: what shall we say unto my lord, what 
shall we speak or what excuse can we make? God hath found out the 
wickedness of thy servants. Behold, both we and he with whom the 
cup is found, are thy servants. And he answered: God forbid that I 
should do so, the man with whom the cup is found, he shall be my 
servant: but go ye in peace unto your father. Then Iuda went unto 
him and said: oh my lord, let thy servant speak a word in my 
lord's audience, {ear} and be not wroth with thy servant: for thou 
art even as Pharao. My lord asked his servant saying: have ye a 
father or a brother? And we answered my lord, we have a father 
that is old, and a young lad which he begat in his age: and the 
brother of the said lad is dead, and he is all that is left of 
that mother. And his father loveth him. Then said my lord unto his 
servants bring him unto me, that I may set mine eyes upon him. And 
we answered my lord, that the lad could not go from his father, 
for if he should leave his father, he were but a dead man. Then 
saidest thou unto thy servants: except your youngest brother come 
with you, look that ye see my face no more. And when we came unto 
thy servant our father, we shewed him what my lord had said. And 
when our father said unto us, go again and buy us a little food: 
we said, that we could not go. Nevertheless if our youngest 
brother go with us then will we go, for we may not see the man's 
face, except our youngest brother be with us. Then said thy 
servant our father unto us. Ye know that my wife bare me two sons. 
And the one went out from me and it is said of a surety that he is 
torn in pieces of wild beasts, and I saw him not since. If ye 
shall take this also away from me and some misfortune happen upon 
him, then shall ye bring my gray head with sorrow unto the grave. 
Now therefore when I come to thy servant my father, if the lad be 
not with me: seeing that his life hangeth by the lad's life, then 
as soon as he seeth that the lad is not come, he will die. So 
shall we thy servants bring the gray head of thy servant our 
father with sorrow unto the grave. For I thy servant became surety 
for the lad unto my father and said: if I bring him not unto thee 
again. I will bear the blame all my life long. Now therefore let 
me thy servant bide here for the lad, and be my lord's bondman: 
and let the lad go home with his brethren. For how can I go unto 
my father, and the lad not with me: lest I should see the 
wretchedness that shall come on my father.

Chapter .xlv.

And Ioseph could no longer refrain before all them that stood 
about him, but commanded that they should go all out from him, and 
that there should be no man with him, while he uttered himself 
unto his brethren. And he wept aloud, so that the Egyptians and 
the house of Pharao heard it. And he said unto his brethren: I am 
Ioseph: doth my father yet live? But his brethren could not answer 
him, for they were abashed at his presence. And Ioseph said unto 
his brethren: come near to me, and they came near. And he said: I 
am Ioseph your brother whom ye sold into Egypt. And now be not 
grieved therewith, neither let it seem a cruel thing in your eyes, 
that ye sold me hither. For God did send me before you to save 
life. For this is the second year of dearth in the land, and five 
more are behind in which there shall neither be earing nor 
harvest. Wherefore God sent me before you to make provision, that 
ye might continue in the earth and to save your lives by a great 
deliverance. So now it was not ye that sent me hither, but God: 
and he hath made me father unto Pharao and lord over all his 
house, and ruler in all the land of Egypt. Haste you and go to my 
father and tell him, this sayeth thy son Ioseph: God hath made me 
lord over all Egypt. Come down unto me and tarry not. And thou 
shalt dwell in the land of Gosan and be by me: both thou and thy 
children, and thy children's children: and thy sheep, and beasts 
and all that thou hast. There will I make provision for thee: for 
there remain yet five years of dearth, lest thou and thy household 
and all that thou hast perish. Behold, your eyes do see, and the 
eyes also of my brother Ben Iamin, that I speak to you by mouth. 
Therefore tell my father of all my honour which I have in Egypt 
and of all that ye have seen, and make haste and bring in father 
hither. And he fell on his brother Ben Iamin's neck and wept, and 
Ben Iamin wept on his neck. Moreover he kissed all his brethren 
and wept upon them. And after that, his brethren talked with him. 
And when the tidings was come unto Pharao's house that Ioseph's 
brethren were come, it pleased Pharao well and all his servants. 
And Pharao spake unto Ioseph: say unto thy brethren, this do ye: 
lade your beasts and get you hence. And when ye be come unto the 
land of Canaan, take your father and your households and come unto 
me, and I will give you the best of the land of Egypt, and ye 
shall eat the fat of the land. And commanded also. This do ye: 
take chariots with you out of the land of Egypt, for your children 
and for your wives: and bring your father and come. Also, regard 
not your stuff, for the goods of all the land of Egypt shall be 
yours. And the children of Israel did even so. And Ioseph gave 
them chariots at the commandment of Pharao, and gave them vitaille 
also to spend by the way. And he gave unto each of them change of 
raiment: but unto Ben Iamin he gave three hundred pieces of silver 
and five changes of raiment. And unto his father he sent after the 
same manner: ten he asses laden with goods out of Egypt, and ten 
she asses laden with corn, bread and meat: to serve his father by 
the way. So sent he his brethren away, and they departed. And he 
said unto them: see that ye fall not out by the way. And they 
departed from Egypt and came into the land of Canaan unto Iacob 
their father, and told him saying. Ioseph is yet alive and is 
governor over all the land of Egypt. And Iacob's heart wavered, 
for he believed them not. And they told him all the words of 
Ioseph which he had said unto them. But when he saw the chariots 
which Ioseph had sent to carry him, then his spirits revived. And 
Israel said: I have enough, if Ioseph my son be yet alive: I will 
go and see him, yer that I die.

Chapter .xlvi.

Israel took his journey with all that he had, and came unto 
Berseba and offered offerings unto the God of his father Isaac. 
And God said unto Israel in a vision by night, and called unto 
him: Iacob, Iacob. And he answered: here am I. And he said: I am 
that mighty God of thy father, fear not to go down into Egypt. For 
I will make of thee there a great people. I will go down with thee 
into Egypt, and I will also bring thee up again, and Ioseph shall 
put his hand upon thine eyes. And Iacob rose up from Berseba. And 
the sons of Israel carried Iacob their father, and their children 
and their wives in the chariots which Pharao had sent to carry 
him. And they took their cattle and the goods which they had 
gotten in the land of Canaan, and came into Egypt: both Iacob and 
all his seed with him, his sons and his sons' sons with him: his 
daughters and his sons daughters and all his seed brought he with 
him into Egypt. These are the names of the children of Israel 
which came into Egypt, both Iacob and his sons: Ruben Iacob's 
first son. The children of Ruben: Hanoch, Pallu, Hezron and 
Charmi. The children of Simeon: Iemuel, Iami, Ohad, Iachin, Zohar 
and Saul the son of a Cananitish woman. The children of Levi: 
Gerson, Kahath and Merari. The children of Iuda: Er, Onan, Sela, 
Pharez and Zerah, but Er and Onan died in the land of Canaan. The 
children of Pharez, Hezron, and Hamul. The children of Isachar: 
Tola, Phua, Iob and Semnon. The children of Zabulon: Sered, Elon 
and Iaheleel. These be the children of Lea which she bare unto 
Iacob in Mesopotamia with his daughter Dina. All these souls of 
his sons and daughters make thirty and six. {.xxx. and .iij.} The 
children of Gad: Ziphion, Haggi, Suni, Ezbon, Eri Arodi and Areli. 
The children of Asser: Iemna, Iesua, Iesui, Bria and Serah their 
sister. And the children of Bria were Heber and Malchiel. These 
are the children of Silpha whom Laban gave to Lea his daughter. 
And these she bare unto Iacob in number sixteen souls. The 
children of Rahel Iacob's wife: Ioseph and Ben Iamin. And unto 
Ioseph in the land of Egypt were borne: Manasses and Ephraim which 
Asnath the daughter of Putiphar priest of On bare unto him. The 
children of Ben Iamin: Bela, Becher, Asbel, Gera, Naeman, Ehi, 
Ros, Mupim, Hupim and Ard. These are the children of Rahel which 
were born unto Iacob: fourteen souls altogether. The children of 
Dan: Husim. The children Nepthali: Iahezeel, Guni, Iezer and 
Sillem. These are the sons of Bilha which Laban gave unto Rahel 
his daughter, and she bare these unto Iacob, altogether seven 
souls. All the souls that came with Iacob into Egypt which came 
out of his loins (beside his son's wives) were all together sixty 
and six souls. And the sons of Ioseph, which were born him in 
Egypt were: two souls. So that all the souls of the house of Iacob 
which came into Egypt are seventy. And he sent Iuda before him 
unto Ioseph that the way might be shewed him unto Gosan, and they 
came into the land of Gosan. And Ioseph made ready his chariot and 
went against {to meet} Israel his father unto Gosan, and presented 
himself unto him, and fell on his neck and wept upon his neck a 
good while. And Israel said unto Ioseph: Now I am content to die, 
insomuch I have seen thee, that thou art yet alive. And Ioseph 
said unto his brethren and unto his father's house: I will go and 
shew Pharao and tell him: that my brethren and my father's house 
which were in the land of Canaan are come unto me, and how they 
are shepherds (for they were men of cattle) and they have brought 
their sheep and their oxen and all that they have with them. If 
Pharao call you and ask you what your occupation is, say: thy 
servants have been occupied about cattle, from our childhood unto 
this time: both we and our fathers, that ye may dwell in the land 
of Gosan. For an abomination unto the Egyptians are all that feed 
sheep. {For the Egyptians abhor all shepherds.}

Chapter .xlvij.

And Ioseph went and told Pharao and said: my father and my 
brethren their sheep and their beasts and all that they have, are 
come out of the land of Canaan and are in the land of Gosan. And 
Ioseph took a part of his brethren: even five of them, and 
presented them unto Pharao. And Pharao said unto his brethren: 
what is your occupation? And they said unto Pharao: feeders of 
sheep {shepherds} are thy servants, both we and also our fathers. 
They said moreover unto Pharao: for to sojourn in the land are we 
come, for thy servants have no pasture for their sheep so sore is 
the famishment in the land of Canaan. Now therefore let thy 
servants dwell in the land of Gosan. And Pharao said unto Ioseph: 
thy father and thy brethren are come unto thee. The land of Egypt 
is open before thee: In the best place of the land make both thy 
father and thy brethren dwell: And even in the land of Gosan let 
them dwell. Moreover if thou know any men of activity among them, 
make them rulers over my cattle. And Ioseph brought in Iacob his 
father and set him before Pharao. And Iacob blessed Pharao. And 
Pharao asked Iacob, how old art thou? And Iacob said unto Pharao: 
the days of my pilgrimage are an hundred and thirty years. Few and 
evil have the days of my life been, and have not attained unto the 
years of the life of my fathers in the days of their pilgrimages. 
And Iacob blessed Pharao and went out from him. And Ioseph 
prepared dwellings for his father and his brethren, and gave them 
possessions in the land of Egypt, in the best of the land: even in 
the land of Rameses, as Pharao commanded. And Ioseph made 
provision for his father, his brethren and all his father's 
household, as young children are fed with bread. There was no 
bread in all the land, for the dearth was exceeding sore: so that 
the land of Egypt and the land of Canaan, were famished by the 
reason of the dearth. And Ioseph brought together all the money 
that was found in the land of Egypt and of Canaan, for the corn 
which they bought: and he laid up the money in Pharao's house. 
When money failed in the land of Egypt and of Canaan, all the 
Egyptians came unto Ioseph and said: give us sustenance: wherefore 
sufferest thou us to die before thee: for our money is spent. Then 
said Ioseph: bring your cattle, and I will give yow for your 
cattle, if ye be without money. And they brought their cattle unto 
Ioseph. And he gave them bread for horses and sheep, and oxen and 
asses: so he fed them with bread for all their cattle that year. 
When that year was ended, they came unto him the next year and 
said unto him: we will not hide it from my lord, how that we have 
neither money nor cattle for my lord: there is no more left for my 
lord, but even our bodies and our lands. Wherefore lettest thou us 
die before thine eyes, and the land to go to nought? buy us and 
our lands for bread: and let both us and our lands be bond to 
Pharao. Give us seed, that we may live and not die, and that the 
land go not to waste. And Ioseph bought all the land of Egypt for 
Pharao. For the Egyptians sold every man his land because the 
dearth was sore upon them: and so the land became Pharao's. And he 
appointed the people unto the cities, from one side of Egypt unto 
the other: only the land of the Priests bought he not. For there 
was an ordinance made by Pharao for the priests, that they should 
eat that which was appointed unto them: which Pharao had given 
them wherefore they sold not their lands. Then Ioseph said unto 
the folk: behold I have bought you this day and your lands for 
Pharao. Take there seed and go sow the land. And of the increase, 
ye shall give the fifth part unto Pharao, and four parts shall be 
your own, for seed to sow the field: and for you, and them of your 
households, and for your children, to eat. And they answered: Thou 
hast saved our lives. Let us find grace in the sight of my lord, 
and let us be Pharao's servants. And Ioseph made it a law over the 
land of Egypt unto this day: that men must give Pharao the fifth 
part, except the land of the priests only, which was not bond unto 
Pharao. And Israel dwelt in Egypt: even in the country of Gosan. 
And they had their possessions therein, and they grew and 
multiplied exceedingly. Moreover Iacob lived in the land of Egypt 
seventeen years, so that the hole age of Iacob was an hundred and 
forty seven years. When the time drew nye, that Israel must die: 
he sent for his son Ioseph and said unto him: If I have found 
grace in thy sight, put thy hand under my thigh and deal 
mercifully and truly with me, that thou bury me not in Egypt: but 
let me lie by my fathers, and carry me out of Egypt, and bury me 
in their burial. And he answered: I will do as thou hast said. And 
he said: swear unto me: and he sware unto him. And then Israel 
bowed him unto the bed's head.

Chapter .xlviij.

After these deeds, tidings were brought unto Ioseph, that his 
father was sick. And he took with him his two sons, Manasse and 
Ephraim. Then was it said unto Iacob: behold, thy son Ioseph 
cometh unto thee. And Israel took his strength unto him, and sat 
up on the bed, and said unto Ioseph: God all mighty appeared unto 
me at Lus in the land of Canaan, and blessed me, and said unto me: 
behold, I will make thee grow and will multiply thee, and will 
make a great number of people of thee, and will give this land 
unto thee and unto thy seed after thee unto an everlasting 
possession. Now therefore thy two sons Manasse and Ephraim which 
were born unto thee before I came to thee, into Egypt, shall be 
mine: even as Ruben and Simeon shall they be unto me. And the 
children which thou gettest after them, shall be thine own: but 
shall be called with the names of their brethren in their 
inheritances. And after I came from Mesopotamia, Rahel died upon 
my hand in the land of Canaan, by the way: when I had but a 
field's brede to go unto Ephrat. And I buried her there in the way 
to Ephrat which is now called Bethlehem. And Israel beheld 
Ioseph's sons and said: what are these? And Ioseph said unto his 
father: they are my sons, which God hath given me here. And he 
said: bring them to me, and let me bless them. And the eyes of 
Israel were dim for age, so that he could not see. And he brought 
them to him, and he kissed them and embraced them. And Israel said 
unto Ioseph: I had not thought to have seen thy face, and yet lo, 
God hath shewed it me and also thy seed. And Ioseph took them away 
from his lap, and they fell on the ground before him. Then took 
Ioseph them both: Ephraim in his right hand toward Israel's left 
hand and Manasse in his left hand, toward Israel's right hand, and 
brought them unto him. And Israel stretched out his right hand and 
laid it upon Ephraim's head which was the younger, and his left 
hand upon Manasse's head, crossing his hands, for Manasse was the 
elder. And he blessed Ioseph saying: God before whom my fathers 
Abraham and Isaac did walk, and the God which hath fed me all my 
life long unto this day; And the angel which hath delivered me 
from all evil, bless these lads: that they may be called after my 
name, and after my father Abraham and Isaac, and that they may 
grow and multiply upon the earth. When Ioseph saw that his father 
laid his right hand upon the head of Ephraim, it displeased him. 
And he lift up his father's hand, to have removed it from 
Ephraim's head unto Manasse's head, and said unto his father: Not 
so my father, for this is the eldest. Put thy right hand upon his 
head. And his father would not, but said: I know it well my son, I 
know it well. He shall be also a people and shall be great. But of 
a troth his younger brother shall be greater than he, and his seed 
shall be full of people. And he blessed them saying: At the 
example of these, the Israelites shall bless and say: God make 
thee as Ephraim and as Manasse. Thus set he Ephraim before 
Manasse. And Israel said unto Ioseph: behold, I die. And God shall 
be with you and bring you again unto the land of your fathers. 
Moreover I give unto thee, a portion of land above thy brethren 
which I gat out of the hands of the Amorites with my sword and 
with my bow.

Chapter .xlix.

And Iacob called for his sons and said: come together, that I may 
tell you what shall happen you in the last days. Gather you 
together and hear ye sons of Iacob, and hearken unto Israel your 
father. Ruben, thou art mine eldest son, my might and the 
beginning of my strength, chief in receiving and chief in power. 
As unstable as water wast thou: thou shalt therefore not be the 
chiefest, for thou wentest up upon thy father's bed, and then 
defiledest thou my couch with going up. The brethren Simeon and 
Levi, wicked instruments are their weapons. Into their secrets 
come not my soul, and unto their congregation be my honour not 
coupled: for in their wrath they slew a man, and in their self 
will they houghed an ox. Cursed be their wrath for it was strong, 
and their fierceness for it was cruel. I will therefore divide 
them in Iacob, and scatter them in Israel. Iuda, thy brethren 
shall praise thee, and thine hand shall be in the neck of thine 
enemies, and thy father's children shall stoop unto thee. Iuda is 
a lion's whelp. From spoil my son thou art come on high: {an hye} 
he laid him down and couched himself as a lion, and as a lioness. 
Who dare stir him up? The sceptre shall not depart from Iuda, nor 
a ruler from between his legs, until Silo come, unto whom the 
people shall hearken. He shall bind his foal unto the vine, and 
his ass's colt unto the vine branch, and shall wash his garment in 
wine and his mantle in the blood of grapes: his eyes are roudier 
than wine, and his teeth whiter then milk. Zabulon shall dwell in 
the haven of the sea and in the port of ships, and shall reach 
unto Sidon. Isachar is a strong ass, he couched him down between 
two borders, and saw that rest was good and the land that it was 
pleasant, and bowed his shoulder to bear, and became a servant 
unto tribute. Dan shall judge his people, as one of the tribes of 
Israel. Dan shall be a serpent in the way, and an adder in the 
path, and bite the horse heels, so that his rider shall fall 
backward. After thy saving look I, LORD. Gad, men of war shall 
invade him. And he shall turn them to flight. Of Asser cometh fat 
bread, and he shall give pleasures for a king. Nephtali is a swift 
hind, and giveth goodly words. That flourishing child Ioseph, that 
flourishing child and goodly unto the eye: the daughters come 
forth to bear rule. {ran upon the wall.} The shooters have envied 
him and chide with him and hated him, and yet his bow bode fast, 
and his arms and his hands were strong, by the hands of the mighty 
God of Iacob: out of him shall come an herdman, a stone in Israel. 
Thy father's God shall help thee, and the almighty shall bless 
thee with blessings from heaven above, and with blessings of the 
water that lieth under, and with blessings of the breasts and of 
the womb. The blessings of thy father were strong: even as the 
blessings of my elders, after the desire of the highest {hiest} in 
the world, and these blessings shall fall on the head of Ioseph, 
and on the top of the head of him that was separated from his 
brethren. Ben Iamin is a ravishing wolf. In the morning he shall 
devour his prey, and at night he shall divide his spoil. All these 
are the twelve tribes of Israel, and this is that which their 
father spake unto them when he blessed them, every man with a 
several blessing. And he charged them and said unto them. I shall 
be put unto my people: see that ye bury me with my fathers, in the 
cave that is in the field of Ephron the Hethite, in the double 
cave that is in the field before Mamre in the land of Canaan. 
Which field Abraham bought of Ephron the Hethite for a possession 
to bury in. There they buried Abraham and Sara his wife, there 
they buried Isaac and Rebecca his wife. And there I buried Lea: 
which field and the cave that is therein, was bought of the 
children of Heth. When Iacob had commanded all that he would unto 
his sons, he plucked up his feet upon the bed and died, and was 
put unto his people;

Chapter .l.

And Ioseph fell upon his father's face, and wept upon him, and 
kissed him. And Ioseph commanded his servants that were 
Physicians, to embalm his father, and the Physicians embalmed 
Israel forty days long, for so long doth the embalming last, and 
the Egyptians bewept him seventy days. And when the days of 
weeping were ended, Ioseph spake unto the house of Pharao saying: 
If I have found favour in your eyes, speak unto Pharao and tell 
him, how that my father made me swear and said: lo, I die, see 
that thou bury me in my grave which I have made me in the land of 
Canaan. Now therefore let me go and bury my father, and then will 
I come again. And Pharao said, go and bury thy father, according 
as he made thee swear. And Ioseph went up to bury his father, and 
with him went all the servants of Pharao that were the elders of 
his house, and all the elders of Egypt, and all the house of 
Ioseph and his brethren and his father's house: only their 
children and their sheep and their cattle left they behind them in 
the land of Gosan. And there went with him also Chariots and 
horsemen: so that they were an exceeding great company. And when 
they came to the field of Atad beyond Iordan, there they made 
great and exceeding sore lamentation. And he mourned for his 
father seven days. When the inhabiters of the land the Cananites 
saw the mourning in the field of Atad, they said: this is a great 
mourning which the Egyptians make. Wherefore the name of the place 
is called Abel mizraim, which place lieth beyond Iordan. And his 
sons did unto him according as he had commanded them. And his sons 
carried him into the land of Canaan and buried him in the double 
cave which Abraham had bought with the field to be a place to bury 
in, of Ephron the Hethite before Mamre. And Ioseph returned to 
Egypt again and his brethren, and all that went up with him to 
bury his father, as soon as he had buried him. When Ioseph's 
brethren saw that their father was dead, they said: Ioseph might 
fortune to hate us and reward us again all the evil which we did 
unto him. They did therefore a commandment unto Ioseph saying: thy 
father charged before his death saying: This wise say unto Ioseph, 
forgive I pray thee the trespass of thy brethren and their sin, 
for they rewarded thee evil. Now therefore we pray thee, forgive 
the trespass of the servants of thy father's God. And Ioseph wept 
when they spake unto him. And his brethren came and fell before 
him and said: behold we be thy servants. And Ioseph said unto 
them: fear not, for am not I under God? Ye thought evil unto me: 
but God turned it unto good to bring to pass, as it is this day, 
even to save much people alive. Fear not therefore, for I will 
care for you and for your children, and he spake kindly unto them. 
Ioseph dwelt in Egypt and his father's house also, and lived an 
hundred and ten years. And Ioseph saw Ephraim's children, even 
unto the third generation. And unto Machir the son of Manasse were 
children born, and sat on Ioseph's knees. And Ioseph said unto his 
brethren: I die; And God will surely visit you and bring you out 
of this land, unto the land which he sware unto Abraham, Isaac and 
Iacob. And Ioseph took an oath of the children of Israel and said: 
God will not fail but visit you: see therefore that ye carry my 
bones hence. And so Ioseph died, when he was an hundred and ten 
years old. And they embalmed him and put him in a chest in Egypt.

The end of the first book of Moses.


The Second Book of Moses, called Exodus

Chapter .j.

These are the names of the children of Israel, which came to Egypt 
with Iacob, every man with his household: Ruben, Simeon, Levi, 
Iuda, Isachar, Zabulon, Ben Iamin, Dan, Nephtali, Gad and Aser. 
All the souls that came out of the loins of Iacob, were seventy, 
and Ioseph was in Egypt already. When Ioseph was dead and all his 
brethren and all that generation: the children of Israel grew, 
increased, multiplied and waxed exceeding mighty: so that the land 
was full of them. Then there rose up a new king in Egypt which 
knew not Ioseph. And he said unto his folk: behold the people of 
the children of Israel are more and mightier than we. Come on, let 
us play wisely with them: lest they multiply, and then (if there 
chance any war) they join them selves unto our enemies and fight 
against us, and so get them out of the land. And he set 
taskmasters over them, to keep them under with burthens. And they 
built unto Pharao treasure cities: Phiton and Raamses. But the 
more they vexed them, the more they multiplied and grew: so that 
they abhorred the children of Israel. And the Egyptians held the 
children of Israel in bondage without mercy, and made their lives 
bitter unto them with cruel labour in clay and brick, and all 
manner work in the fields, and in all manner of service, which 
they caused them to work cruelly. And the king of Egypt said unto 
the midwives of the Hebrews' women, of which the one's name was 
Sephora and the other Phua: when ye midwife the women of the 
Hebrews and see in the birth time that it is a boy, kill it. But 
if it be a maid, let it live. Notwithstanding the midwives feared 
God, and did not as the king of Egypt commanded them: but saved 
the men children. Then the king of Egypt called for the midwives 
and said unto them: why have ye dealt on this manner and have 
saved the men children? And the midwives answered Pharao, that the 
Hebrews' women were not as the women of Egypt: but were sturdy 
women, and were delivered yer the midwives came at them. And God 
therefore dealt well with the midwives. And the people multiplied 
and waxed very mighty. And because the midwives feared God, he 
made them houses. Then Pharao charged all his people saying: All 
the men children that are born, cast into the river and save the 
maid children alive.

Chapter .ij.

And there went a man of the house of Levi and took a daughter of 
Levi. And the wife conceived and bare a son. And when she saw that 
it was a proper child, she hid him three months long. And when she 
could no longer hide him, she took a basket of bulrushes and 
daubed it with slime and pitch, and laid the child therein, and 
put it in the flags by the river's brink. And his sister stood 
afar off, to wete what would come of it. And the daughter of 
Pharao came down to the river to wash herself, and her maidens 
walked along by the river's side. And when she saw the basket 
among the flags, she sent one of her maids and caused it to be 
fetched. And when she had opened it she saw the child, and behold, 
the babe wept. And she had compassion on it and said: it is one of 
the Hebrew's children. Then said his sister unto Pharao's 
daughter: shall I go and call unto thee a nurse of the Hebrew's 
women, to nurse the child? And the maid ran and called the child's 
mother. Then Pharao's daughter said unto her. Take this child away 
and nurse it for me, and I will reward thee for thy labour. And 
the woman took the child and nursed it up. And when the child was 
grown, she brought it unto Pharao's daughter, and it was made her 
son, and she called it Moses, because (said she) I took him out of 
the water. And it happened in these days when Moses was waxed 
great, that he went out unto his brethren and looked on their 
burthens, and spied an Egyptian smiting one of his brethren an 
Hebrew. And he looked round about: and when he saw that there was 
no man by, he slew the Egyptian and hid him in the sand. And he 
went out another day: and behold, two Hebrews strove together. And 
he said unto him that did the wrong: wherefore smitest thou thine 
neighbour? And he answered: who hath made thee a ruler or a judge 
over us? Intendest thou to kill me, as thou killedst the Egyptian? 
Then Moses feared and said: of a surety the thing is known. And 
Pharao heard of it and went about to slay Moses: but he fled from 
Pharao and dwelt in the land of Madian, and he sat down by a 
well's side. The priest of Madian had seven daughters which came 
and drew water and filled the troughs, for to water their father's 
sheep. And the shepherds came and drove them away: But Moses stood 
up and helped them and watered their sheep. And when they came to 
Raguel their father, he said: how happeneth it that ye are come so 
soon today? And they answered: there was an Egyptian that 
delivered us from the shepherds, and so drew us water and watered 
the sheep. And he said unto his daughters: where is he? why have 
ye left the man? Go call him that he may eat bread. And Moses was 
content to dwell with the man. And he gave Moses Zephora his 
daughter which bare a son, and he called him Gerson: for he said. 
I have been a stranger in a strange land. [And she bare yet 
another son, whom he called Elieser saying: the God of my father 
is mine helper, and hath rid me out of the hands of Pharao.] And 
it chanced in process of time, that the king of Egypt died, and 
the children of Israel sighed by the reason of labour, and cried. 
And their complaint came up unto God from the labour. And God 
remembered his promise with Abraham, Isaac and Iacob. And God 
looked upon the children of Israel and knew them.

Chapter .iij.

Moses kept the sheep of Iethro his father-in-law priest of Madian, 
and he drove the flock to the backside of the desert, and came to 
the mountain of God, Horeb. And the angel of the LORD appeared 
unto him in a flame of fire out of a bush. And he perceived that 
the bush burned with fire, and consumed not. Then Moses said: I 
will go hence and see this great sight, how it cometh that the 
bush burneth not. And when the LORD saw that he came for to see, 
he called unto him out of the bush and said: Moses Moses; And he 
answered: here am I. And he said: come not hither, but put thy 
shoes off thy feet: for the place whereon thou stondest is holy 
ground. And he said: I am the God of thy father, the God of 
Abraham, the God of Isaac and the God of Iacob. And Moses hid his 
face, for he was afraid to look upon God. Then the LORD said: I 
have surely seen the trouble of my people which are in Egypt, and 
have heard their cry, which they have of their taskmasters. For I 
know their sorrow, and am come down to deliver them out of the 
hands of the Egyptians, and to bring them out of that land unto a 
good land and a large, and unto a land that floweth with milk and 
honey: even unto the place of the Cananites, Hethites, Amorites, 
Pherezites, Hevites, and of the Iebusites. Now therefore behold, 
the complaint of the children of Israel is come unto me and I have 
also seen the oppression, wherewith the Egyptians oppress them. 
But come, I will send thee unto Pharao, that thou mayst bring my 
people the children of Israel out of Egypt. And Moses said unto 
God: what, am I to go to Pharao and to bring the children of 
Israel out of Egypt? And he said: I will be with thee. And this 
shall be a token unto thee that I have sent thee: after that thou 
hast brought the people out of Egypt, ye shall serve God upon this 
mountain. Then said Moses unto God: when I come unto the children 
of Israel and say unto them, the God of your fathers hath sent me 
unto you, and they say unto me, what is his name, what answer 
shall I give them? Then said God unto Moses: I will be what I will 
be: and he said, this shalt thou say unto the children of Israel: 
I will be did send me to you. And God spake further unto Moses: 
thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel: the LORD God of 
your fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of 
Iacob hath sent me unto you: this is my name for ever, and this is 
my memorial thorowout all generations. Go therefore and gather the 
elders of Israel together and say unto them: the LORD God of your 
fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac and the God of 
Iacob, appeared unto me and said: I have been and seen both you 
and that which is done to you in Egypt. And I have said it, that I 
will bring you out of the tribulation of Egypt unto the land of 
the Cananites, Hethites, Amorites, Pherezites, Hevites and 
Iebusites: even a land that floweth with milk and honey. If it 
come to pass that they hear thy voice, then go, both thou and the 
elders of Israel unto the king of Egypt, and say unto him: The 
LORD God of the Hebrews hath met with us: Let us go therefore 
three days' journey into the wilderness, that we may sacrifice 
unto the LORD our God. Notwithstanding I am sure that the king of 
Egypt will not let you go, except it be with a mighty hand: yea 
and I will therefore stretch out mine hand, and smite Egypt with 
all my wonders which I will do therein. And after that he will let 
you go. And I will get this people favour in the sight of the 
Egyptians: so that when ye go, ye shall not go empty: but every 
wife shall borrow of her neighbouress and of her that sojourneth 
in her house, jewels of silver and of gold and raiment. And ye 
shall put them on your sons and daughters, and shall rob the 
Egyptians.

Chapter .iiij.

Moses answered and said: See, they will not believe me nor hearken 
unto my voice: but will say, the LORD hath not appeared unto thee. 
Then the LORD said unto him: what is that in thine hand? and he 
said, a rod. And he said, cast it on the ground, and it turned 
unto a serpent. And Moses ran away from it. And the LORD said unto 
Moses: put forth thine hand and take it by the tail. And he put 
forth his hand and caught it, and it became a rod again in his 
hand, that they may believe that the LORD God of their fathers, 
the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac and the God of Iacob hath 
appeared unto thee. And the LORD said furthermore unto him: thrust 
thine hand into thy bosom. And he thrust his hand into his bosom 
and took it out. And behold, his hand was leprous even as snow. 
And he said: put thine hand into thy bosom again. And he put his 
hand into his bosom again, and plucked it out of his bosom, and 
behold, it was turned again as his other flesh. If they will not 
believe thee neither hear the voice of the first token: yet will 
they believe the voice of the second token. But and if they will 
not believe the two signs neither hearken unto thy voice, then 
take of the water of the river and pour it upon the dry land. And 
the water which thou takest out of the river shall turn to blood 
upon the dry land. And Moses said unto the LORD: Oh my Lord. {the 
Lorde: oh my Lorde.} I am not eloquent, no not in times past and 
namely since thou hast spoken unto thy servant: but I am slow 
mouthed and slow tongued. And the LORD said unto him: who hath 
made man's mouth, or who hath made the dumb or the deaf, the 
seeing or the blind? have not I the LORD? Go therefore and I will 
be with thy mouth and teach thee what thou shalt say. And he said: 
Oh my Lord, {Lorde} {|LORDE|} send I pray thee whom thou wilt. And 
the LORD was angry with Moses and said: I know Aaron thy brother 
the Levite that he can speak. And moreover behold, he cometh out 
against {to meet} thee, and when he seeth thee, he will be glad in 
his heart. And thou shalt speak unto him and put the words in his 
mouth, and I will be with thy mouth and with his mouth, and will 
teach you what ye shall do. And he shall be thy spokesman unto the 
people: he shall be thy mouth, and thou shalt be his God: and take 
this rod in thy hand, wherewith thou shalt do miracles. And Moses 
went and returned to Iethro his father-in-law again and said unto 
him: let me go (I pray thee) and turn again unto my brethren which 
are in Egypt, that I may see whether they be yet alive. And Iethro 
said to Moses: go in peace. And the LORD said unto Moses in 
Madian: return again into Egypt for they are dead which went about 
to kill thee. And Moses took his wife and his sons and put them on 
an ass, and went again to Egypt, and took the rod of God in his 
hand. And the LORD said unto Moses: when thou art come into Egypt 
again, see that thou do all the wonders before Pharao which I have 
put in thy hand: but I will harden his heart, so that he shall not 
let the people go. And tell Pharao, thus sayeth the LORD: Israel 
is mine eldest son, and therefore sayeth unto thee: let my son go, 
that he may serve me. If thou wilt not let him go: behold, I will 
slay thine eldest son. And it chanced by the way in the inn, that 
the LORD met him and would have killed him. Then Zepora took a 
stone and circumcised her son, and fell at his feet, and said: a 
bloody husband art thou unto me. And he let him go. She said a 
bloody husband, because of the circumcision. Then said the LORD 
unto Aaron: go meet Moses in the wilderness. And he went and met 
him in the mount of God and kissed him. And Moses told Aaron all 
the words of the LORD which he had sent by him, and all the tokens 
which he had charged him withal. So went Moses and Aaron and 
gathered all the elders of the children of Israel. And Aaron told 
all the words which the LORD had spoken unto Moses, and did the 
miracles in the sight of the people, and the people believed. And 
when they heard that the LORD had visited the children of Israel 
and had looked upon their tribulation, they bowed them selves, and 
worshipped.

Chapter .v.

Then Moses and Aaron went and told Pharao, thus sayeth the LORD 
God of Israel. Let my people go, that they may keep holy day unto 
me in the wilderness. And Pharao answered: what fellow is the 
LORD, that I should hear his voice for to let Israel go? I know 
not the LORD, neither will let Israel go. And they said: the God 
of the Hebrews hath met with us: let us go (we pray thee) three 
days' journey into the desert, that we may sacrifice unto the LORD 
our God: lest he smite us either with pestilence or with sword. 
Then said the king of Egypt unto them: wherefore do ye, Moses and 
Aaron, let the people from their work, get you unto your labour. 
And Pharao said furthermore: behold, there is much people in the 
land, and ye make them play and let their work stond. And Pharao 
commanded the same day unto the taskmasters over the people and 
unto the officers saying: see that ye give the people no more 
straw to make brick withal, as ye did in time past: let them go 
and gather them straw them selves, and the number of bricks which 
they were wont to make in time past, lay unto their charge also, 
and minish nothing thereof. For they be idle and therefore cry 
saying: let us go and do sacrifice unto our God. They must have 
more work laid upon them, that they may labour therein, and then 
will they not turn them selves to false words. Then went the 
taskmasters of the people and the officers out and told the people 
saying: Thus sayeth Pharao: I will give you no more straw, but go 
your selves and gather you straw where ye can find it, yet shall 
none of your labour be minished. Then the people scattered abroad 
thorowout all the land of Egypt for to gather them stubble to be 
instead of straw. And the taskmasters hasted them forward saying: 
fulfil your work day by day, even as when straw was given you. And 
the officers of the children of Israel which Pharao's taskmasters 
had set over them, were beaten. And it was said unto them: 
wherefore have ye not fulfilled your task in making brick, both 
yesterday and today, as well as in times past? Then went the 
officers of the children of Israel and complained unto Pharao 
saying: wherefore dealest thou thus with thy servants? there is no 
straw given unto thy servants, and yet they say unto us: make 
brick. And lo, thy servants are beaten, and thy people is foul 
entreated. And he answered: idle are ye idle, and therefore ye 
say: let us go and do sacrifice unto the LORD. Go therefore and 
work, for there shall no straw be given you, and yet see that ye 
deliver the hole tale of brick. When the officers of the children 
of Israel saw themself in shrewd case (in that he said ye shall 
minish nothing of your daily making of brick) then they met Moses 
and Aaron stonding in their way as they came out from Pharao, and 
said unto them: The LORD look unto you and judge, for ye have made 
the savour of us stink in the sight of Pharao and of his servants, 
and have put a sword into their hands to slay us. Moses returned 
unto the LORD {Lorde} {|LORDE|} and said: Lord {|LORDE|} wherefore 
dealest thou cruelly with this people: and wherefore hast thou 
sent me? For since I came to Pharao to speak in thy name, he hath 
fared foul with this folk, and yet thou hast not delivered thy 
people at all;

Chapter .vi.

Then the LORD said unto Moses. Now shalt thou see what I will do 
unto Pharao, for with a mighty hand shall he let them go, and with 
a mighty hand shall he drive them out of his land. And God spake 
unto Moses saying unto him: I am the LORD, and I appeared unto 
Abraham, Isaac and Iacob an almighty God: but in my name Iehouah 
was I not known unto them. Moreover I made an appointment with 
them to give them the land of Canaa: the land of their pilgrimage 
wherein they were strangers. And I have also heard the groaning of 
the children of Israel, because the Egyptians keep them in 
bondage, and have remembered my promise. Wherefore say unto the 
children of Israel: I am the LORD, and will bring you out from 
under the burdens of the Egyptians, and will rid you out of their 
bondage, and will deliver you with a stretched out arm and with 
great judgements. And I will take you for my people and will be to 
you a God. And ye shall know that I am the LORD your God which 
brings you out from under the burthens of the Egyptians. And I 
will bring you unto the land over the which I did lift up my hand 
to give it unto Abraham, Isaac and Iacob, and will give it unto 
you for a possession: even I the LORD. And Moses told the children 
of Israel even so: But they hearkened not unto Moses for anguish 
of spirit and for cruel bondage. And the LORD spake unto Moses 
saying: Go and bid Pharao king of Egypt, that he let the children 
of Israel go out of his land. And Moses spake before the LORD 
saying: behold, the children of Israel hearken not unto me, how 
then shall Pharao hear me: seeing that I have uncircumcised lips. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses and Aaron and gave them a charge 
unto the children of Israel and unto Pharao king of Egypt: to 
bring the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt. These be 
the heads of their father's houses. The children of Ruben the 
eldest son of Israel are these: Hanoh, Pallu, Hezron, Charmi, 
these be the householders of Ruben. The children of Simeon are 
these: Gemuel, Iamin, Ohad, Iachin, Zohar, and Saul the son of a 
Cananitish wife: these are the kindreds of Simeon. These are the 
names of the children of Levi in their generations: Gerson, Kahath 
and Merari. And Levi lived an hundred and thirty seven years. The 
sons of Gerson: Libni and Semei in their kindreds. The children of 
Kahath: Amram, Iesear, Hebron and Usiel. And Kahath lived an 
hundred and thirty three years. The children of Merari are these: 
Maheli and Musi: these are the kindreds of Levi in their 
generations. And Amram took Iochebed his niece to wife which bare 
him Aaron and Moses. And Amram lived an hundred and thirty seven 
years. The children of Iezear: Korah, Nepheg and Sichri. The 
children of Usiel: Misael, Elzaphan and Sithri. And Aaron took 
Elizaba daughter of Aminadab and sister of Nahason, to wife: which 
bare him Nadab, Abehu, Eleazar and Ithamar. The children of Korah: 
Assir, Elkana and Abiassaph: these are the kindreds of the 
Korahites. And Eleazar Aaron's son took him one of the daughters 
of Putuel to wife: which bare him Pinehas: these be the principal 
fathers of the Levites in their kindreds. These are that Aaron and 
Moses to whom the LORD said: carry the children of Israel out of 
the land of Egypt, with their armies. These are that Moses and 
Aaron which spake to Pharao king of Egypt, that they might bring 
the children of Israel out of Egypt. And in the day when the LORD 
spake unto Moses in the land of Egypt, he spake unto him saying, I 
am the LORD, see that thou speak unto Pharao the king of Egypt all 
that I say unto thee. And Moses answered before the LORD: I am of 
uncircumcised lips, how shall Pharao then give me audience?

Chapter .vij.

And the LORD said unto Moses: behold, I have made thee Pharao's 
God, and Aaron thy brother shall be thy prophet. Thou shalt speak 
all that I command thee and Aaron thy brother shall speak unto 
Pharao: that he send the children of Israel out of his land. But I 
will harden Pharao's heart, that I may multiply my miracles and my 
wonders in the land of Egypt. And yet Pharao shall not hearken 
unto you, that I may set mine hand upon Egypt and bring out mine 
armies, even my people the children of Israel out of the land of 
Egypt, with great judgements. And the Egyptians shall know that I 
am the LORD when I have stretched forth my hand upon Egypt, and 
have brought out the children of Israel from among them. Moses and 
Aaron did as the LORD commanded them. And Moses was eighty years 
old and Aaron eighty three when they spake unto Pharao. And the 
LORD spake unto Moses and Aaron saying: when Pharao speaketh unto 
you and sayeth: shew a wonder, then shalt thou say unto Aaron, 
take the rod and cast it before Pharao, and it shall turn to a 
serpent. Then went Moses and Aaron in unto Pharao, and did even as 
the LORD had commanded. And Aaron cast forth his rod before Pharao 
and before his servants, and it turned to a serpent. Then Pharao 
called for the wise men, and enchanters of Egypt did in like 
manner with their sorcery. And they cast down every man his rod, 
and they turned to serpents: but Aaron's rod ate up their rods: 
and yet for all that Pharao's heart was hardened, so that he 
hearkened not unto them, even as the LORD had said. Then said the 
LORD unto Moses: Pharao's heart is hardened, and he refuseth to 
let the people go. Get thee unto Pharao in the morning, for he 
will come unto the water, and stond {stode} thou upon the river's 
brink against he come, and the rod which turned to a serpent take 
in thine hand. And say unto him: the LORD God of the Hebrews hath 
sent me unto thee saying: let my people go, that they may serve me 
in the wilderness: but hitherto thou wouldest not hear. Wherefore 
thus sayeth the LORD: hereby thou shalt know that I am the LORD. 
Behold, I will smite with the staff that is in mine hand upon the 
waters that are in the river, and they shall turn to blood. And 
the fish that is in the river shall die, and the river shall 
stink: so that it shall grieve the Egyptians to drink of the water 
of the river. And the LORD spake unto Moses, say unto Aaron: take 
thy staff and stretch out thine hand over the waters of Egypt, 
over their streams, rivers, ponds and all pools of water, that 
they may be blood, and that there may be blood in all the land of 
Egypt: both in vessels of wood and also of stone. And Moses and 
Aaron did even as the LORD commanded. And he lift up the staff and 
smote the waters that were in the river, in the sight of Pharao 
and in the sight of his servants, and all the water that was in 
the river, turned into blood. And the fish that was in the river 
died, and the river stank: so that the Egyptians could not drink 
of the water of the river. And there was blood thorowout all the 
land of Egypt. And the enchanters of Egypt did likewise with their 
enchantments, so that Pharao's heart was hardened and did not 
regard them as the LORD had said. And Pharao turned himself and 
went into his house, and set not his heart thereunto. And the 
Egyptians digged round about the river for water to drink, for 
they could not drink of the water of the river. And it continued a 
week after that the LORD had smote the river.

Chapter .viij.

The LORD spake unto Moses: Go unto Pharao and tell him, thus 
sayeth the LORD: let my people go, that they may serve me. If thou 
wilt not let them go: behold I will smite all thy land with frogs. 
And the river shall scrale with frogs, and they shall come up and 
go into thine house and into thy chamber where thou sleepest and 
upon thy bed, and into the houses of thy servants, and upon thy 
people, and into thine ovens, and upon thy vitailles which thou 
hast in store. And the frogs shall come upon thee and on thy 
people and upon all thy servants. And the LORD spake unto Moses, 
say unto Aaron: stretch forth thine hand with thy rod over the 
streams, rivers, and ponds. And bring up frogs upon the land of 
Egypt. And Aaron stretched his hand over the water of Egypt, and 
the frogs came up and covered the land of Egypt. And the sorcerers 
did likewise with their sorcery, and the frogs came up upon the 
land of Egypt. Then Pharao called for Moses and Aaron and said, 
pray ye unto the LORD that he may take away the frogs from me and 
from my people, and I will let the people go, that they may 
sacrifice unto the LORD. And Moses said unto Pharao: Appoint thou 
the time unto me, when I shall pray for thee and thy servants and 
thy people, to drive away the frogs from thee and thy house, so 
that they shall remain but in the river only. And he said 
tomorrow. And he said: even as thou hast said, that thou mayst 
know that there is none like unto the LORD our God. And the frogs 
shall depart from thee and from thine houses, and from thy 
servants and from thy people, and shall remain in the river only. 
And Moses and Aaron went out from Pharao, and Moses cried unto the 
LORD upon the appointment of frogs which he had made unto Pharao. 
And the LORD did according to the saying of Moses. And the frogs 
died out of the houses, courts and fields. And they gathered them 
together upon heaps: so that the land stank of them. But when 
Pharao saw that he had rest given him, he hardened his heart and 
hearkened not unto them, as the LORD had said. And the LORD said 
unto Moses: Say unto Aaron: stretch out thy rod and smite the dust 
of the land that it may turn to lice in all the land of Egypt. And 
they did so. And Aaron stretched out his hand with his rod and 
smote the dust of the earth, and it turned to lice both in man and 
beast, so that all the dust of the land turned to lice, thorowout 
all the land of Egypt. And the enchanters assayed likewise with 
their enchantments to bring forth lice, but they could not. And 
the lice were both upon man and beast. Then said the enchanters 
unto Pharao: it is the finger of God. Neverthelater Pharao's heart 
was hardened and he regarded them not, as the LORD had said. And 
the LORD said unto Moses: rise up early in the morning and stond 
before Pharao, for he will come unto the water: and say unto him, 
thus sayeth the LORD: let my people go, that they may serve me. If 
thou wilt not let my people go, behold, I will send all manner 
flies both upon thee and thy servants, and thy people, and into 
thy houses. And the houses of the Egyptians shall be full of 
flies, and the ground whereon they are. But I will separate the 
same day the land of Gosan where my people are, so that there 
shall no flies be there: that thou mayest know that I am the LORD 
upon the earth. And I will put a division between my people and 
thine. And even tomorrow shall this miracle be done. And the LORD 
did even so: and there came noisome flies into the house of 
Pharao, and into his servants' houses and into all the land of 
Egypt: so that the land was marred with flies. Then Pharao sent 
for Moses and Aaron and said: Go and do sacrifice unto your God in 
the land. And Moses answered: it is not mete so to do. For we must 
offer unto the LORD our God, that which is an abomination unto the 
Egyptians: behold shall we sacrifice that which is an abomination 
unto the Egyptians before their eyes, and shall they not stone us? 
we will therefore go three days' journey into the desert and 
sacrifice unto the LORD our God as he hath commanded us. And 
Pharao said: I will let you go, that ye may sacrifice unto the 
LORD your God in the wilderness: only go not far away, and see 
that ye pray for me. And Moses said: behold, I will go out from 
thee and pray unto the LORD, and the flies shall depart from 
Pharao and from his servants and from his people tomorrow. But let 
Pharao from henceforth deceive no more, that he would not let the 
people go to sacrifice unto the LORD. And Moses went out from 
Pharao and prayed unto the LORD. And the LORD did as Moses had 
said, and took away the flies from Pharao and from his servants 
and from his people, so that there remained not one. But for all 
that, Pharao hardened his heart even then also and would not let 
the people go.

Chapter .ix.

And the LORD said unto Moses: go unto Pharao and tell him, thus 
sayeth the LORD God of the Hebrews: send out my people that they 
may serve me. If thou wilt not let them go but wilt hold them 
still: behold, the hand of the LORD shall be upon thy cattle which 
thou hast in the field, upon horses, asses, camels, oxen, and 
sheep, with a mighty great murrain. But the LORD shall make a 
division between the beasts of the Israelites, and the beasts of 
the Egyptians: so that there shall nothing die of all that 
pertaineth to the children of Israel. And the LORD appointed a 
time saying: tomorrow the LORD shall do this thing in the land. 
And the LORD did the thing on the morrow, and all the cattle of 
Egypt died: but of the cattle of the children of Israel died not 
one. And Pharao sent to wete: but there was not one of the cattle 
of the Israelites dead. Notwithstanding the heart of Pharao 
hardened, and he would not let the people go. And the LORD said 
unto Moses and Aaron: take your hands full of ashes out of the 
furnace, and let Moses sprinkle it up into the air in the sight of 
Pharao, and it shall turn to dust in all the land of Egypt, and 
shall make swelling sores with blains both on man and beast in all 
the land of Egypt. And they took ashes out of the furnace, and 
stood before Pharao, and Moses sprinkled it up into the air: And 
there brake out sores with blains both in man and beast: so that 
the sorcerers could not stond before Moses, by the reason of 
botches on the enchanters and upon all the Egyptians. But the LORD 
hardened the heart of Pharao, that he hearkened not unto them, as 
the LORD had said unto Moses. And the LORD said unto Moses: rise 
up early in the morning and stond before Pharao and tell him, thus 
sayeth the LORD God of the Hebrews: Let my people go, that they 
may serve me, or else I will at this time send all my plagues upon 
thine heart and upon thy servants and on thy people, that you 
mayst know that there is none like me in all the earth. For now I 
will stretch out my hand and will smite thee and thy people with 
pestilence: so that thou shalt perish from the earth. Yet in very 
deed for this cause have I stirred thee up, for to shew my power 
in thee, and to declare my name thorowout all the world. If it be 
so that thou stoppest my people, that thou wilt not let them go: 
behold, tomorrow this time, I will send down a mighty great hail: 
even such one as was not in Egypt since it was grounded unto this 
time. Send therefore and fetch home thy beasts and all that thou 
hast in the field. For upon all the men and beasts which are found 
in the field and not brought home, shall the hail fall, and they 
shall die. And as many as feared the word of the LORD among the 
servants of Pharao made their servants and their beasts flee to 
house: and they that regarded not the word of the LORD, left their 
servants and their beasts in the field. And the LORD said unto 
Moses: stretch forth thine hand unto heaven, that there may be 
hail in all the land of Egypt: upon man and beast, and upon all 
the herbs of the field in the field of Egypt. And Moses stretched 
out his rod unto heaven, and the LORD thundered and hailed, so 
that the fire ran along upon the ground. And the LORD so hailed in 
the land of Egypt, that there was hail and fire mingled with the 
hail, so grievous, that there was none such in all the land of 
Egypt, since people inhabited it. And the hail smote in the land 
of Egypt all that was in the field both man and beast. And the 
hail smote all the herbs of the field and broke all the trees of 
the field: only in the land of Gosan where the children of Israel 
were, was there no hail. And Pharao sent and called for Moses and 
Aaron, and said unto them: I have now sinned, the LORD is 
righteous and I and my people are wicked. Pray ye unto the LORD, 
that the thunder of God and hail may cease, and I will let you go, 
and ye shall tarry no longer. And Moses said unto him: as soon as 
I am out of the city, I will spread abroad my hands unto the LORD, 
and the thunder shall cease, neither shall there be any more hail: 
that thou mayst know, how that the earth is the LORD's. But I know 
that thou and thy servants yet fear not the LORD God. The flax and 
the barley were smitten, for the barley was shot up and the flax 
was bolled: but the wheat and the rye were not smitten, for they 
were late sown. And Moses went out of the city from Pharao and 
spread abroad his hands unto the LORD, and the thunder and hail 
ceased, neither rained it any more upon the earth. When Pharao saw 
that the rain and the hail and thunder were ceased, he sinned 
again and hardened his heart: both he and his servants. So was the 
heart of Pharao hardened, that he would not let the children of 
Israel go, as the LORD had said by Moses.

Chapter .x.

The LORD said unto Moses: go unto Pharao, nevertheless I have 
hardened his heart and the hearts of his servants, that I might 
shew these my signs amongst them, and that thou tell in the 
audience of thy son and of thy son's son, the pageants which I 
have played in Egypt, and the miracles which I have done among 
them: that ye may know how that I am the LORD. Then Moses and 
Aaron went in unto Pharao, and said unto him: Thus sayeth the LORD 
God of the Hebrews: how long shall it be, or thou wilt submit 
thyself unto me? Let my people go that they may serve me. If thou 
wilt not let my people go: behold, tomorrow will I bring 
grasshoppers into thy land, and they shall cover the face of the 
earth that it can not be seen, and they shall eat the residue 
which remaineth unto you and escaped the hail, and they shall eat 
all your green trees upon the field, and they shall fill thy 
houses and all thy servants' houses, and the houses of all the 
Egyptians after such a manner: as neither thy fathers nor thy 
fathers fathers have seen, since the time they were upon the earth 
unto this day. And he turned himself about, and went out from 
Pharao. And Pharao's servants said unto him: How long shall this 
fellow thus plague us? {How long shall we be thus evilly 
entreated?} Let the men go that they may serve the LORD their God, 
or else wilt thou see Egypt first destroyed? And then Moses and 
Aaron were brought again unto Pharao, and he said unto them: Go 
and serve the LORD your God but who are they that shall go? And 
Moses answered: we must go with young and old: yea and with our 
sons and with our daughters, and with our sheep and oxen must we 
go. For we must hold a feast unto the LORD. And he said unto them: 
shall it be so? The LORD be with you, should I let you go, and 
your children also? Take heed, for ye have some mischief in hand. 
Nay not so: but go ye that are men and serve the LORD, for that 
was your desire. And they thrust them out of Pharao's presence. 
And the LORD said unto Moses: Stretch out thine hand over the land 
of Egypt for grasshoppers, that they come upon the land of Egypt 
and eat all the herbs of the land, and all that the hail left 
untouched. And Moses stretched forth his rod over the land of 
Egypt, and the LORD brought an east wind upon the land, all that 
day and all night. And in the morning the east wind brought the 
grasshoppers, and the grasshoppers went up over all the land of 
Egypt and lighted in all quarters of Egypt very grievously: so 
that before them were there no such grasshoppers, neither after 
them shall be. And they covered all the face of the earth, so that 
the land was dark therewith. And they ate all the herbs of the 
land and all the fruits of the trees which the hail had left: so 
that there was no green thing left in the trees and herbs of the 
field thorow all the land of Egypt. Then Pharao called for Moses 
and Aaron in haste and said: I have sinned against the LORD your 
God and against you. Forgive me yet my sin only this once, and 
pray unto the LORD your God that he may take away from me this 
death only. And he went out from Pharao and prayed unto the LORD, 
and the LORD turned the wind into a mighty strong west wind, and 
it took away the grasshoppers and cast them into the reed sea: so 
that there was not one grasshopper left in all the coasts of 
Egypt. But the LORD hardened Pharao's heart, so that he would not 
let the children of Israel go. And the LORD said unto Moses: 
Stretch out thy hand unto heaven, and let there be darkness upon 
the land of Egypt: even that they may feel the darkness. And Moses 
stretched forth his hand unto heaven, and there was a dark mist 
{thick darkness} upon all the land of Egypt three days long, so 
that no man saw another, neither rose up from the place where he 
was by the space of three days, but all the children of Israel had 
light where they dwelled. Then Pharao called for Moses and said: 
go and serve the LORD, only let your sheep, and your oxen abide, 
but let your children go with you. And Moses answered: thou must 
give us also offerings and burnt offerings for to sacrifice unto 
the LORD our God. Our cattle therefore shall go with us, and there 
shall not one hoof be left behind, for thereof must we take to 
serve the LORD our God. Moreover we can not know wherewith we 
shall serve the LORD, until we come thither. But the LORD hardened 
Pharao's heart, so that he would not let them go. And Pharao said 
unto him: get thee from me and take heed to thyself that thou see 
my face no more. For whensoever thou comest in my sight, thou 
shalt die. And Moses said: Let it be as thou hast said: I will see 
thy face no more.

Chapter .xi.

And the LORD said unto Moses: yet will I bring one plague more 
upon Pharao and upon Egypt, and after that he will let you go 
hence. And when he letteth you go, he shall utterly drive you 
hence. But bid the people that every man borrow of his neighbour 
and every woman of her neighbouress: jewels of silver and jewels 
of gold. And the LORD gat the people favour in the sight of the 
Egyptians. Moreover Moses was very great in the land of Egypt: 
both in the sight of Pharao, and also in the sight of the people. 
And Moses said: thus sayeth the LORD. About midnight will I go out 
among the Egyptians, and all the firstborn in the land of Egypt 
shall die: even from the firstborn of Pharao that sitteth on his 
seat, unto the firstborn of the maidservant that is in the mill, 
and all the firstborn of the cattle. And there shall be a great 
cry thorowout all the land of Egypt: so that there was never none 
like nor shall be. And among all the children of Israel shall not 
a dog move his tongue, nor yet man or beast: that ye may know, how 
the LORD putteth a difference between the Egyptians and Israel. 
And all these thy servants shall come down unto me, and fall 
before me and say: get thee out and all the people that are under 
thee, and then will I depart. And he went out from Pharao in a 
great anger. And the LORD said unto Moses: Pharao shall not regard 
you, that many wonders may be wrought in the land of Egypt. And 
Moses and Aaron did all these wonders before Pharao. But the LORD 
hardened Pharao's heart, so that he would not let the children of 
Israel go out of his land.

Chapter .xij.

And the LORD spake unto Moses and Aaron in the land of Egypt 
saying: This month shall be your chief month: even the first month 
of the year shall it be unto you. Speak ye unto all the fellowship 
of Israel saying: that they take the tenth day of this month to 
every household, a sheep. If the household be too few for a sheep, 
then let him and his neighbour that is next unto this house, take 
according to the number of souls, and count unto a sheep according 
to every man's eating. A sheep without spot and a male of one year 
old shall it be, and from among the lambs and the goats shall ye 
take it. And ye shall keep him in ward, until the fourteenth day 
of the same month. And every man of the multitude of Israel shall 
kill him about even. And they shall take of the blood and strike 
on the two side posts and on the upper doorpost of the houses, 
wherein they eat him. And they shall eat the flesh the same night, 
roast with fire, and with unleavened bread, and with sour herbs 
they shall eat it. See that ye eat not thereof sodden in water, 
but roast with fire: both head, feet, and purtenance together. And 
see that ye let nothing of it remain unto the morning: if ought 
remain burn it with fire. Of this manner shall ye eat it: with 
your loins girded, and shoes on your feet, and your staves in your 
hands. And ye shall eat it in haste, for it is the LORD's 
passover, for I will go about in the land of Egypt this same 
night, and will smite all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, both 
of man and beast, and upon all the gods of Egypt will I the LORD 
do execution. And the blood shall be unto you a token upon the 
houses wherein ye are, for when I see the blood, I will pass over 
you, and the plague shall not be upon you to destroy you, when I 
smite the land of Egypt. And this day shall be unto you a 
remembrance, and ye shall keep it holy unto the LORD: even 
thorowout your generations after you shall ye keep it holy day, 
that it be a custom for ever. Seven days shall ye eat unleavened 
bread, so that even the first day ye shall put away leaven out of 
your houses. For whosoever eateth leavened bread from the first 
day until the seventh day, that soul shall be plucked out from 
Israel. The first day shall be a holy feast unto you, and the 
seventh also. There shall be no manner of work done in them, save 
about that only which every man must eat: that only may ye do. And 
see that ye keep you to unleavened bread. For upon that same day I 
will bring your armies out of the land of Egypt, therefore ye 
shall observe this day and all your children after you, that it be 
a custom for ever. The first month and the fourteenth day of the 
month at even, ye shall eat sweet bread unto the twenty first day 
of the month at even again. Seven days see that there be no 
leavened bread found in your houses. For whosoever eateth leavened 
bread, that soul shall be rooted out from the multitude of Israel: 
whether he be a stranger or born in the land. Therefore see that 
ye eat no leavened bread, but in all your habitations eat sweet 
bread. And Moses called for the elders of Israel and said unto 
them: choose out and take to every household a sheep, and kill 
passover. And take a bunch of hyssop, and dip it in the blood that 
is in the basin, and strike it upon the upper post and on the two 
side posts, and see that none of you go out at the door of his 
house until the morning. For the LORD will go about and smite 
Egypt. And when he seeth the blood upon the upper door post and on 
the two side posts, he will pass over the door and will not suffer 
the destroyer to come into your house to plague you. Therefore see 
that thou observe this thing, that it be an ordinance to thee, and 
thy sons for ever. And when ye be come into the land which the 
LORD will give you according as he hath promised, see that ye keep 
this service. And when your children ask you what manner of 
service is this ye do. Ye shall say: it is the sacrifice of the 
LORD's passover, which passed over the houses of the children of 
Israel in Egypt, as he smote the Egyptians and saved our houses. 
Then the people bowed them selves and worshipped. And the children 
of Israel went and did as the LORD had commanded Moses and Aaron. 
And at midnight the LORD smote all the firstborn in the land of 
Egypt: from the firstborn of Pharao that sat on his seat, unto the 
firstborn of the captive that was in prison, and all firstborn of 
the cattle. Then Pharao arose the same night and all his servants 
and all the Egyptians, and there was a great crying thorowout 
Egypt, for there was no house where there was not one dead. And he 
called unto Moses and Aaron by night saying: Rise up, and get you 
out from among my people: both ye and also the children of Israel, 
and go and serve the LORD as ye have said. And take your sheep and 
your oxen with you as ye have said, and depart and bless me also. 
And the Egyptians were fierce upon the people and made haste to 
send them out of the land: for they said: we be all dead men. And 
the people took the dough before it was soured which they had in 
store, and bound it in cloths, and put it upon their shoulders. 
And the children of Israel did according to the saying of Moses: 
and they borrowed of the Egyptians jewels of silver, and jewels of 
gold, and raiment. And the LORD gat the people favour in the sight 
of the Egyptians: and so they borrowed and robbed the Egyptians. 
Thus took the children of Israel their journey from Rameses to 
Sucoth six hundred thousand men of foot, beside children. And much 
common people went also with them, and sheep, and oxen, and cattle 
exceeding much. And they baked sweet cakes of the dough which they 
brought out of Egypt, for it was not soured: because they were 
thrust out of Egypt and could not tarry, neither had they prepared 
them any other provision of meat. And the time of the dwelling of 
the children of Israel which they dwelt in Egypt, was four hundred 
and thirty years. And when the four hundred and thirty years were 
expired, even the self same day departed all the hosts of the LORD 
out of the land of Egypt. This is a night to be observed to the 
LORD, because he brought them out of the land of Egypt. This is a 
night of the LORD, to be kept of all the children of Israel and of 
their generations after them. And the LORD said unto Moses and 
Aaron: this is the manner of passover: there shall no stranger eat 
thereof, but all the servants that are bought for money shall ye 
circumcise, and then let them eat thereof. A stranger and a hired 
servant shall not eat thereof. In one house shall it be eaten. Ye 
shall carry none of the flesh out at the doors: moreover, see that 
ye break not a bone thereof. All the multitude of the children of 
Israel shall observe it. If a stranger dwell among you, and will 
hold Passover unto the LORD, let him circumcise all that be males, 
and then let him come and observe it, and be taken as one that is 
born in the land. No uncircumcised person shall eat thereof. One 
manner of law shall be unto them that are born in the land, and 
unto the strangers that dwell among you. And all the children of 
Israel did as the LORD commanded Moses and Aaron. And even the 
self same day did the LORD bring the children of Israel out of the 
land of Egypt with their armies.

Chapter .xiij.

And the LORD spake unto Moses saying: Sanctify unto me all the 
firstborn that open all manner matrices among the children of 
Israel, as well of men as of beasts: for they are mine. And Moses 
said unto the people: think on this day in which ye came out of 
Egypt and out of the house of bondage: for with a mighty hand the 
LORD brought you out from thence. See therefore that ye eat no 
leavened bread. This day come ye out of Egypt in the month of 
Abib. When the LORD hath brought thee in to the land of the 
Cananites, Hethites, Amorites, Hevites and Iebusites, which he 
sware unto thy fathers that he would give thee: a land wherein 
milk and honey floweth, then see that thou keep this service in 
this same month. Seven days thou shalt eat sweet bread, and the 
seventh day shall be feastful unto the LORD. Therefore thou shalt 
eat sweet bread seven days, and see that there be no leavened 
bread seen nor yet leaven among you in all your quarters. And thou 
shalt shew thy son at that time saying: this is done, because of 
that which the LORD did unto me when I came out of Egypt. 
Therefore it shall be a sign unto thee upon thine hand and a 
remembrance between thine eyes, that the LORD's law may be in thy 
mouth. For with a strong hand the LORD brought thee out of Egypt, 
see thou keep therefore this ordinance in his season from year to 
year. Moreover when the LORD hath brought thee into the land of 
the Cananites, as he hath sworn unto thee and to thy fathers, and 
hath given it thee, then thou shalt appoint unto the LORD all that 
openeth the matrice, and all the firstborn among the beasts which 
thou hast if they be males. And all the firstborn of the asses, 
thou shalt redeem with a sheep: if thou redeem him not, then break 
his neck. But all the firstborn among thy children shalt thou buy 
out. And when thy son asketh thee in time to come saying: what is 
this? thou shalt say unto him: with a mighty hand and LORD brought 
us out of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. And when Pharao was 
loth to let us go, the LORD slew all the firstborn in the land of 
Egypt: as well the firstborn of men as of beasts. And therefore I 
sacrifice unto the LORD all the males that open the matrice, but 
all the firstborn of my children I must redeem. And this shall be 
as a token in thine hand, and as a thing hanged up between thine 
eyes: because the LORD brought us out of Egypt with a mighty hand. 
When Pharao had let the people go, God carried them not thorow the 
land of the Philistines, though it were a nye way. For God said: 
the people might haply repent when they see war, and so turn again 
to Egypt: therefore God led thee about thorow the wilderness that 
bordereth on the red sea. The children of Israel went harnessed 
out of the land of Egypt. And Moses took the bones of Ioseph with 
him: for he made the children of Israel swear saying: God will 
surely visit you, take my bones therefore away hence with you. And 
they took their journey from Sucoth: and pitched their tents in 
Etham in the edge of the wilderness. And the LORD went before them 
by day in a pillar of a cloud to lead them the way: and by night 
in a pillar of fire to give them light: that they might go both by 
day and night. And the pillar of the cloud never departed by day 
nor the pillar of fire by night out of the people's sight.

Chapter .xiiij.

Then the LORD spake unto Moses saying: bid the children of Israel 
that they turn and pitch their tents before the entering of Hiroth 
between Migdol and the sea toward Baal Zephon: even before that 
shall ye pitch upon the sea. For Pharao will say of the children 
of Israel: they are tangled in the land, the wilderness hath shut 
them in. And I will harden his heart, that he shall follow after 
them, that I may get me honour upon Pharao and upon all his host, 
that the Egyptians may know that I am the LORD. And they did even 
so. And when it was told the king of Egypt that the people fled, 
then Pharao's heart and all his servants turned unto the people 
and said: why have we this done, that we have let Israel go out of 
our service? and he made ready his chariots and took his people 
with him and took six hundred chosen chariots and all the chariots 
of Egypt and captains upon all his people. For the LORD hardened 
the heart of Pharao king of Egypt, that he followed after the 
children of Israel which for all that went out thorow an high 
hand. And the Egyptians followed after them and overtook them 
where they pitched by the sea, with all the horsses and chariots 
of Pharao and with his horsemen and his host: even fast by the 
entering of Hiroth before Baal Zephon. And Pharao drew nye, and 
when the children of Israel lift up their eyes and saw how the 
Egyptians followed after them, they were sore afraid and cried out 
unto the LORD. Then said they unto Moses: were there no graves for 
us in Egypt, but thou must bring us away for to die in the 
wilderness? wherefore hast thou served us thus, for to carry us 
out of Egypt? Did not we tell thee this in Egypt saying, let us be 
in rest and serve the Egyptians? For it had been better for us to 
have served the Egyptians, than for to die in the wilderness. And 
Moses said unto the people: fear ye not but stond still and behold 
how the LORD shall save you this day: For as ye see the Egyptians 
this day, shall ye see them no more for ever till the world's end. 
The LORD shall fight for you and ye shall hold your peace. The 
LORD said unto Moses: wherefore criest thou unto me? speak unto 
the children of Israel that they go forward. But lift thou up thy 
rod and stretch out thy hand over the sea and divide it asunder, 
that the children of Israel may go on dry ground thorow the 
middest thereof. And behold I will harden the hearts of the 
Egyptians that they may follow you. And I will get me honour upon 
Pharao and upon all his host, upon his chariots and upon his 
horsemen. And the Egyptians shall know that I am the LORD when I 
have gotten me honour upon Pharao, upon his chariots and upon his 
horsemen. And the angel of God which went before the host of 
Israel, removed and went behind them. And the clouden pillar that 
was before them removed and stood behind them and went between the 
host of the Egyptians and the host of Israel. It was a dark cloud, 
and gave light by night: so that all the night long the one could 
not come at the other. When now Moses stretched forth his hand 
over the sea, the LORD carried away the sea with a strong east 
wind that blew all night, and made the sea dry land and the water 
divided itself. And the children of Israel went in thorow the 
middest of the sea upon the dry ground. And the water was a wall 
unto them, both on their right hand and on their left hand. And 
the Egyptians followed and went in after them to the middest of 
the sea, with all Pharao's horses, and his chariots and his 
horsemen. And in the morning watch, the LORD looked unto the host 
of the Egyptians out of the fiery and cloudy pillar, and troubled 
their host and smote off their chariot wheels and cast them down 
to the ground. Then said the Egyptians: Let us flee from Israel, 
for the LORD fighteth for them against us. Then said the LORD unto 
Moses: stretch out thine hand over the sea, that the water may 
come again upon the Egyptians upon their chariots and horsemen. 
Then stretched forth Moses his hand over the sea, and it came 
again to his course early in the morning, and the Egyptians fled 
against it. Thus the LORD overthrew the Egyptians in the middest 
of the sea, and the water returned and covered the chariots and 
the horsemen: so that of all the host of Pharao that came into the 
sea after them, there remained not one. But the children of Israel 
went upon dry land in the middest of the sea, and the water was a 
wall unto them: both on the right hand of them and also on the 
left. Thus the LORD delivered Israel the self same day out of the 
hand of the Egyptians, and Israel saw the Egyptians dead upon the 
sea side. And when Israel saw that mighty hand which the LORD had 
shewed upon the Egyptians, they feared the LORD: and believed both 
the LORD and also his servant Moses.

Chapter .xv.

Then Moses and the children of Israel sang this song unto the LORD 
and said: Let us sing unto the LORD, for he is become glorious, 
the horse and him that rode upon him hath he overthrown in the 
sea. The LORD is my strength and my song, and is become my 
salvation. He is my God and I will glorify him, he is my father's 
God and I will lift him up on high. {an hie} The LORD is a man of 
war, Iehouah is his name: Pharao's chariots and his host hath he 
cast into the sea. His jolly captains are drowned in the redde 
{reed} sea, the deep waters have covered them: they sank to the 
bottom as a stone. Thine hand LORD is glorious in power, thine 
hand LORD hath all to dashed the enemy. And with thy great glory 
thou hast destroyed thine adversaries, thou sentest forth thy 
wrath and it consumed them, even as stubble. With the breath of 
thine anger the water gathered together and the floods stood still 
as a rock, and the deep water congealed together in the middest of 
the sea. The enemy said: I will follow and overtake them, and will 
divide the spoil: I will satisfy my lust upon them: I will draw my 
sword, and mine hand shall destroy them. Thou blewest with thy 
breath and the sea covered them, and they sank as lead in the 
mighty waters. Who is like unto thee o LORD among gods: who is 
like thee, so glorious in holiness, fearful, laudable and that 
shewest wonders? Thou stretchedest out thy right hand, and in the 
earth swallowed them. And thou carriedest with thy mercy this 
people which thou deliveredest, and broughtest them with thy 
strength unto thy holy habitation. The nations heard, and were 
afraid, pangs came upon the Philistines. Then the dukes of the 
Edomites were amazed, and trembling came upon the mightiest of the 
Moabites, and all the inhabiters of Canaan waxed faint hearted. 
Let fear and dread fall upon them thorow the greatness of thine 
arm, and let them be as still as a stone, while thy people pass 
thorow o LORD, while the people pass thorow, which thou hast 
gotten. Bring them in and plant them in the mountains of thine 
inheritance, the place LORD {Lorde} which thou hast made for to 
dwell in, the sanctuary Lord, which thy hands have prepared. The 
LORD reign ever and allway. For Pharao went in on horseback with 
his chariots and horsemen into the sea, and the LORD brought the 
waters of the sea upon them. And the children of Israel went on 
dry land thorow the middest of the sea. And Miriam a prophetess 
the sister of Aaron took a timbrel in her hand, and all the women 
came out after her with timbrels in a dance. And Miriam sang 
before them: sing ye unto the LORD, for he is become glorious 
indeed: the horse and his rider hath he overthrown in the sea. 
Moses brought Israel from the redde {reed} sea, and they went out 
into the wilderness of Sur. And they went three days long in the 
wilderness, and could find no water. At the last they came to 
Mara: but they could not drink of the waters for bitterness, for 
they were bitter. Therefore the name of the place was called Mara. 
Then the people murmured against Moses, saying: what shall we 
drink? And Moses cried unto the LORD, and he shewed him a tree: 
{tre} and he cast it into the water, and they waxed sweet. There 
he made them an ordinance and a law, and there he tempted them and 
said: If ye will hearken unto the voice of the LORD your God, and 
will do that which is right in his sight and will give an ear unto 
his commandments, and keep all his ordinances: then will I put 
none of these diseases upon thee which I brought upon the 
Egyptians, for I am the LORD thy surgeon. And they came to Elim 
where were twelve wells of water and seventy date trees, and they 
pitched there by the water.

Chapter .xvi.

And they took their journey from Elim, and all the whole company 
of the children of Israel came to the wilderness of Sin, which 
lieth between Elim and Sinai: the fifteenth day of the second 
month after that they were come out of the land of Egypt. And the 
hole multitude of the children of Israel murmured against Moses 
and Aaron in the wilderness, and said unto them: would to God we 
had died by the hand of the LORD in the land of Egypt, when we sat 
by the flesh pots, and ate bread our bellies' full for ye have 
brought us out into this wilderness to kill this hole multitude 
for hunger. Then said the LORD unto Moses: behold, I will rain 
bread from heaven down to you, and let the people go out, and 
gather day by day, that I may prove them whether they will walk in 
my law or no. The sixth day let them prepare that which they will 
bring in, and let it be twice as much as they gather in daily. And 
Moses and Aaron said unto all the children of Israel: at even ye 
shall know that it is the LORD, which brought you out of the land 
of Egypt, and in the morning ye shall see the glory of the LORD: 
because he hath heard your grudgings against the LORD: for what 
are we that ye should murmur against us? And moreover spake Moses: 
At evening the LORD will give you flesh to eat, and in the morning 
bread enough, because the LORD hath heard your murmur which ye 
murmur against him: for what are we? your murmuring is not against 
us, but against the LORD. And Moses spake unto Aaron: Say unto all 
the company of the children of Israel, come forth before the LORD, 
for he hath heard your grudgings. And as Aaron spake unto the hole 
multitude of the children of Israel, they looked toward the 
wilderness: and behold, the glory of the LORD appeared in a cloud. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses saying: I have heard the murmuring 
of the children of Israel, tell them therefore and say that at 
evening they shall eat flesh, and in the morning they shall be 
filled with bread, and ye shall know that I am the LORD your God. 
And at evening the quails came and covered the ground where they 
lay. And in the morning the dew lay round about the host. And when 
the dew was fallen: behold, it lay upon the ground in the 
wilderness, small and round and thin as the hoar frost on the 
ground. When the children of Israel saw it, they said one to 
another: what is this? for they wist not what it was; And Moses 
said: this is the bread which the LORD hath given you to eat. This 
is the thing which the LORD hath commanded, that ye gather every 
man enough for him to eat: a gomer full for a man according to the 
number of you, and gather every man for them which are in his 
tent. And the children of Israel did even so, and gathered some 
more some less, and did mete it with a gomer. And unto him that 
had gathered much remained nothing over, and unto him that had 
gathered little was there no lack: but every man had gathered 
sufficient for his eating. And Moses said unto them: See that no 
man let ought remain of it till the morning. Notwithstonding they 
hearkened not unto Moses: but some of the left of it until the 
mornynge, and it waxed full of worms and stank, and Moses was 
angry with them. And they gathered it all mornings: every man as 
much as sufficed for his eating, for as soon as the heat of the 
sonne came it melted. And the sixth day they gathered twice so 
much bread, two gomers for one man, and the rulers of the 
multitude came and told Moses. And he said unto them: this is that 
which the LORD hath said: tomorrow is the Sabbath of the holy rest 
of the LORD: bake that which ye will bake and fetch that ye will 
fetch, and that which remaineth lay up for you, and keep it till 
the morning. And they laid it up till the morning as Moses bade, 
and it stank not, neither was there any worms therein. And Moses 
said: that eat this day: for today it is the LORD's Sabbath: today 
ye shall find none in the field. Six days ye shall gather it, for 
the seventh is the Sabbath: there shall be none therein. 
Notwithstanding there went out of the people in the seventh day 
for to gather: but they found none. Then the LORD said unto Moses: 
how long shall it be, yer ye will keep my commandments and laws? 
See because the LORD hath given you a Sabbath, therefore he giveth 
you the sixth day bread for two days. Bide therefore every man at 
home, and let no man go out of his place the seventh day. And the 
people rested the seventh day. And the house of Israel called it 
Man. And it was like unto Coriander seed and white, and the taste 
of it was like unto wafers made with honey. And Moses said: this 
is that which the LORD commandeth: fill a gomer of it, that it may 
be kept for your children after you: that they may see the bread 
wherewith he fed you in wilderness, when he had brought you out of 
the land of Egypt. And Moses spake unto Aaron: take a cruse and 
put a gomer full of Man therein, and lay it up before the LORD to 
be kept for your children after you, as the LORD commanded Moses. 
And Aaron laid it up before the testimony there to be kept. And 
the children of Israel ate man forty years until they came unto a 
land inhabited. And so they ate Man, even until they came unto the 
borders of the land of Canaan, and a gomer is the tenth part of an 
Epha.

Chapter .xvij.

And all the company of the children of Israel went on their 
journeys from the wilderness of Sin at the commandment of the 
LORD, and pitched in Raphidim: where was no water for the people 
to drink. And the people chode with Moses and said: give us water 
to drink. And Moses said unto them: why chide ye with me, and 
wherefore do ye tempt the LORD? There the people thirsted for 
water, and murmured against Moses and said: wherefore hast thou 
brought us out of Egypt, to kill us and our children and our 
cattle with thirst? And Moses cried unto the LORD saying, what 
shall I do unto this people? they be almost ready to stone me. And 
the LORD said unto Moses: go before the people, and take with thee 
of the elders of Israel: and thy rod wherewith thou smotest the 
river, take in thine hand and go. Behold, I will stond there 
before thee upon a rock in Horeb: and thou shalt smite the rock, 
and there shall come water out thereof, that the people may drink. 
And Moses did even so before the elders of Israel. And he called 
the name of the place: Massa and Meriba: because of the chiding of 
the children of Israel, and because they tempted the LORD saying: 
is the LORD among us or not? Then came Amalek and fought with 
Israel in Raphidim. And Moses said unto Iosua: choose out men and 
go fight with Amelech. Tomorrow I will stond on the top of the 
hill and the rod of God in mine hand. And Iosua did as Moses bade 
him, and fought with the Amalekites. And Moses, Aaron and Hur went 
up to the top of the hill. And when Moses held up his hand, Israel 
had the better. And when he let his hand down, Amelech had the 
better. When Moses' hands were weary, they took a stone and put it 
under him, and he sat down there on. And Aaron and Hur stayed up 
his hands, the one on the one side and the other on the other 
side. And his hands were steady until the son was down. And Iosua 
discomfited Amalek and his people with the edge of his sword. And 
the LORD said unto Moses: write this for a remembrance in a book 
and tell it unto Iosua, for I will put out the remembrance of 
Amalek from under heaven. And Moses made an altar and called the 
name of it Iehouah Nissi, {The LORD is he that exalteth, or 
worketh miracles for me.} for he said: the hand is on the seat of 
the LORD, that the LORD will have war with Amalek thorowout all 
generations.

Chapter .xviij.

Iethro the priest of Madian Moses' father-in-law heard of all that 
God had done unto Moses and to Israel his people, how that the 
LORD had brought Israel out of Egypt. And he took Zippora Moses' 
wife, after she was sent back, and her two sons, of which the one 
was called Gerson, for he said: I have been an alien {alient} in a 
strange land. And the other was called Eliesar: for the God of my 
father was mine help and delivered me from the sword of Pharao. 
And Iethro Moses' father-in-law came with his two sons and his 
wife unto Moses into the wilderness: where he had pitched his tent 
by the mount of God. And he sent word to Moses: I thy father-in-
law Iethro am come to thee, and thy wife also, and her two sons 
with her. And Moses went out to meet his father-in-law and did 
obeisance and kissed him, and they saluted each other and came 
into the tent. And Moses told his father-in-law all that the LORD 
had done unto Pharao and to the Egyptians for Israel's sake, and 
all the travail that had happened them by the way, and how the 
LORD had delivered them. And Iethro rejoiced over all the good 
which the LORD had done to Israel, and because he had delivered 
them out of the hand of the Egyptians. And Iethro said: blessed be 
the LORD which hath delivered you out of the hand of the Egyptians 
and out of the hand of Pharao, which hath delivered his people 
from under the power of the Egyptians. Now I know that the LORD is 
greater than all gods, for because that they dealt proudly with 
them. And Iethro Moses' father-in-law offered burnt offerings and 
sacrifices unto God. And Aaron and all the elders of Israel came 
to eat bread with Moses' father-in-law before God. And it chanced 
on the morrow, that Moses sat to judge the people, and the people 
stood about Moses from morning unto evening. When his father-in-
law saw all that he did unto the people, he said: what is this 
that thou doest unto the people? why sittest thou thyself and 
lettest all the people stond about thee from morning unto even? 
And Moses said unto his father-in-law: because the people came 
unto me to seek counsel, {councell} of God. For when they have a 
matter, they come unto me, and I must judge between every man and 
his neighbour, and must shew them the ordinances of God and his 
laws. And his father-in-law said unto him: it is not well that 
thou doest. Thou doest unwisely and also this people that is with 
thee: because the thing is too grievous for thee, and thou art not 
able to do it thy self alone. But hear my voice, and I will give 
thee counsel, {councell} and God shall be with thee. Be thou unto 
the people to Godward, and bring the causes unto God and provide 
them ordinances and laws, and shew them the way wherein they must 
walk and the works that they must do. Moreover seek out among all 
the people, men of activity which fear God, and men that are true 
and hate covetousness: and make them heads over the people, 
captains over thousands, over hundreds, over fifty, and over ten. 
And let them judge the people at all seasons: If there be any 
great matter, let them bring that unto thee, and let them judge 
all small causes them selves, and ease thy self, and let them bear 
with thee. If thou shalt do this thing, then thou shalt be able to 
endure that which God chargeth thee with all, and all this people 
shall go to their places quietly. And Moses heard the voice of his 
father-in-law, and did all that he had said, and chose active men 
out of all Israel and made them heads over the people, captains 
over thousands, over hundreds, over fifty and over ten. And they 
judged the people at all seasons, and brought the hard causes unto 
Moses: and judged all small matters them selves. And then Moses 
let his father-in-law depart, and he went in to his own land.

Chapter .xix.

The third month after the children of Israel were gone out of 
Egypt: the same day they came into the wilderness of Sinai. For 
they were departed from Raphidim, and were come to the desert of 
Sinai and had pitched their tents in the wilderness. And there 
Israel pitched before the mount. And Moses went up unto God. And 
the LORD called to him out of the mountain saying: thus say unto 
the house of Iacob, and tell the children of Israel: Ye have seen 
what I did unto the Egyptians and how I took you up upon Eagles' 
wings, and have brought you unto myself. Now therefore if ye will 
hear my voice and keep mine appointment: ye shall be mine own 
above all nations, for all the earth is mine. Ye shall be unto me 
a kingdom of priests and an holy people: these are the words which 
thou shalt say unto the children of Israel. And Moses came and 
called for the elders of Israel, and laid before them all these 
words which the LORD had commanded him. And the people answered 
all together and said: All that the LORD hath said, we will do. 
And Moses brought the words of the people unto the LORD. And the 
LORD said unto Moses: Lo, I will come unto thee in a thick cloud, 
that the people may hear when I talk with thee, and also believe 
thee for ever. And Moses shewed the words of the people unto the 
LORD. And the LORD said unto Moses: Go unto the people and 
sanctify them today and tomorrow, and let them wash their clothes: 
that they may be ready against the third day. For the third day 
the LORD will come down in the sight of all the people upon mount 
Sinai. And set marks round about the people and say: beware that 
ye go not up into the mount, and that ye twich not the borders of 
it, for whosoever twicheth the mount, shall surely die. There 
shall not an hand twich it, but that he shall either be stoned or 
else shot thorow: whether it be beast or man, it shall not live, 
when the horn bloweth: then let them come up in to the mountain. 
And Moses went down from the mount unto the people and sanctified 
them, and they washed their clothes: And he said unto the people: 
be ready against the third day, and see that ye come not at your 
wives. And the third day in the morning there was thunder, and 
lightning and a thick cloud upon the mount, and the voice of the 
horn waxed exceeding loud, and all the people that was in the host 
was afraid. And Moses brought the people out of the tents to meet 
with God, and they stood under the hill. And mount Sinai was 
altogether on a smoke: because the LORD descended down upon it in 
fire. And the smoke thereof ascended up, as it had been the smoke 
of a kiln, and all the mount was exceeding fearful. And the voice 
of the horn blew and waxed louder, and louder. Moses spake, and 
God answered him and that with a voice. And the LORD came down 
upon mount Sinai, even in the top of the hill, and called Moses up 
into the top of the hill. And Moses went up. And the LORD said 
unto Moses: go down and charge the people that they prease not up 
unto the LORD for to see him, and so many of them perish. And let 
the priests also which come to the LORD's presence, sanctify them 
selves: lest the LORD smite them. Then Moses said unto the LORD: 
the people can not come up in to mount Sinai, for thou chargedest 
us saying: set marks about the hill and sanctify it. And the LORD 
said unto him: away, and get thee down: and come up both thou and 
Aaron with thee. But let not the priests and the people presume 
for to come up unto the LORD: lest he smite them. And Moses went 
down unto the people and told them.

Chapter .xx.

And God spake all these words and said: I am the LORD thy God, 
which have brought thee out of the land of Egypt and out of the 
house of bondage. Thou shalt have none other gods in my sight. 
Thou shalt make thee no graven image, neither any similitude that 
is in heaven above, either in the earth beneath, or in the water 
that is beneath the earth. See that thou neither bow thyself unto 
them neither serve them: for I the LORD thy God, am a jealous God, 
and visit the sin of the fathers upon the children unto the third 
and fourth generation of them that hate me: and yet shew mercy 
unto thousands among them that love me and keep my commandments. 
Thou shalt not take the name of the LORD thy God in vain, for the 
LORD will not hold him guiltless that taketh his name in vain. 
Remember the Sabbath day that thou sanctify it. Six days mayst 
thou labour and do all that thou hast to do: but the seventh day 
is the Sabbath of the LORD thy God, in it thou shalt do no manner 
work: neither thou nor thy son, nor thy daughter, neither thy 
manservant nor thy maidservant, neither thy cattle neither yet the 
stranger that is within thy gates. For in six days the LORD made 
both heaven and earth and the sea and all that in them is and 
rested the seventh day: wherefore the LORD blessed the Sabbath day 
and hallowed it. Honour thy father and thy mother, that thy days 
may be long in the land which the LORD thy God giveth thee. Thou 
shalt not kill. Thou shalt not break wedlock. Thou shalt not 
steal. Thou shalt bear no false witness against thy neighbour. 
Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's house: neither shalt covet 
thy neighbour's wife, his manservant, his maid, his ox, his ass or 
ought that is his. And all the people saw the thunder and the 
lightning and the noise of the horn, and how the mountain smoked. 
And when the people saw it, they removed and stood afar off and 
said unto Moses: talk thou with us and we will hear, but let not 
God talk with us, lest we die. And Moses said unto the people fear 
not, for God is come to prove you, and that his fear may be among 
you that ye sin not. And the people stood afar off, and Moses went 
into the thick cloud where God was. And the LORD said unto Moses: 
thus thou shalt say unto the children of Israel: Ye have seen how 
that I have talked with you from out of heaven. Ye shall not make 
therefore with me gods of silver nor gods of gold: in no wise 
shall ye do it. An altar of earth thou shalt make unto me and 
thereon offer thy burnt offerings and thy peace offerings, and thy 
sheep and thine oxen. And in all places where I shall put the 
remembrance of my name, thither I will come unto thee and bless 
thee. But and if thou wilt make me an altar of stone, see thou 
make it not of hewed stone, for if thou lift up thy tool upon it, 
thou shalt pollute it. Moreover thou shalt not go up with steps 
unto mine altar, that thy nakedness be not shewed thereon.

Chapter .xxj.

These are the laws which thou shalt set before them. If thou buy a 
servant that is an Hebrew, six years he shall serve, and the 
seventh he shall go out free paying nothing. If he came alone, he 
shall go out alone: If he came married, his wife shall go out with 
him. And if his master have given him a wife and she have borne 
him sons or daughters: then the wife and her children shall be her 
master's and he shall go out alone. But and if the servant say I 
love my master and my wife and my children, I will not go out 
free. Then let his master bring him unto the Gods and set him to 
the door or the doorpost, and bore his ear thorow with an nawl, 
and let him be his servant forever. If a man sell his daughter to 
be a servant: she shall not go out as the menservants do. If she 
please not her master, so that he hath given her to no man to 
wife, then shall he let her go free: to sell her unto a strange 
nation shall he have no power, because he despised her. If he have 
promised her unto his son to wife, he shall deal with her as men 
do with their daughters. If he take him another wife, yet her 
food, raiment and duty of marriage shall he not minish. If he do 
not these three unto her, then shall she go out free and pay no 
money. He that smiteth a man that he die, shall be slain for it. 
If a man lay not await but God deliver him into his hand, then I 
will point thee a place whither he shall flee. If a man come 
presumptuously upon his neighbour and slay him with guile, thou 
shalt take him from mine altar that he die. And he that smiteth 
his father or his mother, shall die for it. He that stealeth a man 
and selleth him (if it be proved upon him) shall be slain for it. 
And he that curseth his father or mother, shall be put to death 
for it. If men strive together and one smite another with a stone 
or with his fist, so that he die not, but lieth in bed: if he rise 
again and walk without upon his staff, then shall he that smote 
him go quite: save only he shall bear his charges while he lay in 
bed and pay for his healing. If a man smite his servant or his 
maid with a staff that they die under his hand, it shall be 
avenged. But and if they continue a day or two, it shall not be 
avenged for they are his money. When men strive and smite a woman 
with child so that her fruit depart from her and yet no misfortune 
followeth: then shall he be merced, according as the woman's 
husband will lay to his charge, and he shall pay as the daysmen 
appoint him. But and if any misfortune follow, then shall he pay 
life for life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot 
for foot, burning for burning, wound for wound and stripe for 
stripe. If a man smite his servant or his maid in the eye and put 
it out, he shall let them go free for the eye's sake. Also if he 
smite out his servant's or his maid's tooth, he shall let them go 
out free for the tooth's sake. If an ox gore a man or a woman that 
they die, then the ox shall be stoned, and his flesh shall not be 
eaten: and his master shall go quite. If the ox were wont to run 
at men in time past and it hath been told his master, and he hath 
not kept him, but that he hath killed a man or a woman: then the 
ox shall be stoned and his master shall die also. If he be set to 
a sum of money, then he shall give for the deliverance of his 
life, according to all that is put unto him. And whether he hath 
gored a son or a daughter, he shall be served after the same 
manner. But if it be a servant or a maid that the ox hath gored, 
then he shall give unto their master the sum of thirty sicles, and 
the ox shall be stoned. If a man open a well or dig a pit and 
cover it not, but that an ox or an ass fall therein, the owner of 
the pit shall make it good and give money unto their master, and 
the dead beast shall be his. If one man's ox hurt another's that 
he die: then they shall sell the live ox and divide the money, and 
the dead ox also they shall divide. But and if it be known that 
the ox hath used to push in time's past, then because his master 
hath not kept him, he shall pay ox for ox, and the dead shall be 
his own.

Chapter .xxij.

If a man steal an ox or sheep and kill it or sell it, he shall 
restore five oxen for an ox, and four sheep for a sheep. If a 
thief be found breaking up and be smitten that he die, there shall 
no blood be shed for him: except the sonne be up when he is found, 
then there shall be blood shed for him. A thief shall make 
restitution: If he have not wherewith, he shall be sold for his 
theft. If the theft be found in his hand alive (whether it be ox, 
ass or sheep) he shall restore double. If a man do hurt field or 
vineyard, so that he put in his beast to feed in another man's 
field: of the best of his own field, and of the best of his own 
vineyard, shall he make restitution. If fire break out and catch 
in the thorns, so that the stacks {stoukes} of corn or the 
stonding corn or field be consumed therewith: he that kindled the 
fire shall make restitution. If a man deliver his neighbour money 
or stuff to keep, and it be stolen out of his house: If the thief 
be found, he shall pay double. If the thief be not found, then the 
goodman of the house shall be brought unto the gods and swear, 
whether he have put his hand unto his neighbour's good. And in all 
manner of trespass, whether it be ox, ass, sheep, raiment or any 
manner lost thing which another challengeth to be his, the cause 
of both parties shall come before the gods. And whom the gods 
condemn: the same shall pay double unto his neighbour. If a man 
deliver unto his neighbour to keep, ass, ox, sheep or whatsoever 
beast it be and it die or be hurt or driven away and no man see 
it: then shall an oath of the LORD go between them, whether he 
have put his hand unto his neighbour's good, and the owner of it 
shall take the oath, and the other shall not make it good. If it 
be stolen from him, then he shall make restitution unto the owner: 
If it be torn with wild beasts, then let him bring record of the 
tearing: and he shall not make it good. When a man borroweth ought 
of his neighbour if it be hurt or else die, and if the owner 
thereof be not by, he shall make it good: If the owner thereof be 
by, he shall not make it good, namely if it be an hired thing and 
came for hire. If a man beguile a maid that is not betrothed and 
lie with her, he shall endote her and take her to his wife: If her 
father refuse to give her unto him, he shall pay money according 
to the dowry of virgins. Thou shalt not suffer a witch to live. 
Whosoever lieth with a beast, shall be slain for it. He that 
offereth unto any gods save unto the LORD only, let him die 
without redemption. Vex not a stranger neither oppress him for ye 
were strangers in the land of Egypt. Ye shall trouble no widow nor 
fatherless child: If ye shall trouble them: they shall cry unto 
me, and I will surely hear their cry and then will my wrath wax 
hot and I will kill you with sword, and your wives shall be widows 
and your children fatherless. If thou lend money to any of my 
people that is poor by thee, thou shalt not be as an usurer unto 
him, neither shalt oppress him with usury. If thou take thy 
neighbour's raiment to pledge, see that thou deliver it unto him 
again by that the sonne go down. For that is his coverlet only: 
even the raiment for his skin wherein he sleepeth: or else he will 
cry unto me and I will hear him, for I am merciful. Thou shalt not 
rail upon the gods, neither curse the ruler of thy people. Thy 
fruits (whether they be dry or moist) see thou keep not back. Thy 
firstborn son thou shalt give me: likewise shalt thou do of thine 
oxen and of thy sheep. Seven days it shall be with the dam, and 
the eighth day thou shalt give it me. Ye shall be holy people unto 
me, and therefore shall ye eat no flesh that is torn of beasts in 
the field. But shall cast it to dogs.

Chapter .xxiij.

Thou shalt not accept a vain tale, neither shalt put thine hand 
with the wicked to be an unrighteous witness. Thou shalt not 
follow a multitude to do evil: neither answer in a matter of plea 
that thou wouldest to follow many turn aside from the truth, 
neither shalt thou paint a poor man's cause. When thou meetest 
thine enemy's ox or ass going astray, thou shalt bring them to him 
again. If thou see thine enemy's ass sink under his burthen, thou 
shalt not pass by and let him alone: but shalt help him to lift 
him up again. Thou shalt not hinder the right of the poor that are 
among you in their suit. Keep thee far from a false matter, and 
the Innocent and righteous see thou slay not, for I will not 
justify the wicked. Thou shalt take no gifts, for gifts blind the 
seeing and pervert the words of the righteous. Thou shalt not 
oppress a stranger, for I know the heart of stranger, because ye 
were strangers in Egypt. Six years thou shalt sow thy land and 
gather in the fruits thereof: and the seventh year thou shalt let 
it rest and lie still, that the poor of thy people may eat, and 
what they leave, the beasts of the field shall eat: In like manner 
thou shalt do with thy vineyard and thine olive trees. Six days 
thou shalt do thy work and the seventh day thou shalt keep holy 
day, that thine ox and thine ass may rest and the son of thy maid 
and the stranger may be refreshed. And in all things that I have 
said unto you be circumspect. And make no rehearsal of the names 
of strange gods, neither let any man hear them out of your mouths. 
Three feasts thou shalt hold unto me in a year. Thou shalt keep 
the feast of sweet bread, that thou eat unleavened bread seven 
days long as I commanded thee in the time appointed of the month 
of Abib, for in that month thou camest out of Egypt: and see that 
no man appear before me empty. And the feast of Harvest, when thou 
reapest the first fruits of thy labours which thou hast sown in 
the field. And the feast of ingathering, in the end of the year: 
when thou hast gathered in thy labours out of the field. Three 
times in a year shall all thy men children appear before the Lord 
Iehouah. Thou shalt not offer the blood of my sacrifice with 
leavened bread: neither shall the fat of my feast remain until the 
morning. The first of the firstfruits of thy land thou shalt bring 
into the house of the LORD thy God thou shalt also not seethe a 
kid in his mother's milk. Behold, I send mine angel before thee, 
to keep thee in the way, and to bring thee into the place which I 
have prepared. Beware of him and hear his voice and anger him not: 
for he will not spare your misdeeds, yea and my name is in him. 
But and if thou shalt hearken unto his voice and keep all that I 
shall tell thee, then I will be an enemy unto thine enemies and an 
adversary unto thine adversaries. When mine angel goeth before 
thee and hath brought thee in unto the Amorites, Hethites, 
Pherezites, Cananites, Hevites and Iebusites, and I shall have 
destroyed them, see thou worship not their gods neither serve 
them, neither do after the works of them, but overthrow them and 
break down the places of them. And see that ye serve the LORD your 
God, and he shall bless thy bread and thy water, and I will take 
all sicknesses away from among you. Moreover there shall be no 
woman childless or unfruitful in thy land, and the number of thy 
days I will fulfill. I will send my fear before thee and will kill 
all the people whither thou shalt go. And I will make all thine 
enemies turn their backs unto thee, and I will send hornets before 
thee, and they shall drive out the Hevites, the Cananites and the 
Hethites before thee. I will not cast them out in one year, lest 
the land grow to a wilderness: and the beasts of the field 
multiply upon thee. But a little and a little I will drive them 
out before thee, until thou be increased that thou mayst inherit 
the land. And I will make thy coasts from the red sea unto the sea 
of the Philistines and from the desert unto the river. I will 
deliver the inhabiters of the land into thine hand, and thou shalt 
drive them out before thee. And thou shalt make none appointment 
with them nor with their gods. Neither shall they dwell in thy 
land, lest they make thee sin against me: for if thou serve their 
gods, it will surely be thy decay.

Chapter .xxiiij.

And he said unto Moses: come unto the LORD: both thou and Aaron, 
Nadab and Abihu, and the seventy elders of Israel, and worship 
afar off. And Moses went himself alone unto the LORD, but they 
came not nye, neither came the people up with him. And Moses came 
and told the people all the words of the LORD and all the laws. 
And all the people answered with one voice and said: all the words 
which the LORD hath said, will we do. Then Moses wrote all the 
words of the LORD and rose up early and made an altar under the 
hill, and twelve pillars according to the number of the twelve 
tribes of Israel, and sent young men of the children of Israel to 
sacrifice burnt offerings and to offer peace offerings of oxen 
unto the LORD. And Moses took half of the blood and put it in 
basins, and the other half he sprinkled on the altar. And he took 
the book of the appointment and read it in the audience of the 
people. And they said: All that the LORD hath said, we will do and 
hear. And Moses took the blood and sprinkled it on the people and 
said: behold, this is the blood of the appointment which the LORD 
hath made with you upon all these words. Then went Moses and 
Aaron, Nadab and Abihu and the seventy elders of Israel up, and 
saw the God of Israel, and under his feet as it were a brick work 
of Saphir and as it were the fashion of heaven when is clear, and 
upon the nobles of the children of Israel he set not his hand. And 
when they had seen God they ate and drank. And the LORD said unto 
Moses: come up to me in to the hill and be there, and I will give 
thee tables of stone and a law and commandments, which I have 
written to teach them. Then Moses rose up and his minister Iosua, 
and Moses went up into the hill of God, and said unto the elders: 
tarry ye here until we come again unto you: And behold here is 
Aaron and Hur with you. If any man have any matters to do, let him 
come to them. When Moses was come up into the mount, a cloud 
covered the hill, and the glory of the LORD abode upon mount 
Sinai, and the cloud covered it six days. And the seventh day he 
called unto Moses out of the cloud. And the fashion of the glory 
of the LORD was like consuming fire on the top of the hill in the 
sight of the children of Israel. And Moses went into the mountain. 
And Moses was in the mount forty days and forty nights.

Chapter .xxv.

And the LORD talked with Moses saying: speak unto the children of 
Israel that they give me an heave offering, and of every man that 
giveth it willingly with his heart, ye shall take it. And this is 
the heave offering which ye shall take of them: gold, silver and 
brass: and Iacinth colour, scarlet, purple, byss and goat's hair: 
ram's skins that are red, and the skins of taxus and sethim wood, 
oil for lights, and spices for anointing oil and for sweet cense: 
Onyx stones and set stones for the Ephod and for the breastlap. 
And they shall make me a sanctuary that I may dwell among them. 
And as I have shewed {And i shall shew} thee the fashion of the 
habitation and of all the ornaments thereof, even so see that ye 
make it in all things. And they shall make an ark of sethim wood 
two cubits and an half long, a cubit and an half broad and a cubit 
and an half high. And thou shalt overlay it with pure gold: both 
within and without, and shalt make an high {hye} upon it a crown 
of gold round about. And thou shalt cast four rings of gold for it 
and put them in the four corners thereof, two rings on the one 
side of it and two on the other. And thou shalt make staves of 
sethim wood and cover them with gold, and put the staves in the 
rings along by the sides of the ark, to bear it withal. And the 
staves shall abide in the rings of the ark, and shall not be taken 
away. And thou shalt put in the ark, the witness which I shall 
give thee. And thou shalt make a mercy seat of pure gold two 
cubits and an half long and a cubit and an half broad. And make 
two cherubins of thick gold on the two ends of the mercy seat: and 
set the one cherub on the one end and the other on the other end 
of the mercy seat: so see that thou make them on the two ends 
thereof. And the cherubins shall stretch their wings abroad over 
on high, {an hye} and cover the mercy seat with their wings, and 
their faces shall look one to another: even to the mercy seat 
ward, shall the faces of the cherubins be. And thou shalt put the 
mercy seat above upon the ark, and in the ark thou shalt put the 
witness which I will give thee. There I will meet thee and will 
commune {common} with thee from upon the mercy seat from between 
the two cherubins which are upon the ark of witness, of all things 
which I will give thee in commandment unto the children of Israel. 
Thou shalt also make a table of sethim wood of two cubits long and 
one cubit broad and a cubit and an half high. And cover it with 
pure gold and make thereto a crown of gold round about. And make 
unto that an hoop of four fingers broad, round about. And make a 
golden crown also to the hoop round about. And make for it four 
rings of gold and put them in the corners that are on the four 
feet thereof: even hard under the hoop shall the rings be, to put 
in staves to bear the table withal. And thou shalt make staves of 
sethim wood and overlay them with gold, that the table may be 
borne with them. And thou shalt make his dishes, spoons, pots and 
flatpieces to pour out withal, of fine gold. And thou shalt set 
upon the table, shewbread before me alway. And thou shalt make a 
candlestick of pure thick gold with his shaft, branches, bowls, 
knops and flowers proceeding thereout. Six branches shall proceed 
out of the sides of the candlestick, three out of the one side and 
three out of the other. And there shall be three cups like unto 
almonds with knops and flowers upon every one of the six branches 
that proceed out of the candlestick: and in the candlestick self 
four cups like unto almonds with their knops and flowers: that 
there be a knop under every two branches of the six that proceed 
out of the candlestick. And the knops and the branches shall be 
altogether, one piece of pure thick gold. And thou shalt make 
seven lamps and put them an high {hye} there on, to give light 
unto the other side that is over against it: with snuffers and 
firepans of pure gold. An hundred pound weight of fine gold shall 
make it with all the apparel. And see that thou make them after 
the fashion that was shewed thee in the mount.

Chapter .xxvi.

And thou shalt make an habitation with ten curtains of twined 
byss, Iacinth, scarlet and purple, and shalt make them with 
cherubins of broidered work. The length of a curtain shall be 
twenty eight cubits, and the breadth four and they shall be all of 
one measure: five curtains shall be coupled together one to 
another: and the other five likewise shall be coupled together one 
to another. Then shalt thou make loops of Iacinth colour, along by 
the edge of the one curtain even in the selvedge of the coupling 
curtain. And likewise shalt thou make in the edge of the utmost 
curtain that is coupled therewith on the other side. Fifty loops 
shalt thou make in the one curtain, and fifty in the edge of the 
other that is coupled therewith on the other side: so that the 
loops be one over against another. And thou shalt make fifty 
buttons of gold, and couple the curtain together with the buttons: 
that it may be an habitation. And thou shalt make eleven curtains 
of goat's hair, to be a tent to cover the habitation. The length 
of a curtain shall be thirty cubits, and the breadth four and they 
shall be all eleven of one measure. And thou shalt couple five by 
them selves, and the other six by them selves, and shalt double 
the sixth in the forefront of the tabernacle. And thou shalt make 
fifty loops in the edge of the utmost curtain on the one side: 
even in the coupling curtain, and as many in the edge of the 
coupling curtain on the other side. And thou shalt make fifty 
buttons of brass and put them on the loops, and couple the tent 
together withal: that there may be one tabernacle. {covering} And 
the remnant that resteth in the curtains of the tent: even the 
breadth of half a curtain that resteth, shall be left on the back 
sides of the habitation: a cubit on the one side and a cubit on 
the other side, of that, that remaineth in the length of the 
curtains of the tabernacle, which shall remain of either side of 
the habitation to cover it withal. And thou shalt make another 
covering for the tent of rams' skins dyed red: and yet another 
above all of taxus' skins. And thou shalt make boards for the 
habitation of sethim wood to stond upright: ten cubits long shall 
every board be, and a cubit and an half broad. Two feet shall one 
board have to couple them together withal, and so thou shalt make 
unto all the boards of the habitation. And thou shalt make twenty 
boards for the habitation on the south side, and thou shalt make 
forty sockets of silver and put them under the twenty boards: two 
sockets under every board, for their two feet. In like manner in 
the north side of the habitation there shall be twenty boards and 
forty sockets of silver: two sockets under every board. And for 
the west end of the habitation, shalt thou make six boards, and 
two boards more for the two west corners of the habitation: so 
that these two boards be coupled together beneath and likewise 
above with clamps. And so shall it be in both the corners. And so 
there shall be eight boards in all, and sixteen sockets of silver: 
two sockets under every board. And thou shalt make bars of sethim 
wood five for the boards of the one side of the tabernacle, and 
five for the other side, and five for the boards of the west end. 
And the middle bar shall go along thorow the midst {mydddes} of 
the boards and bar them together from the one end unto the other. 
And thou shalt cover the boards with gold and make golden rings 
for them to put the bars thorow, and shalt cover the bars with 
gold also. And rear up the habitation according to the fashion 
thereof that was shewed thee in the mount. And thou shalt make a 
vail of Iacinth, of scarlet, purple and twined byss, and shalt 
make it of broidered work and full of cherubins. And hang it upon 
four pillars of sethim wood covered with gold and that their knops 
be covered with gold also, and stond upon four sockets of silver. 
And thou shalt hang up the vail with rings, and shall bring in 
within the vail, the ark of witness. And the vail shall divide the 
holy from the most holy. And thou shalt put the mercy seat upon 
the ark of witness in the holiest place. And thou shalt put the 
table without the vail and candlestick over against the table, 
upon the south side of the habitation. And put the table on the 
north side. And thou shalt make an hanging for the door of the 
tabernacle: of Iacinth, of scarlet, of purple and of twined byss, 
wrought with needle work. And thou shalt make for the hanging, 
five pillars of sethim wood, and cover both them and their knops 
with gold, and shalt cast five sockets of brass for them.

Chapter .xxvij.

And thou shalt make an altar of sethim wood: five cubits long and 
five cubits broad, that it be foursquare, and three cubits high. 
And make it horns proceeding out in the four corners of it, and 
cover it with brass. And make his ashpans, shovels, basins, 
fleshhooks, firepans and all the apparel thereof, of brass: after 
the fashion of a net, and put upon the net four rings: even in the 
four corners of it, and put it beneath under the compass of the 
altar, and let the net reach unto the one half of the altar; And 
make staves for the altar of sethim wood, and cover them with 
brass, and let them be put in rings along by the sides of the 
altar, to bear it withal. And make the altar hollow with boards: 
even as it was shewed thee in the mount, so let them make it. And 
thou shalt make a court unto the habitation, which shall have in 
the south side hangings of twined byss, being an hundred cubits 
long, and twenty pillars thereof with their twenty sockets of 
brass: but the knops of the pillars and their hoops shall be 
silver. In like wise on the north side there shall be hangings of 
an hundred cubits long and twenty pillars with their sockets of 
brass, and the knops and the hoops of silver. And in the breadth 
of the court westward, there shall be hangings of fifty cubits 
long, and ten pillars with their ten sockets. And in the breadth 
of the court eastward toward the rising of the son, shall be 
hangings of fifty cubits. Hangings of fifteen cubits in the one 
side of it with three pillars, and three sockets: and likewise on 
the other side shall be hangings of fifteen cubits with three 
pillars and three sockets. And in the gate of the court shall be a 
vail of twenty cubits: of jacinth, scarlet, purple and twined byss 
wrought with needle work, and four pillars with their four 
sockets. All the pillars round about the court shall be hooped 
with silver, and their knops of silver, and their sockets of 
brass. The length of the court, shall be an hundred cubits, and 
the breadth fifty, and the height five, and the hangings shall be 
of twined byss and the sockets of brass. And all the vessels of 
the habitation to all manner service and the pins thereof: yea and 
the pins also of the court, shall be brass. And command the 
children of Israel that they give the pure oil olive beaten for 
the lights to pour alway into the lamps. In the tabernacle of 
witness without the vail which is before the witness, shall Aaron 
and his sons dress it both even and morning before the LORD: And 
it shall be a duty for ever unto your generations after you: to be 
given of the children of Israel.

Chapter .xxviij.

And take thou unto thee, Aaron thy brother and his sons with him, 
from among the children of Israel, that he may minister unto me: 
both Aaron, Nadab, Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar, Aaron's sons. And 
thou shalt make holy raiment for Aaron thy brother, both 
honourable and glorious. Moreover speak unto all that are wise 
hearted, which I have filled with the spirit of wisdom: that they 
make Aaron's raiment to consecrate him with, that he may minister 
unto me. These are the garments which they shall make: a 
breastlap, Ephod, a tunicle, a strait coat, a mitre and a girdle. 
And they shall make holy garments for Aaron thy brother and his 
sons, that he may minister unto me. And they shall take thereto, 
gold, jacinth, scarlet, purple and byss. And they shall make the 
Ephod of gold, jacinth, scarlet, purple and white twined byss with 
broidered work. The two sides shall come together, closed up in 
the edges thereof. And the girdle of the Ephod shall be of the 
same workmanship and of the same stuff: even of gold, jacinth, 
scarlet, purple and twined byss. And thou shalt take two onyx 
stones and grave in them the names of the children of Israel: fix 
in the one stone, and the other fix in the other stone: according 
to the order of their birth. After the work of a stone graver, 
even as signets are graven, shalt thou grave the two stones with 
the names of the children of Israel, and shalt make them to be set 
in ouches of gold. And thou shalt put the two stones upon the two 
shoulders of the Ephod, and they shall be stones of remembrance 
unto the children of Israel. And Aaron shall bear their names 
before the LORD upon his two shoulders for a remembrance. And thou 
shalt make hooks of gold and two chains of fine gold: link work 
and wreathed, and fasten the wreathed chains to the hooks. And 
thou shalt make the breastlap of ensample {judgement} with 
broidered work: even after the work of the Ephod shalt thou make 
it: of gold, jacinth, scarlet, purple and twined byss shalt thou 
make it. Foursquare it shall be and double, an hand breadth long 
and an hand breadth broad. And thou shalt fill it with four rows 
of stones. In the first row shall be a Sardius, a Topas and 
Smaragdus. The second row, a Ruby, Sapphire and Diamond. The 
third: Ligurius, an Achat and Amethyst. The fourth: a Turcois Onyx 
and Iasper. And they shall be set in gold in their enclosures. And 
the stones shall be graven as signets be graven: with the names of 
the children of Israel, even with twelve names every one with his 
name according to the twelve tribes. And thou shalt make upon the 
breastlap two fastening chains of pure gold and wreathen work. And 
thou shalt make likewise upon the breastlap two rings of gold and 
put them on the edges of the breastlap, and put the two wreathen 
chains of gold in the two rings which are in the edges of the 
breastlap. And the two ends of the two chains thou shalt fasten in 
the two rings, and put them upon the shoulders of the Ephod: on 
the foreside of it. And thou shalt yet make two rings of gold, and 
put them in the two edges of the breastlap even in the borders 
thereof toward the inside of the Ephod that is over against it. 
And yet two other rings of gold thou shalt make, and put them on 
the two sides of the Ephod, beneath over against the breastlap, 
alow where the sides are joined together upon the broidered girdle 
of the Ephod. And they shall bind the breastlap by his rings unto 
the rings of the Ephod with a lace of jacinth, that it may lie 
close unto the broidered girdle of the Ephod, that the breastlap 
be not lowsed from the Ephod. And Aaron shall bear the names of 
the children Israel in the breastlap of ensample upon his heart, 
when he goeth into the holy place, for a remembrance before the 
LORD alway. And thou shalt put in the breastlap of ensample light 
and perfectness: that they be even upon Aaron's heart when he 
goeth in before the LORD and Aaron shall bear the example of the 
children of Israel upon his heart before the LORD alway. And thou 
shalt make the tunicle unto the Ephod, altogether of Iacinth. And 
there shall be an hole for the head in the midst of it, and let 
there be a bond of woven work round about the collar of it: as it 
were the collar of a partlet, that it rend not. And beneath upon 
the hem, thou shalt make pomegranates of Iacincth, of scarlet, and 
of purple round about the hem, and bells of gold between them 
round about: that there be ever a golden bell and a pomegranate, a 
golden bell and a pomegranate round about upon the hem of the 
tunicle. And Aaron shall have it upon him when he ministereth, 
that the sound may be heard when he goeth into the holy place 
before the LORD and when he cometh out, that he die not. And thou 
shalt make a plate of pure gold, and grave thereon (as signets are 
graven) The holiness of the LORD, and put it on a lace of Iacincth 
and tie it unto the mitre, upon the forefront of it, that it be 
upon Aaron's forehead: that Aaron bear the sin of the holy things 
which the children of Israel have hallowed in all their holy 
gifts. And it shall be always upon Aaron's forehead, that they may 
be accepted before the LORD. And thou shalt make an alb of byss, 
and thou shalt make a mitre of byss and a girdle of needle work. 
And thou shalt make for Aaron's sons also coats, girdles and 
bonnets honourable and glorious, and thou shalt put them upon 
Aaron thy brother and on his sons with him and shalt anoint them 
and fill their hands and consecrate them, that they may minister 
unto me. And thou shalt make them linen breeches to cover their 
privates: {privities} from the loins unto the thighs shall they 
reach. And they shall be upon Aaron and his sons, when they go 
into the tabernacle of witness, or when they go unto the altar to 
minister in holiness, that they bear no sin and so die. And it 
shall be a law for ever unto Aaron and his seed after him.

Chapter .xxix.

This is the thing that thou shalt do unto them when thou hallowest 
them to be my priests. Take one ox and two rams that are without 
blemish, and unleavened bread and cakes of sweet bread tempered 
with oil and wafers of sweet bread anointed with oil (of wheaten 
flour shalt thou make them) and put them in a maund and bring them 
in the maund with the oil and the two rams. And bring Aaron and 
his sons unto the door of the tabernacle of witness, and wash them 
with water, and take the garments, and put upon Aaron: the strait 
coat, and the tunicle of the Ephod, and the Ephod and the 
breastlap: and girth them to him with the broidered girdle of the 
Ephod. And put the mitre upon his head and put the holy crown upon 
the mitre. Then take the anointing oil and pour it upon his head 
and anoint him. And bring his sons and put albes upon them, and 
girth them with girdles: as well Aaron as his sons. And put the 
bonnets on them that the priest's office may be theirs for a 
perpetual law. And fill the hands of Aaron and of his sons, and 
bring the ox before the tabernacle of witness. And let Aaron and 
his sons put their hands upon his head and kill him before the 
LORD in the door of the tabernacle of witness. And take of the 
blood of the ox and put it upon the horns of the altar with thy 
finger and pour all the blood upon the bottom of the altar, and 
take all the fat that covereth the inwards, and the caul that is 
on the liver, and the two kidneys with the fat that is upon them: 
and burn them upon the altar. But the flesh of the ox and his skin 
and his dung, shalt thou burn with fire, without the host. For it 
is a sin offering. Then take one of the rams, and let Aaron and 
his sons put their hands upon the head of the ram, and cause him 
to be slain, and take of his blood, and sprinkle it round about 
upon the altar, and cut the ram in pieces and wash the inwards of 
him and his legs, and put them unto the pieces and unto his head, 
and burn the whole ram upon the altar. For it is a burnt offering 
unto the LORD, and a sweet savour of the LORD's sacrifice. And 
take the other ram and let Aaron and his sons, put their hands 
upon his head and let him then be killed. And take of his blood 
and put it upon the tip of the right ear of Aaron and of his sons, 
and upon the thumb of their right hands, and upon the great toe of 
their right feet and sprinkle the blood upon the altar round 
about. Then take of the blood that is upon the altar and of the 
anointing oil, and sprinkle it upon Aaron and his vestments, and 
upon his sons and upon their garments also. Then is he and his 
clothes holy and his sons and their clothes holy also. Then take 
the fat of the ram and his rump and the fat that covereth the 
inwards and the caul of the liver and, the two kidneys, and the 
fat that is upon them and the right shoulder (for that ram is a 
full offering) and a simnel of bread and a cake of oiled bread and 
a wafer out of the basket of sweet bread that is before the LORD, 
and put all upon the hands of Aaron and on the hands of his sons: 
and wave them in and out a wave offering unto the LORD. Then take 
it from off their hands and burn it upon the altar: even upon the 
burnt offering, to be a savour of sweetness before the LORD. For 
it is a sacrifice unto the LORD. Then take the breast of the ram 
that is Aaron's full offering and wave it a wave offering before 
the LORD, and let that be thy part. And sanctify the breast of the 
wave offering and the shoulder of the heave offering which is 
waved and heaved up of the ram which is the full offering of Aaron 
and of his sons. And it shall be Aaron's and his sons' duty for 
ever, of the children of Israel, for it is an heave offering. And 
the heave offering shall be the LORD's duty of the children of 
Israel: even of the sacrifice of their peace offerings which they 
heave unto the LORD. And the holy garments of Aaron shall be his 
sons' after him, to anoint them therein, and to fill their hands 
therein. And that son that is priest in his stead after him, shall 
put them on seven days: that he go into the tabernacle of witness, 
to minister in the holy place. Then take the ram that is the full 
offering and seethe his flesh in an holy place. And Aaron and his 
sons shall eat the flesh of him, and the bread that is in the 
basket: even in the door of the tabernacle of witness. And they 
shall eat them, because the atonement was made therewith to fill 
their hands and to sanctify them: but a stranger shall not eat 
thereof, because they are holy. If ought of the flesh of the full 
offerings, or of the bread remain unto the morning, thou shalt 
burn it with fire: for it shall not be eaten, because it is holy. 
And see thou do unto Aaron and his sons, even so in all things as 
I have commanded thee: that thou fill their hands seven days and 
offer every day an ox for a sin offering for to reconcile with 
all. And thou shalt hallow the altar when thou reconcilest it, and 
shalt anoint it to sanctify it. Seven days thou shalt reconcile 
the altar and sanctify it, that it may be an altar most holy: so 
that no man may twich it but they that be consecrate. This is that 
which thou shalt offer upon the altar: two lambs of one year old 
day by day for ever, the one thou shalt offer in the morning and 
the other at even. And unto the one lamb take a tenth deal of 
flour mingled with the fourth part of an hin of beaten oil, and 
the fourth part of an hin of wine, for a drink offering. And the 
other lamb thou shalt offer at even and shalt do thereto according 
to the meat offering and drink offering in the morning, to be an 
odour of a sweet savour of the sacrifice of the LORD. And it shall 
be a continual burnt offering among your children after you, in 
the door of the tabernacle of witness before the LORD, where I 
will meet you to speak unto you there. There I will meet with the 
children of Israel, and will be sanctified in mine honour. And I 
will sanctify the tabernacle of witness and the altar: and I will 
sanctify also both Aaron and his sons to be my priests. And 
moreover I will dwell among the children of Israel and will be 
their God. And they shall know that I am the LORD their God that 
brought them out of the land of Egypt for to dwell among them: 
even I the LORD their God.

Chapter .xxx.

And thou shalt make an altar to burn cense therein, of sethim 
wood: a cubit long, and a cubit broad, even foursquare shall it be 
and two cubits, high: with horns proceeding out of it, and thou 
shalt overlay it with fine gold both the roof and the walls round 
about, and his horns also, and shalt make unto it a crown of gold 
round about, and two golden rings on either side, even under the 
crown, to put staves therein for to bear it withal. And thou shalt 
make the staves of sethim wood and cover them with gold. And thou 
shalt put it before the vail that hangeth before the ark of 
witness, and before the mercy seat that is before the witness, 
where I will meet thee. And Aaron shall burn thereon sweet cense 
every morning when he dresseth the lamps: and likewise at even 
when he setteth up the lamps he shall burn cense perpetually 
before the LORD thorowout your generations. Ye shall put no 
strange cense thereon, neither burnt sacrifice nor meat offering, 
neither pour any drink offering thereon. And Aaron shall reconcile 
his horns once in a year, with the blood of the sin offering of 
reconciling: even once in the year shall he reconcile it thorow 
your generations. And so is it most holy unto the LORD. And the 
LORD spake unto Moses saying: when thou takest the sum of the 
children of Israel and tellest them, they shall give every man a 
reconciling of his soul unto the LORD, that there be no plague 
among them when thou tellest them. And thus much shall every man 
give that goeth in the number: half a sicle, after the holy sicle: 
a sicle is twenty geras: and an half sicle shall be the heave 
offering unto the LORD. And all that are numbered of them that are 
twenty years old and above shall give an heave offering unto the 
LORD. The rich shall not pass, and the poor shall not go under 
half a sicle, when they give an heave offering unto the LORD for 
the atonement of their souls. And thou shalt take the reconciling 
money of the children of Israel and shalt put it unto the use of 
the tabernacle of witness, and it shall be a memorial of the 
children of Israel before the LORD, to make atonement for their 
souls. And the LORD spake unto Moses saying: thou shalt make a 
laver of brass and his foot also of brass to wash withal, and 
shalt put it between the tabernacle of witness and the altar and 
put water therein: that Aaron and his sons may wash both their 
hands and their feet thereout, when they go into the tabernacle of 
witness, or when they go unto the altar to minister and to burn 
the LORD's offering, lest they die. And it shall be an ordinance 
for ever unto him and his seed among your children after you. And 
the LORD spake unto Moses saying: take principal spices: of pure 
myrrh five hundred sicles, of sweet cinnamon half so much, two 
hundred and fifty sicles: of sweet calamite, two hundred and 
fifty. Of cassia, two hundred and fifty after the holy sicle, and 
of oil olive an hin. And make of them holy anointing oil even an 
oil compound after the craft of the apothecary. And anoint the 
tabernacle of witness therewith, and the ark of witness, and the 
table with all his apparel, and the candlestick with all his 
ordinance, and the altar of incense, and the altar of burnt 
sacrifice and all his vessels, and the laver and his foot. And 
sacrify them that they may be most holy: so that no man twich them 
but they that be hallowed. And anoint Aaron and his sons and 
consecrate them to minister unto me. And thou shalt speak unto the 
children of Israel saying: this shall be an holy anointing oil 
unto me, thorowout your generations. No man's flesh shall be 
anointed therewith: neither shall ye make any other after the 
making of it for it is holy, see therefore that ye take it for 
holy: Whosoever maketh like that, or whosoever putteth any of it 
upon a stranger, shall perish from among his people. And the LORD 
said unto Moses: take unto thee sweet spices: stacte, onycha, 
sweet galbanum and pure frankincense, of each like much: and make 
cense of them compounded after the craft of the apothecary, 
mingled together, that it may be made pure and holy. And beat it 
to powder and put it before the witness in the tabernacle of 
witness, where I will meet thee, but let it be unto you holy. And 
see that ye make none after the making of that, but let it be unto 
you holy for the LORD. And whosoever shall make like unto that, to 
smell thereto, shall perish from among his people.

Chapter .xxxj.

And the LORD spake unto Moses saying: behold, I have called by 
name, Bezaleel the son of Uri son to Hur of the tribe of Iuda. And 
I have filled him with the spirit of God, with wisdom, 
understanding and knowledge: even in all manner work, to find out 
subtle feats, to work in gold, silver and brass and with the craft 
to grave stones, to set and to carve in timber, and to work in all 
manner workmanship. And behold, I have given him to be his 
companion Ahaliab the son of Ahisamach of the tribe of Dan, and in 
the hearts of all that are wise hearted I have put wisdom to make 
all that I have commanded thee: the tabernacle of witness, and the 
ark of witness, and the mercyseat that is there upon, all the 
ornaments of the tabernacle, and the table with his ordinance, and 
the pure candlestick with all his apparel, and the altar of 
incense, and the altar of burnt offerings with all his vessels, 
and the laver with his foot, and the vestments to minister in, and 
the holy garments for Aaron the priest, and the garments of his 
sons to minister in, and the anointing oil and the sweet cense for 
the sanctuary: according to all as I have commanded thee shall 
they do. And the LORD spake unto Moses saying: speak unto the 
children of Israel and say: in any wise see that ye keep my 
Sabbath, for it shall be a sign between me and you in your 
generations for to know, that I the LORD do sanctify you. Keep my 
Sabbath therefore, that it be an holy thing unto you. He that 
defileth it, shall be slain therefore. For whosoever worketh 
therein, the same soul shall be rooted out from among his people. 
Six days shall men work, but the seventh day is the Sabbath of the 
holy rest of the LORD: so that whosoever doeth any work in the 
Sabbath day, shall die for it. Wherefore let the children of 
Israel keep the Sabbath, that they observe it thorowout their 
generations, that it be an appointment for ever. For it shall be a 
sign between me, and the children of Israel for ever. For in six 
days the LORD made heaven and earth, and the seventh day he rested 
and was refreshed. And when he {|the LORDe|} had made an end of 
communing with Moses upon the mount Sinai, he gave him two tables 
of witness: which were of stone and written with the finger of 
God.

Chapter .xxxij.

And when the people saw that it was long or Moses came down out of 
the mountain, they gathered them selves together and came unto 
Aaron and said unto him: Up and make us a god to go before us: for 
of this Moses the fellow that brought us out of the land of Egypt, 
we wote not what is become. And Aaron said unto them: pluck off 
the golden earings which are in the ears of your wives, your sons 
and of your daughters: and bring them unto me. And all the people 
plucked off the golden earings that were in their ears, and 
brought them unto Aaron. And he received them of their hands and 
fashioned it with a graver and made it a calf of molten metal. And 
they said: This is thy God, O Israel, which brought thee out of 
the land of Egypt. And when Aaron saw that, he made an altar 
before it, and made a proclamation saying tomorrow shall be holy 
day unto the LORD. And they rose up in the morning and offered 
burnt offerings, and brought offerings of atonement also. And then 
they sat them down to eat and drink, and rose up again to play. 
Then the LORD said unto Moses: go get thee down, for thy people 
which thou broughtest out of the land of Egypt, have marred all 
they are turned at once out of the way which I commanded them, and 
have made them a calf of molten metal, and have worshipped it and 
have offered thereto and have said: This is thy God thou Israel, 
which hath brought thee out of the land of Egypt. And the LORD 
said unto Moses: behold, I see this people, that it is a 
stiffnecked people, and now therefore suffer me that my wrath may 
wax hot upon them, and that I may consume them: and then will I 
make of thee a mighty people. Then Moses besought the LORD his God 
and said: O LORD, why should thy wrath wax hot upon thy people 
which thou hast brought out of the land of Egypt with great power 
and with a mighty hand? wherefore should the Egyptians speak and 
say: For a mischief did he bring them out: even for to slay them 
in the mountains, and to consume them from the face of the earth. 
Turn from thy fierce wrath, and have compassion over the 
wickedness of thy people. Remember Abraham, Isaac and Israel thy 
servants, to whom thou sworest by thine own self and saidest unto 
them: I will multiply your seed as the stars of heaven, and all 
this land which I have said, I will give unto your seed: and they 
shall inherit it for ever. And the LORD refrained himself from 
that evil, which he said he would do unto his people. And Moses 
turned his back and went down from the hill, and the two tables of 
witness in his hand: which were written on both the leaves and 
were the work of God, and the writing was the writing of God 
graven upon the tables. And when Iosua heard the noise of the 
people as they shouted, he said unto Moses: there is a noise of 
war in the host. And he said: it is not the cry of them that have 
the mastery, nor of them that have the worse: but I do hear the 
noise of singing. And as soon as he came nye unto the host and saw 
the calf and the dancing, his wrath waxed hot, and he cast the 
tables out of his hand, and brake them even at the hill foot. And 
the took the calf which they had made and burned it with fire, and 
stamped it unto powder and strowed it in the water, and made the 
children of Israel drink. And then Moses said unto Aaron: what did 
this people unto thee that thou hast brought so great a sin upon 
them? And Aaron said: let not the wrath of my lord wax fierce, 
thou knowest the people that they are even set on mischief: they 
said unto me: make us a god to go before us, for we wote not what 
is become of Moses the fellow that brought us out of the land of 
Egypt. And I said unto them: let them that have gold, take and 
bring it me: and I cast it into the fire, and thereof came out 
this calf. When Moses saw that the people were naked (for Aaron 
had made them naked unto their shame when they made insurrection) 
he went and stood in the gate of the host and said: If any man 
pertain unto the LORD, let him come to me. And all the sons of 
Levi gathered them selves together and came unto him. And he said 
unto them, thus sayeth the LORD of Israel: put every man his sword 
by his side, and go in and out from gate to gate thorowout the 
host: and slay every man his brother, every man his friend and 
every man his neighbour. And the children of Levi did as Moses had 
said. And there were slain of the people the same day, about three 
thousand men. Then Moses said: fill your hands unto the LORD this 
day, every man upon his son and upon his brother: to bring upon 
you a blessing this day. And on the morrow, Moses said unto the 
people: Ye have sinned a great sin. But now I will go up unto the 
LORD, to wit whether I can make an atonement for your sin. And 
Moses went again unto the LORD and said: Oh, this people have 
sinned a great sin and have made them a god of gold: Yet forgive 
them their sin I pray thee: If not wipe me out of thy book which 
thou hast written. And the LORD said unto Moses: I will put him 
out of my book that hath sinned against me. But go and bring the 
people unto the land which I said unto thee: behold, mine angel 
shall go before thee. Neverthelater in the day when I visit, I 
will visit their sin upon them. And the LORD plagued the people, 
because they made the calf which Aaron made.

Chapter .xxxiij.

And the LORD said unto Moses: depart and go hence: both thou and 
the people which thou hast brought out of the land of Egypt, unto 
the land which I swore unto Abraham, Isaac and Iacob, saying: unto 
thy seed I will give it. And I will send an angel before thee, and 
will cast out the Cananites, the Amorites, the Hethites, the 
Pherezites, the Hevites, and the Iebusites: that thou mayst go in 
to a land that floweth with milk and honey. But I will not go 
among you myself, for ye are a stiffnecked people: lest I consume 
you by the way. And when the people heard this evil tidings, they 
sorrowed: and no man did put on his best raiment. And the LORD 
spake unto Moses, say unto the children of Israel: ye are a 
stiffnecked people: I must come once suddenly upon you, and make 
an end of you. But now put your goodly raiment from you, that I 
may wete what to do unto you. And the children of Israel laid 
their goodly raiment from them even under the mount Horeb. And 
Moses took the tabernacle and pitched it without the host, afar 
off from the host, and called it the tabernacle of witness. And 
all that would ask any question of the LORD, went out unto the 
tabernacle of witness which was without the host. And when Moses 
went out unto the tabernacle, all the people rose up and stood 
every man in his tent door and looked after Moses, until he was 
gone in to the tabernacle. And as soon as Moses was entered into 
the tabernacle, the clouden pillar descended and stood in the door 
of the tabernacle, and he talked with Moses. And when all the 
people saw the clouden pillar stond in the tabernacle door, they 
rose up and worshipped: every man in his tent door. And the LORD 
spake unto Moses face to face, as a man speaketh unto his friend. 
And when Moses turned again in to the host, the lad Iosua his 
servant the son of Nun departed not out of the tabernacle. And 
Moses said unto the LORD: see, thou saidest unto me: lead this 
people forth, but thou shewest me not whom thou wilt send with me. 
And hast said moreover: I know thee by name and thou hast also 
found grace in my sight: Now therefore, if I have found favour in 
thy sight, then shew me thy way and let me know thee: that I may 
find grace in thy sight. And look on this also, how that this 
nation is thy people. And he said: my presence shall go with thee, 
and I will give thee rest. And he said: If thy presence go not 
with me, carry us not hence, for how shall it be known now that 
both I and thy people have found favour in thy sight, but in that 
thou goest with us: that both I and thy people have a preeminence 
before all the people that are upon the face of the earth. And the 
LORD said unto Moses: I will do this also that thou hast said, for 
thou hast found grace in my sight, and I know thee by name. And he 
said: I beseech thee, shew me thy glory: And he said: I will make 
all my good go before thee, and I will be called in this name 
Iehouah before thee, and will shew mercy to whom I shew mercy, and 
will have compassion on whom I have compassion. And he said 
furthermore: thou mayst not see my face, for there shall no man 
see me and live. And the LORD said: behold, there is a place by 
me, and thou shalt stond upon a rock, and while my glory goeth 
forth I will put thee in a clift of the rock, and will put mine 
hand upon thee while I pass by. And then I will take away mine 
hand, and thou shalt see my back parts: but my face shall not be 
seen.

Chapter .xxxiiij.

And the LORD said unto Moses: hew the two tables of stone like 
unto the first that I may write in them the words which were in 
the first two tables, which thou brakest. And be ready against the 
morning that thou mayst come up early unto the mount of Sinai and 
stond {stode} me there upon the top of the mount. But let no man 
come up with thee, neither let any man be seen thorowout all the 
mount, neither let sheep nor oxen feed before the hill. And Moses 
hewed two tables of stone like unto the first and rose up early in 
the morning and went up unto the mount of Sinai as the LORD 
commanded him: and took in his hand the two tables of stone. And 
the LORD descended in the cloud, and stood with him there: and he 
called upon the name of the LORD. And when the LORD walked before 
him, he cried: LORD LORD God full of compassion and mercy, which 
art not lightly angry but abundant in mercy and truth, and keepest 
mercy in store for thousands, and forgivest wickedness, trespass 
and sin (for there is no man innocent before thee) and visitest 
the wickedness of the fathers upon the children and upon 
children's children, even unto the third and fourth generation. 
And Moses bowed himself to the earth quickly, and worshipped and 
said: If I have found grace in thy sight o Lord, then let my Lord 
go with us (for it is a stubborn people) and have mercy upon our 
wickedness and our sin, and let us be thine enheritance. And he 
said: behold, I make an appointment before all this people, that I 
will do marvels: such as have not been done in all the world, 
neither among any nation. And all the people among which thou art, 
shall see the work of the LORD: for it is a terrible thing that I 
will do with thee: keep all that I command thee this day, and 
behold: I will cast out before thee: the Amorites, Cananites, 
Hethites, Pherezites, Hevites and Iebusites. Take heed to thyself, 
that thou make no compact with the inhabiters of the land whither 
thou goest lest it be cause of ruin among you. But overthrow their 
altars and break their pillars, and cut down their groves, for 
thou shalt worship no strange god. For the LORD is called jealous, 
because he is a jealous God: lest if thou make any agreement with 
the inhabiters of the land, when they go a whoring after their 
gods and do sacrifice unto their gods, they call thee and thou eat 
of their sacrifice: And thou take of their daughters unto thy 
sons, and when their daughters go a whoring after their gods, they 
make thy sons go a whoring after their gods also. Thou shalt make 
thee no gods of metal. The feast of sweet bread shalt thou keep, 
and seven days thou shalt eat unleavened bread (as I commanded 
thee) in the time appointed in the month of Abib: for in the month 
of Abib thou camest out of Egypt. All that breaketh up the matrice 
shall be mine, and all that breaketh the matrice among thy cattle, 
if it be male: whether it be ox or sheep. But the first of the ass 
thou shalt buy out with a sheep, or if thou redeem him not: see 
thou break his neck. All the firstborn of thy sons thou must needs 
redeem. And see that no man appear before me empty. Six days thou 
shalt work, and the seventh thou shalt rest: both from earing and 
reaping. Thou shalt observe the feast of weeks with the first 
fruits of wheat harvest, and the feast of ingathering at the 
year's end. Thrice in a year shall all your men children appear 
before the Lord Iehouah God of Israel: for I will cast out the 
nations before thee and will enlarge thy coasts, so that no man 
shall desire thy land, while thou goest up to appear before the 
face of the LORD thy God, thrice in the year. Thou shalt not offer 
the blood of my sacrifice with leavened bread: neither shall ought 
of the sacrifice of the feast of Passover, be left unto the 
morning. The first of the first fruits of thy land, thou shalt 
bring unto the house of the LORD thy God. And see, that thou 
seethe not a kid in his mother's milk. And the LORD said unto 
Moses: write these words, for upon these words I have made a 
covenant with thee and with the children of Israel. And he was 
there with the LORD forty days and forty nights, and neither ate 
bread nor drank water. And he wrote in the tables the words of the 
covenant: even ten verses. And Moses came down from mount Sinai 
and the two tables of witness in his hand, and yet he wist not 
that the skin of his face shone with beams of his communing with 
him. And when Aaron and all the children of Israel looked upon 
Moses and saw that the skin of his face shone with beams, they 
were afraid to come nye him. But he called them to him, and then 
Aaron and all the chief of the company came unto him, and Moses 
talked with them. And at the last all the children of Israel came 
unto him, and he commanded them all that the LORD had said unto 
him in mount Sinai. And as soon as he had made an end of communing 
with them, he put a covering upon his face. But when he went 
before the LORD to speak with him, he took the covering off until 
he came out. And he came out and spake unto the children of Israel 
that which he was commanded. And the children of Israel saw the 
face of Moses, that the skin of his face shone with beams: but 
Moses put a covering upon his face, until he went in, to commune 
with him.

Chapter .xxxv.

And Moses gathered all the company of the children of Israel 
together, and said unto them: these are the things which the LORD 
hath commanded to do: Six days ye shall work, but the seventh day 
shall be unto you the holy Sabbath of the LORD's rest: so that 
whosoever doth any work therein, shall die. Moreover ye shall 
kindle no fire thorowout all your habitations upon the Sabbath 
day. And Moses spake unto all the multitude of the children of 
Israel saying: this is the thing which the LORD commanded saying: 
Give from among you an heave offering, unto the LORD. All that are 
willing in their hearts, shall bring heave offerings unto the 
LORD: gold, silver, brass: Iacinth, scarlet, purple, byss and 
goats' hair: rams' skins red and taxus' skins and Sethim wood: and 
oil for lights and spices for the anointing oil and for the sweet 
cense: and Onyx stones and stones to be set for the Ephod and for 
the breastlap. And let all them that are wise hearted among you, 
come and make all that the LORD hath commanded: the habitation and 
the tent thereof with his covering and his rings, boards, bars, 
pillars and sockets: the ark and the staves thereof with the mercy 
seat and the vail that covereth it: the table and his staves with 
all that pertaineth thereto and the shewbread: the candlestick of 
light with his apparel and his lamps and the oil for the lights: 
the cense altar and his staves, the anointing oil and the sweet 
cense and the hanging before the tabernacle door: the altar of 
burnt sacrifices and his brazen gridiron that longeth thereto with 
his staves and all his ordinance and the laver and his foot: the 
hangings of the court with his pillars and their sockets, and the 
hanging to the door of the court: the pins of the habitation and 
the pins of the court with their boards: the ministering garments 
to minister with in holiness, and the holy vestments of Aaron the 
priest and the vestments of his sons to minister in. And all the 
company of the children of Israel departed from the presence of 
Moses. And they went (as many as their hearts couraged them and as 
many as their spirits made them willing) and brought heave 
offerings unto the LORD, to the making of the tabernacle of 
witness and for all his uses and for the holy vestments. And the 
men came with the women (even as many as were willing hearted) and 
brought bracelets, earings, rings and girdles and all manner 
Iewels of gold. And all the men that waved wave offerings of gold 
unto the LORD and every man with whom was found Iacinth, scarlet, 
purple, byss or goats' hair or red skins of rams' or taxus' skins, 
brought it. And all that hove up gold or brass, brought an heave 
offering unto the LORD. And all men with whom was found sethim 
wood meet for any manner work or service, brought it. And all the 
women that were wise hearted to work with their hands, span, and 
brought the spun work, both of Iacinth, scarlet, purple and byss. 
And all the women that excelled in wisdom of heart, span the 
goats' hair. And the lords brought Onyx stones and setstones for 
the Ephod, and for the breastlap, and spice and oil: both for the 
lights and for the anointing oil and for the sweet cense. And the 
children of Israel brought willing offerings unto the LORD, both 
men and women: as many as their hearts made them willing to bring, 
for all manner works which the LORD had commanded to make by the 
hand of Moses. And Moses said unto the children of Israel: behold, 
the LORD hath called by name Bezaleel the son of Uri the son of 
Hur of the tribe of Iuda, and hath filled him with the spirit of 
God, with wisdom, understanding and knowledge, even in all manner 
work, and to find out curious works, to work in gold, silver and 
brass: and with graving of stones to set, and with carving in 
wood, and to work in all manner of subtle works. And he hath put 
in his heart the grace to teach: both him and Ahaliab the son of 
Ahisamach of the tribe of Dan hath he filled with wisdom of heart, 
to work all manner of graven work: they are also broiderers and 
workers with needle, in Iacinth, scarlet, purple and byss, and are 
weavers that can make all manner work, and can devise subtle 
works.

Chapter .xxxvi.

And Bezaleel wrought and Ahaliab and all wise hearted men to whom 
the LORD had given wisdom and understanding, to know how to work 
all manner work for the holy service, in all that the LORD 
commanded. And Moses called for Bezaleel, Ahaliab and all the wise 
hearted men in whose hearts the LORD had put wisdom, even as many 
as their hearts couraged to come unto the work to work it. And 
they received of Moses all the heave offerings which the children 
of Israel had brought for the work of the holy service to make it 
withal. And they brought beside that, willing offerings every 
morning. And all the wise men that wrought all the holy work, came 
every man from his work which they made, and spake unto Moses 
saying: the people bring too much and above that is enough to 
serve for the work which the LORD hath commanded to make. And then 
Moses gave a commandment, and they caused it to be proclaimed 
thorowout the host saying: see that neither man nor woman prepare 
any more work for the holy heave offering, and so the people were 
forbidden to bring: for the stuff they had, was sufficient for 
them unto all the work, to make it and too much. And all the wise 
hearted men among them that wrought in the work of the habitation 
made: even ten curtains of twined byss, Iacinth, scarlet and 
purple, and made them full of Cherubins with broidered work. The 
length of one curtain was twenty eight cubits and the breadth four 
and were all of one size. And they coupled five curtains by them 
selves, and other five by them selves. And they made fifty loops 
of Iacinth along by the edge of the utmost curtain, even in the 
selvedge of the coupling curtain: and likewise they made on the 
side of the utmost coupling curtain on, the other side, fifty 
loops they made in the one curtain, and fifty in the edge of the 
coupling curtain on the other side: so that the loops were one 
over against another. And they made fifty rings of gold, and 
coupled the curtains one to another with the rings: and so was it 
made a dwelling place. And they made eleven curtains of goats' 
hair to be a tent over the tabernacle thirty cubits long apiece 
and four cubits broad, and they all eleven of one sise, and they 
coupled five by them selves, and six by them selves, and they made 
fifty loops along by the border of the utmost coupling courtain on 
the one side, and fifty in the edge of the coupling curtain on the 
other side. And they made fifty rings of brass to couple the tent 
together that it might be one. And they made a covering unto the 
tent of rams' skins red, and yet another of taxus' skins above 
all. And they made boards for the dwelling place of sethim wood 
that stood upright, every board ten cubits long and a cubit and an 
half broad. And they made two feet to every board of the dwelling 
place joining one to another. And they made twenty boards for the 
south side of the habitation, and forty sockets of silver under 
the twenty boards, two sockets under every board, even for the two 
feet of them. And for the other side of the dwelling toward the 
north, they made other twenty boards with forty sockets of silver 
two sockets under every board. And behind in the end of the 
tabernacle toward the west, they made six boards and two other 
boards for the corners of the habitation behind, and they were 
joined close both beneath and also above with clamps, and thus 
they did to both the corners: so they were in all eight boards and 
sixteen sockets, under every board two sockets. And they made bars 
of Sethim wood five for the boards of the one side of the 
habitation and five for the other, and five for the boards of the 
west end of the habitation. And they made the middle bar to shoot 
thorow the boards: even from the one end to the other, and 
overlaid the boards with gold, and made them rings of gold to 
thrust the bars thorow, and covered the bars with gold. And they 
made an hanging of Iacinth, of scarlet, purple and twined byss 
with Cherubins of broidered work. And made thereunto four pillars 
of Sethim wood and overlaid them with gold. Their knops were also 
of gold, and they cast for them four sockets of silver. And they 
made an hanging for the tabernacle door: of Iacinth, scarlet, 
purple and twined byss of needle work, and the pillars of it were 
five with their knops, and overlaid the heads of them and the 
hoops with gold, with their five sockets of brass.

Chapter .xxxvij.

And Bezaleel made the ark of sethim wood two cubits and an half 
long and a cubit and a half broad, and a cubit and a half high: 
and overlaid it with fine gold both within and without, and made a 
crown of gold to it round about, and cast for it four rings of 
gold for the four corners of it: two rings for the one side and 
two for the other, and made staves of Sethim wood, and covered 
them with gold, and put the staves in the rings along by the side 
of the ark to bear it withal. And he made the mercyseat of pure 
gold two cubits and a half long and one cubit and a half broad, 
and made two Cherubins of thick gold upon the two ends of the 
mercy seat: One Cherub on the one end, and another Cherub on the 
other end of the mercyseat. And the Cherubins spread out their 
wings above on high, {an hye} and covered the mercyseat therewith. 
And their faces were one to another: even to the mercyseat ward, 
were the faces of the Cherubins. And he made the table of sethim 
wood two cubits long and a cubit broad, and a cubit and an half 
high, and overlaid it with fine gold, and made thereto a crown of 
gold round about, and made thereto an hoop of an hand breadth 
round about, and made unto the hoop a crown of gold round about, 
and cast for it four rings of gold and put the rings in the four 
corners by the feet: even under the hoop to put staves in to bear 
the table withal. And he made staves of Sethim wood and covered 
them with gold to bear the table withal, and made the vessels that 
were on the table of pure gold, the dishes, spoons, flat pieces 
and pots to pour withal. And he made the candlestick of pure thick 
gold: both the candlestick and his shaft: with branches, bowls, 
knops and flowers proceeding out of it. Six branches proceeding 
out of the sides thereof, three out of the one side and three out 
of the other. And on every branch were three cups like unto 
almonds, with knops and flowers thorowout the six branches that 
proceeded out of the candlestick. And upon the candlestick self, 
were four cups after the fashion of almonds with knops and 
flowers: under every two branches a knop. And the knops and the 
branches proceeded out of it, and were all one piece of pure thick 
gold. And he made seven lamps thereto, and the snuffers thereof, 
and firepans of pure gold. An hundred weight of pure gold, made 
both it and all that belonged thereto. And he made the cense altar 
of Sethim wood of a cubit long and a cubit broad: even four 
square, and two cubits high with horns proceeding out of it. And 
he covered it with pure gold both the top and the sides round 
about and the horns of it, and made unto it a crown of gold round 
about. And he made two rings of gold unto it, even under the crown 
upon either side of it, to put staves in for to bear it withal: 
and made staves of Sethim wood, and overlaid them with gold. And 
he made the holy anointing oil and the sweet pure incense after 
the apothecary's craft.

Chapter .xxxviij.

And he made the burnt offering altar of Sethim wood, five cubits 
long and five cubits broad: even four square, and three cubits 
high. And he made horns in the four corners of it proceeding out 
of it, and overlaid it with brass. And he made all the vessels of 
the altar: the cauldrons, shovels, basins, fleshhooks and coalpans 
all of brass. And he made a brazen gridiron of network unto the 
altar round about alow beneath, under the compass of the altar: so 
that it reached unto half the altar, and cast four rings of brass 
for the four ends of the gridiron to put staves in. And he made 
staves of sethim wood and covered them with brass, and put the 
staves in the rings along by the altar side to bear it withal, and 
made the altar hollow with boards. And he made the laver of brass 
and the foot of it also of brass, in the sight of them that did 
watch before the door of the tabernacle of witness. And he made 
the court with hangings of twined byss of an hundred cubits long 
upon the south side, and twenty pillars with twenty sockets of 
brass: but the knops of the pillars, and the hoops were silver. 
And on the north side the hangings were an hundred cubits long 
with twenty pillars and twenty sockets of brass, but the knops and 
the hoops of the pillars were of silver. And on the west side, 
were hangings of fifty cubits long, and ten pillars with their ten 
sockets, and the knops and the hoops of the pillars were silver. 
And on the east side toward the son rising, were hangings of fifty 
cubits: the hangings of the one side of the gate were fifteen 
cubits long, and their pillars three with their three sockets. And 
of the other side of the court gate, were hangings also of fifteen 
cubits long, and their pillars three with three sockets. Now all 
the hangings of the court round about, were of twined byss, and 
the sockets of the pillars were brass: but the knops and the hoops 
of the pillars were silver, and the heads were overlaid with 
silver, and all the pillars of the court were hooped about with 
silver. And the hanging of the gate of the court was needlework: 
of jacinth, scarlet, purple, and twined byss twenty cubits long 
and five in the breadth, according to the hangings of the court. 
And the pillars were four with four sockets of brass, and the 
knops of silver, and the heads overlaid with silver and hooped 
about with silver, and all the pins of the tabernacle and of the 
court round about were brass. This is the sum of the habitation of 
witness, which was counted at the commandment of Moses: and was 
the office of the Levites by the hand of Ithamar son to Aaron the 
priest. And Bezaleel son of Uri son to Hur of the tribe of Iuda, 
made all that the LORD commanded Moses, and with him Ahaliab son 
of Ahisamach of the tribe of Dan, a cunning graver and a worker of 
needle work in jacinth, scarlet, purple and byss. All the gold 
that was occupied upon all the work of the holy place (which was 
the gold of the wave offering) was, twenty nine hundred weight and 
seven hundred and thirty sicles, according to the holy sicle. And 
the sum of silver that came of the multitude, was five score 
hundred weight and a thousand seven hundred and seventy five 
sicles of the holy sicle. Every man offering half a sicle after 
the weight of the holy sicle among them that went to be numbered 
from twenty years old and above, among six hundred thousand and 
three thousand and five hundred and fifty men. And the five score 
hundred weight of silver went to the casting of the sockets of the 
sanctuary and the sockets of the vail: an hundred sockets of the 
five score hundred weight, an hundred weight to every socket. And 
the thousand seven hundred and seventy five sicles, made knops to 
the pillars and overlaid the heads and hooped them. And the brass 
of the wave offering was seventy hundred weight and two thousand, 
and four hundred sicles. And therewith he made the sockets to the 
door of the tabernacle of witness, and the brazen altar, and the 
brazen gridiron that longeth thereto, and all the vessels of the 
altar, and the sockets of the court round about, and the sockets 
of the court gate, and all the pins of the habitation, and all the 
pins of the court round about.

Chapter .xxxix.

And of the jacinth, scarlet, purple and twined byss, they made the 
vestments of ministration to do service {[in]} in that holy place, 
and made the holy garments that pertained to Aaron, as the LORD 
commanded Moses. And they made the Ephod of gold, jacinth, 
scarlet, purple, and twined byss. And they did beat the gold into 
thin plates, and cut it into wires: to work it in the jacinth, 
scarlet, purple, and the byss, with broidered work. And they made 
the sides come together, and closed them up by the two edges. And 
the broidering of the girdle that was upon it, was of the same 
stuff and after the same work of gold, jacinth, scarlet, purple 
and twined byss, as the LORD commanded Moses. And they wrought 
Onyx stones closed in ouches of gold and graved as signets are 
graven with the names of the children of Israel, and put them on 
the shoulders of the Ephod that they should be a remembrance of 
the children of Israel, as the LORD commanded Moses. And they made 
the brestlap of cunning work, after the work of the Ephod: even of 
gold, Iacinct, scarlet, purple and twined byss And they made it 
four square and double, an hand breadth long and an hand breadth 
broad. And they filled it with four rows of stones (the first row: 
Sardios, a Topas and Smaragdus: the second row: a Ruby, a Sapphire 
and a Diamond. The third row: Ligurius, an Achat and an Amethyst. 
The fourth row: a Turquoise, an onyx and a Iasper) closed in 
ouches of gold in their inclosures. And the twelve stones were 
graven as signets with the names of the children of Israel: every 
stone with his name, according to the twelve tribes. And they made 
upon the breastlap, two fastening chains of wreathen work and pure 
gold. And they made two hooks of gold and two gold rings, and put 
the two rings upon the two corners of the breastlap. And they put 
the two chains of gold in the two rings, in the corners of the 
breastlap. And the two ends of the two chains they fastened in the 
two hooks, and put them on the shoulders of the Ephod upon the 
forefront of it. And they made two other rings of gold and put 
them on the two other corners of the breastlap along upon the edge 
of it, toward the inside of the Ephod that is over against it. And 
they made yet two other gold rings, and put them on the two sides 
of the Ephod, beneath on the fore side of it: even where the sides 
go together, above upon the broidering of the Ephod, and they 
strained the breastlap by his rings unto the rings of the Ephod, 
with laces of jacinth, that it might lie fast upon the broidering 
of the Ephod, and should not be lowsed from of the Ephod: as the 
LORD commanded Moses. And he made the tunicle unto the Ephod of 
woven work and all together of jacinth, and the head of the 
tunicle was in the middest of it as the collar of a partlet, with 
a band round about the collar, that it should not rent. And they 
made beneath upon the hem of the tunicle: pomegranates of jacinth, 
scarlet, purple, and twined byss. And they made little bells of 
pure gold, and put them among the pomegranates round about upon 
the edge of the tunicle, a bell and a pomegranate, a bell and a 
pomegranate round about the hems of the tunicle to minister in, as 
the LORD commanded Moses. And they made coats of byss of woven 
work for Aaron and his sons, and a mitre of byss, and goodly 
bonnets of byss, and linen breeches of twined byss, and a girdle 
of twined byss, jacinth, scarlet and purple: even of needle work, 
as the LORD commanded Moses. And they made the plate of the holy 
crown of fine gold, and wrote upon it with graven work: the 
holiness of the LORD, and tied it to a lace of jacinth to fasten 
it on high {an hye} upon the mitre, as the LORD commanded Moses. 
Thus was all the work of the habitation of the tabernacle of 
witness, finished. And the children of Israel did, according to 
all that the LORD had commanded Moses. And they brought the 
habitation unto Moses: the tent and all his apparel thereof: the 
buttons, boards, bars, pillars and sockets: and the covering of 
rams' skins red, and the covering of taxus' skins, and the hanging 
vail, and the ark of witness with the staves thereof, and the 
mercyseat: the table and all the ordinance thereof, and the 
shewbread, and the pure candlestick, and the lamps prepared 
thereunto with all the vessels thereof, and the oil for lights, 
and the golden altar, and the anointing oil and the sweet cense, 
and the hanging of the tabernacle door, and the brasen altar, and 
the gridiron of brass longing thereunto with his bars and all his 
vessels, and the laver with his foot, and the hangings of the 
court with his pillars and sockets, and the hanging to the court 
gate, his boards and pins, and all the ordinance that serveth to 
the habitation of the tabernacle of witness, and the ministering 
vestments to serve in the holy place, and the holy vestments of 
Aaron the priest and his sons' raiments to minister in: according 
to all that the LORD commanded Moses: even so the children of 
Israel made all the work. And Moses beheld all the work: and see, 
they had done it even as the LORD commanded: and then Moses 
blessed them.

Chapter .xl.

And the LORD spake unto Moses saying: In the first day of the 
first month shalt thou set up the habitation of the tabernacle of 
witness, and put therein the ark of witness, and cover the ark 
with the vail, and bring in the table and apparel it, and bring in 
the candlestick and put on his lamps, and set the cense altar of 
gold before the ark of witness, and put the hanging of the door 
unto the habitation. And set the burnt offering altar before the 
door of the tabernacle of witness, and set the laver between the 
tabernacle of witness, and the altar, and put water therein, and 
make the court round about, and set up the hanging of the court 
gate. And take the anointing oil and anoint the habitation and all 
that is therein, and hallow it and all that belong thereto: that 
it may be holy. And anoint the altar of the burnt offerings and 
all his vessels, and sanctify the altar that it may be most holy. 
And anoint also the laver and his foot, and sanctify it. Then 
bring Aaron and his sons unto the door of the tabernacle of 
witness, and wash them with water. And put upon Aaron the holy 
vestments. And anoint him and sanctify him that he may minister 
unto me, that their anointing may be an everlasting priesthood 
unto them thorowout their generations. And Moses did according to 
all that the LORD commanded him. Thus was the tabernacle reared up 
the first month in the second year. And Moses reared up the 
tabernacle and fastened his sockets, and set up the boards and put 
in their bars, and reared up the pillars, and spread abroad the 
tent over the habitation and put the covering of the tent on high 
{an hye} above it: as the LORD commanded Moses. And he took and 
put the testimony in the ark, and set the staves to the ark and 
put the mercy seat on high {an hye} upon the ark, and brought the 
ark into the habitation and hanged up the vail and covered the ark 
of witness, as the LORD commanded Moses. And he put the table in 
the tabernacle of witness in the north side of the habitation 
without the vail, and set the bread in order before the LORD, even 
as the LORD had commanded Moses. And he put the candlestick in the 
tabernacle of witness over against the table in the south side of 
the habitation, and set up the lamps before the LORD: as the LORD 
commanded Moses. And he put the golden altar in the tabernacle of 
witness before the vail, and brent sweet cense there on as the 
LORD commanded Moses. And set up the hanging in the door of the 
habitation, and set the burnt offering altar before the door of 
the tabernacle of witness, and offered burnt offerings and meat 
offerings there on as the LORD commanded Moses. And he set the 
laver between the tabernacle of witness and the altar, and poured 
water therein to wash with all. And both Moses Aaron and his sons 
washed their hands and their feet thereat: both when they went 
into the tabernacle of witness, or when they went to the altar, as 
the LORD commanded Moses. And he reared up the court round about 
the habitation and the altar, and set up the hanging of the court 
gate: and so Moses finished the work. And the cloud covered the 
tabernacle of witness, and the glory of the LORD filled the 
habitation: so that Moses could not enter into the tabernacle of 
witness, because the cloud abode therein, and the glory of the 
LORD filled the habitation. When the cloud was taken up from off 
the habitation, the children of Israel took their journeys as oft 
as they journeyed. And if the cloud departed not, they journeyed 
not till it departed: for the cloud of the LORD was upon the 
habitation by day, and fire by night: in the sight of all the 
house of Israel in all their journeys.

The end of the second book of Moses.


The Third Book of Moses, called Leviticus

Chapter .j.

And the LORD called Moses, and spake unto him out of the 
tabernacle of witness saying: Speak unto the children of Israel, 
and say unto them: Whosoever of you shall bring a gift unto the 
LORD, shall bring it of the cattle: even of the oxen and of the 
sheep. If he bring a burntoffering of the oxen he shall offer a 
male without blemish, and shall bring him to the door of the 
tabernacle of witness, that he may be accepted before the LORD. 
And let him put his hand upon the head of the burntsacrifice, and 
favour shall be given him to make an atonement for him, and let 
him kill the ox before the LORD. And let the priests Aaron's sons 
bring the blood and let them sprinkle it round about upon the 
altar that is before the door of the tabernacle of witness. And 
let the burntofferings be stripped and hewed in pieces. And then 
let the sons of Aaron the priest put fire upon the altar, and put 
wood upon the fire, and let them lay the pieces with the head and 
the fat, upon the wood that is on the fire in the altar. But the 
inwards and the legs they shall wash in water, and the priest 
shall burn altogether upon the altar, that it be a burnt 
sacrifice, and an offering of a sweet odour unto the LORD. If he 
will offer a burnt sacrifice of the sheep whether it be of the 
lambs or of the goats: he shall offer a male without blemish. And 
let him kill it on the north side of the altar, before the LORD. 
And let the priests Aaron's sons sprinkle the blood of it, round 
about upon the altar. And let it be cut in pieces: even with his 
head and his fat, and let the priest put them upon the wood that 
lieth upon the fire in the altar. But let him wash the inwards and 
the legs with water, and then bring altogether and burn it upon 
the altar: that is a burntoffering and a sacrifice of sweet savour 
unto the LORD. If he will offer a burntoffering of the fowls 
{|[unto the LORD]|} he shall offer either of the turtle doves or 
of the young pigeons. And the priest shall bring it unto the 
altar, and wring the neck asunder of it, and burn it on the altar, 
and let the blood run out upon the sides of the altar, and pluck 
away his crop and his feathers, and cast them beside the altar on 
the east part upon the heap of ashes, and break his wings, but 
pluck them not asunder. And then let the priest burn it upon the 
altar, even upon the wood that lieth upon the fire, a burnt 
sacrifice and an offering of a sweet savour unto the LORD.

Chapter .ij.

If any soul will offer a meatoffering unto the LORD, his offering 
shall be fine flour, and he shall pour thereto oil, and put 
frankincense thereon, and shall bring it unto Aaron's sons the 
priests. And one of them shall take thereout his handful of the 
flour, and of the oil with all the frankincense, and burn it for a 
memorial upon the altar: an offering of a sweet savour unto the 
LORD. And the remnant of the meatoffering shall be Aaron's and his 
sons, as a thing most holy of the sacrifices of the LORD. If any 
man bring a meatoffering that is baken in the oven, let him bring 
sweet cakes of fine flour mingled with oil, and unleavened wafers 
anointed with oil. If thy meatoffering be baken in the frying pan, 
then it shall be of sweet flour mingled with oil. And thou shalt 
mince it small, and pour oil thereon: and so is it a meatoffering. 
If thy meatoffering be a thing broiled upon the gridiron, of flour 
mingled with oil it shall be. And thou shalt bring the 
meatoffering that is made of these things unto the LORD, and shalt 
deliver it unto the priest, and he shall bring it unto the altar, 
and shall heave up part of the meatoffering for a memorial, and 
shall burn it upon the altar: an offering of a sweet savour unto 
the LORD. And that which is left of the meatoffering shall be 
Aaron's and his sons, as a thing that is most holy of the 
offerings of the LORD. All the meatofferings which ye shall bring 
unto the LORD, shall be made without leaven. For ye shall neither 
burn leaven nor honey in any offering of the LORD: Notwithstanding 
ye shall bring the firstlings of them unto the LORD: But they 
shall not come upon the altar to make a sweet savour. All thy 
meatofferings thou shalt salt with salt: neither shalt thou suffer 
the salt of the covenant of thy God to be lacking from thy 
meatoffering: but upon all thine offerings thou shalt bring salt. 
If thou offer a meatoffering of the first ripe fruits unto the 
LORD, then take of that which is yet green, and dry it by the fire 
and beat it small, and so offer the meatoffering of thy first ripe 
fruits. And then pour oil thereto, and put frankincense thereon: 
and so it is a meatoffering. And the priest shall burn part of the 
beaten corn and part of that oil, with all the frankincense, for a 
remembrance. That is an offering unto the LORD.

Chapter .iij.

If any man bring a peaceoffering of the oxen: whether it be male 
or female, he shall bring such as is without blemish, before the 
LORD, and let him put his hand upon the head of his offering, and 
kill it before the door of the tabernacle of witness. And Aaron's 
sons the priests, shall sprinkle the blood upon the altar round 
about. And they shall offer of the peaceoffering to be a sacrifice 
unto the LORD: the fat that covereth the inwards and all the fat 
that is upon the inwards: and the two kidneys with the fat that 
lieth upon the loins: and the caul that is on the liver, they 
shall take away with the kidneys. And Aaron's sons shall burn them 
upon the altar with the burntsacrifice which is upon the wood on 
the fire. That is a sacrifice of a sweet favour unto the LORD. If 
a man bring a peaceoffering unto the LORD from of the flock: 
whether it be male, or female, it shall be without blemish. If he 
offer a lamb, he shall bring it before the LORD, and put his hand 
upon his offering's head, and kill it in the door of the 
tabernacle of witness, and Aaron's sons shall sprinkle the blood 
thereof round about the altar. And of the peaceoffering they shall 
bring a sacrifice unto the LORD: the fat thereof and the rump 
altogether, which they shall take off hard by the back bone: and 
the fat that covereth the inwards and all the fat that is upon the 
inwards and the two kidneys with the fat that lieth upon them and 
upon the loins, and the caul that is upon the liver he shall take 
away with the kidneys. And the priest shall burn them upon the 
altar to feed the LORD's offering withall. If the offering be a 
goat, he shall bring it before the LORD and put his hand upon the 
head of it and kill it before the tabernacle of witness, and the 
sons of Aaron shall sprinkle the blood thereof upon the altar 
round about. And he shall bring thereof his offering unto the 
LORD's sacrifice: the fat that covereth the inwards and all the 
fat that is upon the inwards and the two kidneys and the fat that 
lieth upon them and upon the loins, and the caul that is upon the 
liver he shall take away with the kidneys. And the priest shall 
burn them upon the alter to feed the LORD's sacrifice with all and 
to make a sweet savour. And thus shall all the fat be the LORD's, 
and it shall be a law forever among your generations after you in 
your dwelling places: that ye eat neither fat nor blood.

Chapter .iiij.

And the LORD talked with Moses saying: speak unto the children of 
Israel and say: when a soul sinneth thorow ignorance, and hath 
done any of those things which the LORD hath forbidden in his 
commandments to be done: If the priest that is anointed sin and 
make the people to do amiss, he shall bring for his sin which he 
hath done: an ox without blemish unto the LORD for a sinoffering. 
And he shall bring the ox unto the door of the tabernacle of 
witness before the LORD, and shall put his hand upon the ox's head 
and kill him before the LORD. And the priest that is anointed 
shall take of the ox's blood, and bring it into the tabernacle of 
witness, and shall dip his finger in the blood and sprinkle 
thereof seven times before the LORD: even before the hanging of 
the holy place. And he shall put some of the blood upon the horns 
of the altar of sweet cense before the LORD which is in the 
tabernacle of witness, and shall pour all the blood of the ox upon 
the bottom of the altar of burntofferings which is by the door of 
the tabernacle of witness. And he shall take away all the fat of 
the ox that is the sinoffering: the fat that covereth the inwards 
and all the fat that is about them, and the two kidneys with the 
fat that lieth upon them and upon the loins, and the caul upon the 
liver let them take away also with the kidneys: as it was taken 
from the ox of the peaceoffering, and let the priest burn them 
upon the altar of burntofferings. But the skin of the ox and all 
his flesh with his head, his legs, his inwards with his dung, 
shall he carry altogether out of the host unto a clean place: even 
where the ashes are poured out, and burn him on wood with fire: 
even upon the heap of ashes. If the whole commonalty of the 
children of Israel sin thorow ignorance, and the thing be hid from 
their eyes: so that they have committed any of these things which 
the LORD hath forbidden to be done in his commandments and have 
offended, and the sin which they have sinned be afterward known, 
then shall they offer an ox for a sinoffering and shall bring him 
before the tabernacle of witness, and the elders of the multitude 
shall put their hands upon his head before the LORD. And the 
priest that is anointed shall bring of his blood into the 
tabernacle of witness, and shall dip his finger in the blood, and 
sprinkle it seven times before the LORD: even before the vail. And 
shall put of the blood upon the horns of the altar which is before 
the LORD in the tabernacle of witness, and shall pour all the 
blood upon the bottom of the altar of burntofferings which is by 
the door of the tabernacle of witness, and shall take all his fat 
from him and burn it upon the altar, and shall do with his ox as 
he did with the sinoffering ox. And the priest shall make an 
atonement for them, and so it shall be forgiven them. And he shall 
bring the ox without the host, and burn him as he burned the 
first, so is this the sinoffering of the commonalty. When a lord 
sinneth and committeth thorow ignorance any of these things which 
the LORD his God hath forbidden to be done in his commandments and 
hath so offended: when his sin is shewed unto him which he hath 
sinned, he shall bring for his offering an hegoat without blemish 
and lay his hand upon the head of it, and kill it in the place 
where the burntofferings are killed before the LORD: this is a 
sinoffering. Then let the priest take of the blood of the 
sinoffering with his finger, and put it upon the horns of the 
burntoffering altar, and pour his blood upon the bottom of the 
burntoffering altar and burn all his fat upon the altar, as he 
doth the fat of the peaceofferings. And the priest shall make an 
atonement for him as concerning his sin, and so it shall be 
forgiven him. If one of the common people of the land sin thorow 
ignorance and commit any of the things which the LORD hath 
forbidden, in his commandments to be done and so hath trespassed, 
when his sin which he hath sinned is come to his knowledge, he 
shall bring for his offering, a she goat without blemish for his 
sin which he hath sinned, and lay his hand upon the head of the 
sinoffering, and slay it in the place of burntofferings. And the 
priest shall take of the blood with his finger, and put it upon 
the horns of the burntoffering altar, and pour all the blood upon 
the bottom of the altar, and shall take away all his fat as the 
fat of the peaceofferings is taken away. And the priest shall burn 
it upon the altar for a sweet savour unto the LORD, and the priest 
shall make an atonement for him and it shall be forgiven him. If 
he bring a sheep {lamb} and offer it for a sinoffering, he shall 
bring a ewe {female} without blemish, and lay his hand upon the 
head of the sinoffering, and slay it in the place where the 
burntofferings are slain. And the priest shall take of the blood 
of the sinoffering with his finger, and put it upon the horns of 
the burntoffering altar, and shall pour all the blood thereof unto 
the bottom of the altar. And he shall take away all the fat 
thereof, as the fat of the sheep of the peaceofferings was taken 
away. And the priest shall burn it upon the altar for the LORD's 
{lordes} sacrifice, and the priest shall make an atonement for his 
sin, and it shall be forgiven him.

Chapter .v.

When a soul hath sinned and heard the voice of cursing and is a 
witness: whether he hath seen or known of it if he have not 
uttered it, he shall bear his sin. Either when a man toucheth any 
unclean thing: whether it be the carrion of an unclean beast or of 
unclean cattle or unclean worm and is not ware of it, he is also 
unclean and hath offended. Either when he toucheth any uncleanness 
of man (whatsoever uncleanness it be that a man is defiled with 
all) and is not ware of it and afterward cometh to the knowledge 
of it, he is a trespasser. Either when a soul sweareth: so that he 
pronounceth with his lips to do evil or to do good (whatsoever it 
be that a man pronounceth with an oath) and the thing be out of 
his mind and afterward cometh to the knowledge of it, then he hath 
offended in one of these. Then when he hath sinned in one of these 
things, he shall confess that wherein that he hath sinned, and 
shall bring his trespassoffering unto the LORD for his sin which 
he hath sinned. A female from the flock, whether it be an ewe 
{lamb} or a she goat, for a sinoffering. And the priest shall make 
an atonement for him for his sin. But if he be not able to bring a 
sheep, then let him bring for his trespass which he hath sinned, 
two turtle doves or two young pigeons unto the LORD, one for a 
sinoffering and another for a burntoffering. And he shall bring 
them unto the priest, which shall offer the sinoffering first and 
wring the neck asunder of it, but pluck it not clean off. And let 
him sprinkle of the blood of the sinoffering upon the side of the 
altar, and let the rest of the blood bleed upon the bottom of the 
altar, and then it is a sinoffering. And let him offer the second 
for a burntoffering as the manner is: and so shall the priest make 
an atonement for him for the sin which he hath sinned, and it 
shall be forgiven him. And yet if he be not able to bring two 
turtle doves or two young pigeons, then let him bring his offering 
for his sin: the tenth part of an Epha of fine flour for a 
sinoffering, but put none oil thereto neither put any frankincense 
thereon, for it is a sinoffering. And let him bring it to the 
priest, and the priest shall take his handful of it and burn it 
upon the altar for a remembrance to be a sacrifice for the LORD: 
that is a sinoffering. And let the priest make an atonement for 
him for his sin (whatsoever of these he hath sinned) and it shall 
be forgiven. And the remnant shall be the priest's, as it is in 
the meatoffering. And the LORD communed with Moses saying: when a 
soul trespasseth and sinneth thorow ignorance in any of the holy 
things of the LORD, he shall bring for his trespass unto the LORD, 
a ram without blemish out of the flock valued at two sicles after 
the holy sicle, {[of the sanctuary,]} for a trespassoffering. And 
he shall make amends for the harm that he hath done in the holy 
thing, and put the fifth part more thereto, and give it unto the 
priest. And the priest shall make an atonement for him with the 
ram of the trespassoffering, and it shall be forgiven him. When a 
soul sinneth and committeth any of these things which are 
forbidden to be done by the commandments of the LORD: though he 
wist it not, he hath yet offended and is in sin, and shall bring a 
ram without blemish out of the flock that is esteemed to be worth 
a sinoffering, unto the priest. And the priest shall make an 
atonement for him for the ignorance which he did, and was not 
ware, and it shall be forgiven him. This is a trespassoffering, 
for he trespassed against the LORD.

Chapter .vi.

And the LORD talked with Moses saying: when a soul sinneth and 
trespasseth against the LORD, and denied unto his neighbour that 
which was taken him to keep, or that was put under his hand, or 
that which he hath violently taken away, or that which he hath 
deceived his neighbour of with subtlety, or hath found that which 
was lost and denieth it, and sweareth falsely, in whatsoever thing 
it be that a man doth and sinneth therein; Then when he hath 
sinned or trespassed, he shall restore again that he took 
violently away, or the wrong which he did, or that which was 
delivered him to keep, or the lost thing which he found, or 
whatsoever it be about which he hath sworn falsely, he shall 
restore it again in the whole sum, and shall add the fifth part 
more thereto and give it unto him to whom it pertaineth, the same 
day that he offereth for his trespass, and shall bring for his 
trespassoffering unto the LORD, a ram without blemish out of the 
flock, that is esteemed worth a trespassoffering unto the priest. 
And the priest shall make an atonement for him before the LORD, 
and it shall be forgiven him in whatsoever thing it be that a man 
doth and trespasseth therein. And the LORD spake unto Moses 
saying: Command Aaron and his sons saying: this is the law of the 
burntoffering. The burntoffering shall be upon the hearth of the 
altar all night unto the morning, and the fire of the altar shall 
burn therein. And the priest shall put on his linen alb and his 
linen breeches upon his flesh, and take away the ashes which the 
fire of the burntsacrifice in the altar hath made, and put them 
beside the altar, and then put off his raiment and put on other 
and carry the ashes out without the host unto a clean place. The 
fire that is upon the altar shall burn therein and not go out. And 
the priest shall put wood on the fire every morning, and put the 
burntsacrifice upon it, and he shall burn thereon the fat of the 
peaceofferings. The fire shall ever burn upon the altar, and never 
go out. This is the law of the meatoffering: Aaron's sons shall 
bring it before the LORD, unto the altar: and one of them shall 
take his handful of the flour of the meatoffering and of the oil 
with all the frankincense which is thereon, and shall burn it unto 
a remembrance upon the altar to be a sweet savour of the memorial 
of it unto the LORD. And the rest thereof, Aaron and his sons 
shall eat: unleavened it shall be eaten in the holy place: even in 
the court of the tabernacle of witness they shall eat it. Their 
part which I have given them of my sacrifice, shall not be baken 
with leaven, for it is most holy, as is the sinoffering, and 
trespass offering. All the males among the children of Aaron, 
shall eat of it: and it shall be a duty for ever unto your 
generations of the sacrifices of the LORD, neither shall any man 
twitch it, but he that is hallowed. And the LORD spake unto Moses 
saying: this is the offering of Aaron and of his sons which he 
shall offer unto the LORD in the day when they are anointed: the 
tenth part of an Epha of flour, which is a daily meatoffering 
perpetually: half in the morning and half at night: and in the 
frying pan it shall be made with oil. And when it is fried, thou 
shalt bring it in as a baken meatoffering minced small, and shalt 
offer it for a sweet savour unto the LORD. And that priest of his 
sons that is anointed in his stead, shall offer it: and it shall 
be the LORD's {lordes} duty for ever, and it shall be burnt 
altogether. For all the meatofferings of the priests shall be 
burnt altogether, and shall not be eaten. And the LORD talked with 
Moses saying: speak unto Aaron and unto his sons and say: This is 
the law of the sinoffering. In the place where the burntoffering 
is killed, shall the sinoffering be killed also before the LORD, 
for it is most holy. The priest that offereth it shall eat it in 
the holy place: even in the court of the tabernacle of witness. No 
man shall touch the flesh thereof, save he that is hallowed. And 
if any raiment be sprinkled therewith, it shall be washed in an 
holy place, and the earthen pot that it is sodden in shall be 
broken. If it be sodden in brass, then the pot shall be scoured 
and plunged {rinsed} in the water. All the males among the 
children of Aaron {the priests} shall eat thereof, for it is most 
holy. Notwithstanding no sinoffering that hath his blood brought 
into the tabernacle of witness to reconcile with all in the holy 
place, shall be eaten: but shall be burnt in the fire.

Chapter .vij.

This is the law of the trespassoffering which is most holy. In the 
place where the burntoffering is killed, the trespassoffering 
shall be killed also: and his blood shall be sprinkled round about 
upon the altar. And all the fat thereof shall be offered: the rump 
and the fat that covered the inwards, and the two kidneys with the 
fat that lieth on them and upon the loins: and the caul on the 
liver shall be taken away with the kidneys: And the priest shall 
burn them upon the altar, to be an offering unto the LORD: this is 
a trespass offering. All the males among the priests shall eat 
thereof in the holy place, for it is most holy. As the sinoffering 
is, so is the trespass offering, one law serveth for both: and it 
shall be the priests that reconcileth therewith. And the priest 
that offered a man's burntoffering, shall have the skin of the 
burntoffering which he hath offered. And all the meatofferings 
that are baken in the oven, and all that is dressed upon the 
gridiron and in the frying pan, shall be the priests that offereth 
them. And all the meatofferings that are mingled with oil or dry, 
shall pertain unto all the sons of Aaron, and one shall have as 
much as another. This is the law of the peaceofferings which shall 
be offered unto the LORD. If he offer to give thanks, he shall 
bring unto his thankoffering: sweet cakes mingled with oil and 
sweet wafers anointed with oil, and cakes mingled with oil of fine 
flour fried, and he shall bring his offering upon cakes made of 
leavened bread unto the thankoffering of his peaceofferings, and 
of them all he shall offer one to be an heave offering unto the 
LORD, and it shall be the priests that sprinkleth the blood of the 
peaceofferings. And the flesh of the thankoffering of his 
peaceofferings shall be eaten the same day that it is offered, and 
there shall none of it be laid up until the morning. If it be a 
vow or a freewill offering that he bringeth, the same day that he 
offereth it, it shall be eaten, and that which remaineth may be 
eaten on the morrow: but as much of the offered flesh as remaineth 
unto the third day shall be burned with fire. For if any of the 
flesh of the peaceofferings be eaten the third day then shall he 
that offered it obtain no favour, neither shall it be reckoned 
unto him: but shall be an abomination, and the soul that eateth of 
it shall bear the sin thereof. The flesh that twicheth any unclean 
thing shall not be eaten, but burnt with fire: and all that be 
clean in their flesh, may eat flesh. If any soul eat of the flesh 
of the peaceofferings, that pertain unto the LORD, and his 
uncleanness yet upon him, the same soul shall perish from among 
his people. Moreover if a soul twich any unclean thing, whether it 
be the uncleanness of man or of any unclean beast or any 
abomination that is unclean: and then eat of the flesh of the 
peaceofferings which pertain unto the LORD, that soul shall perish 
from his people. And the LORD spake unto Moses saying: speak unto 
the children of Israel and say: Ye shall eat no manner fat of 
oxen, sheep or goats: neverthelater the fat of the beast that 
dieth alone and the fat of that which is torn with wild beasts, 
may be occupied in all manner uses: but ye shall in no wise eat of 
it. For whosoever eateth the fat of the beast of which men bring 
an offering unto the LORD, that soul that eateth it shall perish 
from his people. Moreover ye shall eat no manner of blood, 
wheresoever ye dwell, whether it be of fowl or of beast. 
Whatsoever soul it be that eateth any manner of blood the same 
soul shall perish from his people. And the LORD talked with Moses 
saying: speak unto the children of Israel and say: He that 
offereth his peaceoffering unto the LORD, shall bring his gift 
unto the LORD of his peaceofferings: his own hands shall bring the 
offering of the LORD: even the fat upon the breast he shall bring 
with the breast to wave it a waveoffering before the LORD. And the 
priest shall burn the fat upon the altar, and the breast shall be 
Aaron's and his sons. And the right shoulder they shall give unto 
the priest, to be an heave offering, of their peaceofferings. And 
the same that offereth the blood of the peaceofferings and the 
fat, among the sons of Aaron, shall have the right shoulder unto 
his part, for the wavebreast and the heaveshoulder I have taken of 
the children of Israel, even of their peaceofferings, and have 
given it unto Aaron the priest and unto his sons: to be a duty for 
ever of the children of Israel. This is the anointing of Aaron and 
of the sacrifices of the LORD, in the day when they were offered 
to be priests unto the LORD, which the LORD commanded to be given 
them in the day when he anointed them, of the children of Israel, 
and to be a duty for ever among their generations. This is the law 
of burntofferings, of meatofferings, of sinofferings, of 
trespassofferings, of fullofferings, of peaceofferings, which the 
LORD commanded Moses in the mount of Sinai, in the day when he 
commanded the children of Israel to offer their offerings unto the 
LORD in the wilderness of Sinai.

Chapter .viij.

And the LORD spake unto Moses saying: take Aaron and his sons with 
him, and the vestures and the anointing oil, and an ox for a 
sinoffering and two rams and a basket of sweet bread: and gather 
all the community together unto the door of the tabernacle of 
witness. And Moses did as the LORD commanded him, and the people 
gathered them selves together unto the door of the tabernacle of 
witness. And Moses said unto the people: this is the thing which 
the LORD commanded to do. And Moses brought Aaron and his sons, 
and washed them with water, and put upon him the alb and gird him 
with a girdle, and put upon him the tunicle, and put the Ephod 
thereon, and girded him with the broidered girdle of the Ephod, 
and bound it unto him therewith. And he put the breastlap thereon, 
and put in the breastlap light and perfectness. And he put the 
mitre upon his head, and put upon the mitre even upon the 
forefront of it, the golden plate of the holy crown, as the LORD 
commanded Moses. And Moses took the anointing oil and anointed the 
habitation and all that was therein and sanctified them, and 
sprinkled thereof upon the altar seven times, and anointed the 
altar and all his vessels, and the laver with his foot, to 
sanctify them. And he poured of the anointing oil upon Aaron's 
head, and anointed him to sanctify him. And he brought Aaron's 
sons and put albs upon them, and girded them with girdles, and put 
bonnets upon their heads: as the LORD commanded Moses. And the 
sinoffering was brought. And Aaron and his sons put their hands 
upon the head of the ox of the sinoffering. And when it was slain, 
Moses took of the blood, and put it upon the horns of the altar 
round about with his finger and purified it, and poured the blood 
unto the bottom of the altar and sanctified it and reconciled it. 
And he took all the fat that was upon the inwards and the caul 
that was on the liver and the two kidneys with their fat and 
burned it upon the altar. But the ox, the hide, his flesh and his 
dung, he burnt with fire without the host, as the LORD commanded 
Moses. And he brought the ram of the burntoffering, and Aaron and 
his sons put their hands upon the head of the ram, and it was 
killed. And Moses sprinkled the blood upon the altar round about, 
and cut the ram in pieces and burnt the head, the pieces and the 
fat, and washed the inwards and the legs in water, and burn the 
ram every whit upon the altar. That was a burnt sacrifice of a 
sweet savour, and an offering unto the LORD, as the LORD commanded 
Moses. And he brought the other ram that was the fulloffering, and 
Aaron and his sons put their hands upon the head of the ram: And 
when it was slain, Moses took of the blood of it, and put it upon 
the tip of Aaron's right ear, and upon the thumb of his right 
hand, and upon the great toe of his right foot. Then were Aaron's 
sons brought, and Moses put of the blood on the tip of the right 
ear of them, and upon the thumbs of their right hands, and upon 
the great toes of their right feet, and sprinkled the blood upon 
the altar round about. And he took the fat and the rump and all 
the fat that was upon the inwards, and the caul of the liver, and 
the two kidneys with their fat and their right shoulder. And out 
of the basket of sweet bread that was before the LORD, he took one 
sweet cake of oiled bread and one wafer, and put them on the fat 
and upon the right shoulder, and put altogether upon Aaron's hands 
and upon his sons' hands, and waved it a waveoffering before the 
LORD. And then Moses took them from of their hands again, and 
burnt them upon the altar, even upon the burntoffering: These are 
the fullofferings of a sweet savour and a sacrifice unto the LORD. 
And Moses took the breast and waved it a waveoffering before the 
LORD, of the ram of the fullofferings: and it was Moses' part, as 
the LORD commanded Moses. And Moses took of the anointing oil and 
of the blood which was upon the altar, and sprinkled it upon Aaron 
and upon his vestments and upon his sons and on their vestments 
with him, and sanctified Aaron and his vestures and his sons and 
his sons' vestures also. Then Moses said unto Aaron and his sons: 
boil the flesh in the door of the tabernacle of witness, and there 
eat it with the bread that is in the basket of fullofferings, as 
the Lord commanded saying: Aaron and his sons shall eat it: and 
that which remaineth of the flesh and of the bread, burn with 
fire. And see that ye depart not from the door of the tabernacle 
of witness seven days long: until the days of your fullofferings 
be at an end. For seven days must your hands be filled, as they 
were this day: even so the LORD hath commanded to do, to reconcile 
you with all. See therefore that ye abide in the door of the 
tabernacle of witness day and night seven days long: and keep the 
watch of the LORD that ye die not: for so I am commanded. And 
Aaron and his sons did all things which the LORD commanded by the 
hand of Moses.

Chapter .ix.

And the eighth day Moses called Aaron and his sons, and the elders 
of Israel, and said unto Aaron: take a calf for a sinoffering, and 
a ram for a burntoffering: both without blemish, and bring them 
before the LORD. And unto the children of Israel he spake saying: 
take ye an he goat for a sinoffering, and a calf and a lamb both 
two of a year old, and without blemish for a burnt sacrifice, and 
an ox and a ram for peaceofferings, to offer before the LORD, and 
a meatoffering mingled with oil, for today the LORD will appear 
unto you. And they brought that which Moses commanded unto the 
tabernacle of witness, and all the people came and stood before 
the LORD. And Moses said: this is the thing which the LORD 
commanded that ye should do: and then the glory of the LORD shall 
appear unto you. And Moses said unto Aaron: go unto the altar and 
offer thy sinoffering, and make an atonement for thee and for the 
people: and then offer the offering of the people and reconcile 
them also, as the LORD commanded Moses. And Aaron went unto the 
altar, and slew the calf that was his sinoffering. And the sons of 
Aaron brought the blood unto him, and he dipped his finger in the 
blood and put it upon the horns of the altar, and poured the blood 
unto the bottom of the altar. And the fat and the two kidneys with 
the caul of the liver of the sinoffering, he burnt upon the altar, 
as the LORD commanded Moses: but the flesh and the hide, he burnt 
with fire without the host. Afterward he slew the burntoffering, 
and Aaron's sons brought the blood unto him, and he sprinkled it 
round about upon the altar. And they brought the burntoffering 
unto him in pieces and the head also, and he burnt it upon the 
altar, and did wash the inwards and the legs, and burnt them also 
upon the burntoffering in the altar. And then he brought the 
people's offering and took the goat that was the people's 
sinoffering, and slew it and offered it for a sinoffering: as he 
did the first. And then brought the burntoffering and offered it 
as the manner was, and brought the meatoffering and filled his 
hand thereof, and burnt it upon the altar, besides the burnt 
sacrifice in the morning. Then he slew the ox and the ram that 
were the people's peaceofferings, and Aaron's sons brought the 
blood unto him, and he sprinkled it upon the altar round about, 
and took the fat of the ox and of the ram: the rump and the fat 
that covereth the inwards and the kidneys and the caul of the 
liver: and put them upon the breasts and burnt it upon the altar: 
but the breasts and the right shoulders Aaron waved before the 
LORD, as the LORD commanded Moses. And Aaron lift up his hand over 
the people and blessed them, and came down from offering of 
sinofferings, burntofferings and peaceofferings. Then Moses and 
Aaron went into the tabernacle of witness and came out again and 
blessed the people, and the glory of the LORD appeared unto all 
the people. And there came a fire out from before the LORD, and 
consumed upon the altar: the burntoffering and the fat. And all 
the people saw it and shouted, and fell on their faces.

Chapter .x.

And Nadab and Abihu the sons of Aaron took either of them his 
censor, and put fire therein, and put cense upon, and brought 
strange fire before the LORD: which he commanded them not, and 
there went a fire out from the LORD, and consumed them, and they 
died before the LORD. Then Moses said unto Aaron: this is it that 
the LORD spake saying: I will be sanctified in them that come nye 
me, and before all the people I will be glorified. And Aaron held 
his peace. And Moses called Misael and Elisaphan the sons of Uriel 
the uncle of Aaron, and said unto them: go to and carry your 
brethren from the holy place out of the host. And they went to 
them and carried them in their albs out of the host, as Moses 
bade. And Moses said unto Aaron and unto Eleazar and Ithamar his 
eldest sons: uncover not your head neither rent your clothes, lest 
ye die and wrath come upon all the people, let your brethren the 
hole house of Israel, beweep the burning which the LORD hath 
burnt. But go ye not out from the door of the tabernacle of 
witness, lest ye die: for the anointing oil of the LORD is upon 
you. And they did as Moses bade. And the LORD spake unto Aaron 
saying: drink no wine nor strong drink, neither thou nor thy sons 
with thee: when ye go into the tabernacle of witness, lest ye die. 
And let it be a law forever unto your children after you: that ye 
may put difference between holy and unholy, and between unclean 
and clean, and that ye may teach the children of Israel all the 
ordinances which the LORD hath commanded them by the hands of 
Moses. And Moses said unto Aaron and unto Eleazar and Ithamar his 
sons that were left: take the meatoffering that remaineth of the 
sacrifices of the LORD, and eat it without leaven beside the 
altar, for it is most holy: eat it therefore in the holy place, 
because it is thy duty and thy sons' duty of the sacrifice of the 
LORD: for so I am commanded. And the wavebreast and heaveshoulder 
eat in a clean place: both thou and thy sons and thy daughters 
with thee. For it is thy duty, and thy sons' duty with thee, of 
the peaceofferings of the children of Israel. For the 
heaveshoulder and the wavebreast which they bring with the 
sacrifices of the fat, to wave it before the LORD, shall be thine 
and thy sons' with thee, and be a law for ever, as the LORD hath 
commanded. And Moses sought for the goat that was the sinoffering, 
and see, it was burnt. And he was angry with Eleazar and Ithamar 
the sons of Aaron, which were left alive saying: wherefore have ye 
not eaten the sinoffering in the holy place, seeing it is most 
holy: and forasmuch as it is given you to bear the sin of the 
people, and make agreement for them before the LORD? Behold, the 
blood of it was not brought in within the holy place, therefore 
should ye have eaten it in the holy place as I commanded. And 
Aaron said unto Moses: behold, this day have they offered their 
sinoffering and their burntoffering before the LORD, and it is 
chanced me after this manner. If I should eat of the sinoffering 
today, would the LORD be content with all? And when Moses heard 
that, he was content.

Chapter .xi.

And the LORD spake unto Moses and Aaron saying: speak unto the 
children of Israel and say: these are the beasts which ye shall 
eat among all the beasts that are on the earth: whatsoever hath 
hoof and divideth it into two claws and cheweth cud among the 
beasts, that shall ye eat. Nevertheless, these shall ye not eat of 
them that chew cud and have hoofs. The camel, for he cheweth cud 
but he divideth not the hoof into two claws, therefore he shall be 
unclean unto you. And the cony, for he cheweth the cud but 
divideth not the hoof into two claws, therefore he is unclean to 
you. And the hare, for he likewise cheweth the cud, but divideth 
not the hoof into two claws, he is therefore unclean to you. And 
the swine, for though he divide the hoof into two claws, yet he 
cheweth not the cud and therefore is unclean to you. Of their 
flesh see that ye eat not, and their carcasses see that ye twich 
not for they are unclean to you. These shall ye eat of all that 
are in the waters: whatsoever hath fins and scales in the waters, 
seas and rivers, that shall ye eat. And all that have not fins and 
scales in the seas and rivers of all that move and live in the 
waters, shall ye abhor. See that ye eat not of their flesh, and 
also that ye abhor their carcasses: for all that have no fins nor 
scales in the waters, shall be abomination unto you. These are the 
fowls which ye shall abhor and which shall not be eaten, for they 
are an abomination. The eagle, the goshawk, the cormorant, the 
kite, the vulture and all his kind and all kind of ravens, the 
ostrich, the nightcrow, the cuckoo, the sparrowhawk, and all the 
kind: the little owl, the stork, the great owl, the back, the 
pelican, the pye, the heron, the jay with the kind, the lapwing 
and the swallow. And all fowls that creep and go upon all fours 
shall be an abomination unto you. Yet these may ye eat of all the 
fowls that move and go upon four feet: even those that have no 
knees above upon their feet to leap withal upon the earth, even 
these of them ye may eat: the arb and all his kind: the Soleam 
with all his kind: the Hargol and all the kind, and the Hagab and 
all his kind. All other fowls that move and have four feet, shall 
be abomination unto you. In such ye shall be unclean whosoever 
touch the carcass of the shall be unclean unto the even, and 
whosoever beareth the carcass of them, shall wash his clothes and 
shall be unclean until even. Among all manner beasts, they that 
have hoofs and divide them not into two claws or that chew not the 
cud, shall be unclean unto you: and all that twicheth them shall 
be unclean. And all that goeth upon his hands among all manner 
beasts that go on all fours, are unclean unto you: and as many as 
twich their carcasses, shall be unclean until the evening. And he 
that beareth the carcass of them, shall wash his clothes and be 
unclean until the even, for such are unclean unto you. And these 
are also unclean to you among the things that creep upon the 
earth: the weasel, the mouse, the toad and all his kind, the 
hedgehog, stellio, the lizard, the snail and the mole: These are 
unclean to you among all that move, and all that twich them when 
they be dead, shall be unclean until the evening. And whatsoever 
any of the dead carcasses of them fall upon, shall be unclean: 
whatsoever vessel of wood it be, or raiment, or skin, or bag or 
whatsoever thing it be that any work is wrought with all. And they 
shall be plunged in the water and be unclean until the even, and 
then they shall be clean again. All manner of earthen vessel 
whereinto any of them falleth, is unclean with all that therein 
is: and ye shall break it. All manner meat that is eaten, if any 
such water come upon it, it shall be unclean. And all manner drink 
that is drunk in all manner such vessels, shall be unclean. And 
whether it be oven or kettle, it shall be broken. For they are 
unclean and shall be unclean unto you: Neverthelater, yet the 
fountains and wells and ponds of water, shall be clean still. But 
whosoever twicheth their carcasses, shall be unclean. If the dead 
carcass of any such fall upon any seed used to sow, it shall yet 
be clean still: but and if any water be poured upon the seed and 
afterward the dead carcass of them fall thereon, then it shall be 
unclean unto you. If any beast of which ye eat die, he that 
twicheth the dead carcass shall be unclean until the evening. And 
he that eateth of any such dead carcass, shall wash his clothes 
and remain unclean until the evening. And he also that beareth the 
carcass of it, shall wash his clothes and be unclean until even. 
All that crawleth upon the earth, is an abomination and shall not 
be eaten. And whatsoever goeth upon the breast, and whatsoever 
goeth upon four or more feet among all that crawleth upon the 
earth, of that see ye eat not: for they are abominable. Make not 
your souls abominable. Make not your souls abominable with nothing 
that creepeth, neither make your souls unclean with them: that ye 
should be defiled thereby. For I am the LORD your God, be 
sanctified therefore that ye may be holy, for I am holy: and 
defile not your souls with any manner thing that creepeth upon the 
earth. For I am the LORD that brought you out of the land of Egypt 
to be your God: be holy therefore, for I am holy. This is the law 
of beast and fowl and of all manner thing that liveth and moveth 
in the water and of all things that creep upon the earth, that ye 
may put difference between unclean and clean, and between the 
beasts that are eaten and the beasts that are not eaten.

Chapter .xij.

And the LORD spake Unto Moses and said: speak unto the children of 
Israel and say: when a woman hath conceived and hath borne a man 
child, she shall be unclean seven days: even in like manner as 
when she is put apart in time of her natural disease. And in the 
eighth day the flesh of the child's foreskin shall be cut away. 
And she shall continue in the blood of her purifying thirty three 
days, she shall twitch no hallowed thing nor come in to the 
sanctuary, until the time of her purifying be out. If she bear a 
maidchild, then she shall be unclean two weeks, as when she hath 
her natural disease. And she shall continue in the blood of her 
purifying sixty six days. And when the days of her purifying are 
out: whether it be a son or a daughter, she shall bring a lamb of 
one year old for a burntoffering and a young pigeon or a 
turtledove for a sinoffering unto the door of the tabernacle of 
witness unto the priest: which shall offer them before the LORD, 
and make an atonement for her, and so she shall be purged of her 
issue of blood. This is the law of her that hath borne a child, 
whether it be male or female. But and if she be not able to bring 
a sheep, then let her bring two turtles or two young pigeons: the 
one for the burntoffering, and the other for the sinoffering. And 
the priest shall make an atonement for her, and she shall be 
clean.

Chapter .xiij.

And the LORD spake unto Moses and unto Aaron saying: when there 
appeareth a rising in any man's flesh either a scab or a 
glistering white: as though the plague of leprosy were in the skin 
of his flesh, then let him be brought unto Aaron the priest or 
unto one of his sons the priests, and let the priest look on the 
sore that is in the skin of his flesh. If the hair in the sore be 
turned unto white, and the sore also seem to be lower than the 
skin of his flesh, then it is surely a leprosy, and let the priest 
look on him and make him unclean. If there be but a white pleck in 
the skin of his flesh, and seem not to be lower than the other 
skin nor the hair thereof is turned unto white: then let the 
priest shut him up seven days. And let the priest look upon him 
the seventh day: if the sore seem to him to abide still and to go 
no further in the skin, then let the priest shut him up yet seven 
days more. {mo} And let the priest look on him again the seventh 
day. Then if the sore be waxed blackish, and is not grown abroad 
in the skin, let the priest make him clean, for it is but a scurf. 
And let him wash his clothes, and then he is clean. But and if the 
scab grow in the skin after that he is seen of the priest again. 
If the priest see that the scab be grown abroad in the skin, let 
him make him unclean: for it is surely a leprosy. If the plague of 
leprosy be in a man, let him be brought unto the priest, and let 
the priest see him. If the rising appear white in the skin, and 
have also made the hair white, and there be raw flesh in the sore 
also: then it is an old leprosy in the skin of his flesh. And the 
priest shall make him unclean, and shall not shut him up for he is 
unclean. If a leprosy break out in the skin and cover all the skin 
from the head to the foot over all wheresoever the priest looketh, 
then let the priest look upon him. If the leprosy have covered all 
his flesh, let him make {judge} the disease clean: for inasmuch as 
he is altogether white he is therefore clean. But and if there be 
raw flesh on him when he is seen, then he shall be unclean. 
Therefore when the priest seeth the raw flesh, let him make him 
unclean. For inasmuch as his flesh is raw, he is unclean and it is 
surely a true leprosy. But and if the raw flesh depart again and 
change unto white, then let him come to the priest and let the 
priest see him: If the sore be changed unto white, let the priest 
make {judge} the disease clean, and then he is clean. When there 
is a beal in the skin of any man's flesh and is healed and after 
in the place of the beal there appear a white rising either a 
shining white somewhat reddish, let him be seen of the priest. If 
when the priest seeth him it appear lower than the other skin and 
the hair thereof be changed unto white, let the priest make 
{judge} him unclean: for it is a very leprosy, that is broken out 
in the place of the beal. But and if when the priest looketh on it 
there be no white hairs therein neither the scab lower than the 
other skin and be somewhat blackish, then the priest shall shut 
him apart seven days. If it spread abroad in the mean season, then 
let the priest make {judge} him unclean: for it is a leprosy. But 
and if the glistering white abide still in one place and go no 
further, then it is but the print of the beal, and the priest 
shall make {judge} him clean. When the skin of any man's flesh is 
burnt with fire that it be raw and there appear in the burning a 
glistering white that is somewhat reddish or altogether white, let 
the priest look upon it. If the hair in that brightness be changed 
to white and it also appear lower than the other skin, then it is 
a leprosy that is broken out in the place of the burning. And the 
priest shall make {judge} him unclean, for it is a leprosy. But 
and if (when the priest looketh on it) he see that there is no 
white hair in the brightness, and that it is no lower than the 
other skin, and that it is also blackish, then let the priest shut 
him up seven days. And if (when the priest looketh on him the 
seventh day) it be grown abroad in the skin, let him make {judge} 
him unclean: for it is a leprosy. But and if that brightness abide 
still in one place and go no further in the skin and be blackish, 
then it is but a rising in the place of the burning, and the 
priest shall make him clean: for it is but the print of the 
burning only. When either man or woman hath a breaking out upon 
the head or the beard, let the priest see it. And if it appear 
lower than the other skin, and there be therein golden hairs and 
thin, let the priest make {judge} him unclean, for it is a 
breaking out of leprosy upon the head or beard. If (when the 
priest looketh on the breaking out) he see that it is no lower 
than the other skin and that there are black hairs therein, let 
him shut him up seven days. And let the priest look on the disease 
the seventh day: and if the breaking out be gone no further 
neither be any golden hairs therein neither the scab be lower than 
the other skin, then let him be shaven, but let him not shave the 
scab, and let the priest shut him up seven days more. And let the 
priest look on the breaking out the seventh day again: If the 
breaking out be gone no further in the skin nor more lower than 
the other skin, then let the priest make {judge} him clean, and 
let him wash his clothes and then he is clean. If the breaking out 
grow in the skin after that he is once made {judged} clean, let 
the priest see him. If it be grown abroad indeed in the skin, let 
the priest seek no further for any golden hairs, for he is 
unclean. But and if he see that the scab stond still, and that 
there is black hair grown up therein, then the scab is healed and 
he is clean: and the priest shall make {judge} him clean. If there 
be found in the skin of the flesh of man or woman a glistering 
white, let the priest see it. If there appear in their flesh a 
glistering white somewhat blackish, then it is but freckles grown 
up in the skin: and he is clean. If a man's hair fall off his 
head, then he is headbald and clean. If his hair fall before in 
his forehead, then he is foreheadbald and clean. If there be in 
the bald head or bald forehead a reddish white scab, then there is 
leprosy sprung up in his bald head or bald forehead. And let the 
priest see it: and if the rising of the sore be reddish white in 
his bald head or forehead after the manner of a leprosy in the 
skin of the flesh, then he is a leper and unclean: and the priest 
shall make {judge} him unclean, for the plague of his head. And 
the leper in whom the plague is, shall have his clothes rent and 
his head bare and his mouth muffled and shall be called unclean. 
And as long as the disease lasteth upon him, he shall be unclean: 
for he is unclean, and shall therefore dwell alone, and even 
without the host shall his habitation be. When the plague of 
leprosy is in a cloth: whether it be linen or woollen, yea and 
whether it be in the warp or woof of the linen or of the woollen: 
either in a skin or any thing made of skin, if the disease be pale 
or somewhat reddish in the cloth or skin: whether it be in the 
warp or the woof or any thing that is made of skin, then it is a 
very leprosy, and must be shewed unto the priest. And when the 
priest seeth the plague, let him shut it up seven days, and let 
him look on the plague the seventh day. If it be increased in the 
cloth: whether it be in the warp or woof or in a skin or in 
anything that is made of skin, then the plague is a fretting 
leprosy, and it is unclean: And that cloth shall be burnt, either 
warp or woof, whether it be woollen or linen or any thing that is 
made of skin wherein the plague is, for it is a fretting leprosy, 
and shall be burnt in the fire. If the priest see that the plague 
hath fretten no further in the cloth: either in the warp or woof 
or in whatsoever thing of skin it be, then let the priest command 
then to wash the thing wherein the plague is, and let him shut it 
up seven days more. And let the priest look on it again after that 
the plague is washed. If the plague have not changed his fashion 
though it be spread no further abroad, it is yet unclean. And see 
that ye burn it in the fire, for it is fretten inward: whether in 
part or in all together. But and if the priest see that it is 
somewhat blackish after that it is washed, let him rent it out of 
the cloth, or out of the skin or out of the warp or woof. But and 
if it appear any more in the cloth either in the warp or in the 
woof or in anything made of skin, then it is a waxing plague. And 
see that ye burn that with fire, wherein the plague is. Moreover 
the cloth either warp or woof or whatsoever thing of skin it be 
which thou hast washed and the plague be departed from it, shall 
be washed once again: and then it is clean. This is the law of the 
plague of leprosy in a cloth whether it be woollen or linen: 
either whether it be in the warp or woof, or in anything made of 
skins, to make {judge} it clean or unclean.

Chapter .xiiij.

And the LORD spake unto Moses saying: this is the law of a leper 
when he shall be cleansed: He shall be brought unto the priest, 
and the priest shall go out without the host and look upon him. If 
the plague of leprosy be healed in the leper, then shall the 
priest command that there be brought for him that shall be 
cleansed two living birds that are clean, and cypress {cedar} 
wood, and a piece of purple cloth and hyssop. And the priest shall 
command that one of the birds be killed over {in} an earthen 
vessel of running water. And the priest shall take the living bird 
and the cypress {cedar} wood and the purple and the hyssop, and 
shall dip them and the living bird in the blood of the slain bird, 
and in the running water and sprinkle it upon him that must be 
cleansed of his leprosy seven times and cleanse him, and shall let 
the living bird go free into the fields. And he that is cleansed 
shall wash his clothes and shave off all his hair, and wash 
himself in water, and then he is clean. And after that he shall 
come into the host, but shall tarry without his tent seven days. 
When the seventh day is come, he shall shave off all his hair both 
upon his head and his beard and on his brows: and even all the 
hair that is on him, shall be shaven off. And he shall wash his 
clothes and his flesh in water, and then he shall be clean. And 
when the eighth day is come, let him take two lambs without 
blemish and a ewe lamb of a year old without blemish, and three 
tenth deals of fine flour for a meatoffering mingled with oil, and 
a log of oil. Then let the priest that maketh him clean, bring the 
man that is made clean with those things before the LORD unto the 
door of the tabernacle of witness. And let the priest take one of 
the lambs and offer him for a trespassoffering, and the log of 
oil: and wave them before the LORD. And then let him slay the lamb 
in the place where the sinoffering and the burntoffering are 
slain: even in the holy place. For as the sinoffering is, even so 
is the trespassoffering the priest's: for it is most holy. Then 
let the priest take of the blood of the trespassoffering, and put 
it upon the tip of the right ear of him that is cleansed, and upon 
the thumb of his right hand, and upon the great toe of his right 
foot. Then let the priest take of the log of oil, and pour it into 
the palm of his left hand and dip his right finger in the oil that 
is in the palm of his left hand, and let him sprinkle it with his 
finger seven times before the LORD. And of the rest of the oil 
that is in his hand, shall the priest put upon the tip of the 
right ear of him that is cleansed, and upon the thumb of his right 
hand, and upon the great toe of his right foot: even upon the 
blood of the trespass offering. And the remnant of the oil that is 
in the priest's hand, he shall pour upon the head of him that is 
cleansed: and so shall be priest make an atonement for him before 
the LORD. Then let the priest offer the sinoffering, and make an 
atonement for him that is cleansed for his uncleanness. And then 
let the burntoffering be slain, and let the priest put both the 
burntoffering and the meatoffering upon the altar; and make an 
atonement for him, and then he shall be clean. If he be poor and 
can not get so much, then let him bring one lamb for a 
trespassoffering to wave it and to make an atonement for him, and 
a tenth deal of fine flour mingled with oil for a meatoffering, 
and a log of oil, and two turtle doves or two young pigeons which 
he is able to get, and let the one be a sinoffering and the other 
a burntoffering. And let him bring them the eighth day for his 
cleansing unto the priest to the door of the tabernacle of witness 
before the LORD. And let the priest take the lamb that is the 
trespassoffering and the log of oil, and wave them before the 
LORD. And when the lamb of the trespassoffering is killed, the 
priest shall take of the blood of the trespass offering, and put 
it upon the tip of his right ear that is cleansed, and upon the 
thumb of his right hand, and upon the great toe of his right foot. 
And the priest shall pour of the oil into his right hand, and 
shall sprinkle with his finger of the oil that is in his left hand 
seven times before the LORD. And the priest shall put of the oil 
that is in his hand, upon the tip of the right ear of him that is 
cleansed, and upon the thumb of his right hand, and upon the great 
toe of his right foot: even in the place where the blood of the 
trespassoffering was put. And the rest of the oil that is in his 
hand, he shall pour upon the head of him that is cleansed: to make 
an atonement for him before the LORD. And he shall offer one of 
the turtle doves or of the young pigeons, such as he can get: the 
one for a sin offering and the other for a burntoffering upon the 
altar. And so shall the priest make an atonement for him that is 
cleansed before the LORD. This is the law of him that hath the 
plague of leprosy, whose hand is not able to get that which 
pertaineth to his cleansing. And the LORD spake unto Moses and 
Aaron saying: when ye be come unto the land of Canaan which I give 
you to possess: if I put the plague of leprosy in any house of the 
land of your possession, let him that owneth the house go and tell 
the priest saying: me think that there is as it were a leprosy in 
the house. And the priest shall command them to rid all things out 
of the house, before the priest go in to see the plague: that he 
make not all that is in the house unclean, and then the priest 
shall go in and see the house. If the priest see that the plague 
is in the walls of the house, and that there be hollow streaks 
pale or red which seem to be lower than the other parts of the 
wall, then let the priest go out at the house doors, and shut up 
the house for seven days. And let the priest come again the 
seventh day and see it: if the plague be increased in the walls of 
the house, let the priest command them to take away the stones in 
which the plague is, and let them cast them in a foul place 
without the city, and scrape the house within round about, and 
pour out the dust without the city in a foul place. And let them 
take other stones and put them in the places of those stones, and 
other mortar, and plaster the house withal. If now the plague come 
again and break out in the house, after that they have taken away 
the stones and scraped the house, and after that the house is 
plastered anew: let the priest come and see it. And if then he 
perceive that the plague hath eaten further in the house, then it 
is a fretting leprosy that is in the house, and it is unclean. 
Then they shall break down the house: both stones, timber and all 
the mortar of the house, and carry it out of the city unto a foul 
place. Moreover he that goeth into the house all the while that it 
is shut up, shall be unclean until night. And he that sleepeth in 
the house shall wash his clothes, and he also that eateth in the 
house shall wash his clothes. But and if the priest come and see 
that the plague hath spread no further in the house after that it 
is new plastered, then let him make it clean for the plague is 
healed. And let him take to cleanse the house withal: two birds, 
cypress wood, and purple cloth and hyssop. And let him kill one of 
the birds over {in} an earthen vessel of {with} running water: and 
take the cypress {cedar} wood, the hyssop, the purple and the 
living bird, and dip them in the blood of the slain bird and in 
the running water, and sprinkle upon the house seven times, and 
cleanse the house with the blood of the bird, and with the running 
water, and with the living bird, and with the cypress wood, and 
the hyssop, and the purple cloth. And he shall let the living bird 
flee out of the town into the wild fields, and so make an 
atonement for the house, and it shall be clean. This is the law of 
all manner plague of leprosy and breaking out, and of the leprosy 
of cloth and house: and of risings, scabs and glistering white, to 
teach when a thing is unclean or clean. This is the law of 
leprosy.

Chapter .xv.

And the LORD spake unto Moses and Aaron saying: Speak unto the 
children of Israel and say unto them: every man that hath a 
running issue in his flesh, is unclean by the reason of his issue. 
And hereby shall it be known when he is unclean. If his flesh run, 
or if his flesh congeal by the reason of his issue, then he is 
unclean. Every couch whereon he lieth and every thing whereon he 
sitteth shall be unclean. He that twicheth his couch, shall wash 
his clothes and bathe himself with water, and be unclean until the 
even. He that sitteth on that whereon he sat, shall wash his 
clothes and bathe himself with water and be unclean until the 
evening. And he that twicheth his flesh shall wash his clothes and 
bathe himself in water and be unclean unto the evening. If any 
such spit upon him that is clean, he must wash his clothes and 
bathe himself in water and be unclean until even. And whatsoever 
saddle that he rideth upon, shall be unclean. And whosoever 
twicheth anything that was under him, shall be unclean unto the 
evening. And he that beareth any such things shall wash his 
clothes, and bathe himself in water and be unclean unto the even, 
and whosoever he twicheth (if he have not first washed his hands 
in water) must wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and 
be unclean unto the evening. And if he twich a vessel of earth, it 
shall be broken: and all vessels of wood shall be rinsed in the 
water. When he that hath an issue is cleansed of his issue, let 
him number seven days after he is clean, and wash his clothes, and 
bathe his flesh in running water, and then he is clean. And the 
eighth day let him take two turtle doves or two young pigeons, and 
come before the LORD unto the door of the tabernacle of witness, 
and give them unto the priest. And the priest shall offer them: 
the one for a sinoffering, and the other for a burntoffering: and 
make an atonement for him before the LORD, as concerning his 
issue. If any man's seed depart from him in his sleep, he shall 
wash his flesh in water and be unclean until evening. And all the 
clothes or furs whereon such seed chanceth shall be washed with 
water and be unclean unto the evening. And if a woman lie with 
such a one, they shall wash them selves with water and be unclean 
until even. When a woman's natural course of blood runneth, she 
shall be put apart seven days: and whosoever twicheth her shall be 
unclean unto the evening. And all that she lieth {[or sitteth]} 
upon as long as she is put apart shall be unclean. And whosoever 
twicheth her couch shall wash his clothes and bathe himself with 
water and be unclean unto the evening. And whosoever twicheth 
anything that she sat upon, shall wash his clothes and wash 
himself also in water, and be unclean unto the even: so that 
whether he twich her couch or anything whereon she hath sitten, he 
shall be unclean unto the evening. And if a man lie with her in 
the mean time, he shall be put apart as well as she and shall be 
unclean seven days, and all his couch wherein he sleepeth shall be 
unclean. When a woman's blood runneth long time: whether out of 
the time of her natural course: as long as her uncleanness 
runneth, she shall be unclean after the manner as when she is put 
apart. All her couches whereon she lieth (as long as her issue 
lasteth) shall be unto her as her couch when she is put apart. And 
whatsoever she sitteth upon, shall be unclean, as is her 
uncleanness when she is put apart. And whosoever twicheth them, 
shall be unclean, and shall wash his clothes and bathe himself in 
water and be unclean unto evening. And when {But if} she is 
cleansed {be clean} of her issue, let her count her seven days, 
after that she is clean. And the eighth day let her take two 
turtles or two young pigeons and bring them unto the priest unto 
the door of the tabernacle of witness. And the priest shall offer 
the one for a sinoffering, and the other for a burntoffering: and 
so make an atonement for her before the LORD, as concerning her 
unclean issue. Make the children of Israel to keep them selves 
from their uncleanness, that they die not in their uncleanness: 
when they have defiled my habitation that is among them. This is 
the law of him that hath a running sore, and of him whose seed 
runneth from him in his sleep and is defiled therewith, and of her 
that hath an issue of blood as long as she is put apart, and of 
whosoever hath a running sore whether it be man or woman, and of 
him that sleepeth with her that is unclean.

Chapter .xvi.

And the LORD spake unto Moses after the death of the two sons of 
Aaron, when they had offered before the LORD and died: And he said 
unto Moses: speak unto Aaron thy brother that he go not at all 
times into the holy place, that is whithin the vail that hangeth 
before the mercy seat which is upon the ark that he die not. For I 
will appear in a cloud upon the mercy seat. But of this manner 
shall Aaron go in into the holy place: with a young ox {bullock} 
for a sinoffering, and a ram for a burntoffering. And he shall put 
the holy linen alb upon him, and shall have a linen breech upon 
his flesh, and shall gird him with a linen girdle, and put the 
linen mitre upon his head: for they are holy raiments. And he 
shall wash his flesh with water, and put them on. And he shall 
take of the multitude of the children of Israel two goats for a 
sinoffering and a ram for a burntoffering. And Aaron shall offer 
the ox for his sinoffering and make an atonement for him and for 
his house. And he shall take the two goats and present them before 
the LORD in the door of the tabernacle of witness. And Aaron cast 
lots over the two goats: one lot for the LORD, and another for a 
scapegoat. And Aaron shall bring the goat upon which the LORD's 
lot fell, and offer him for a sinoffering. But the goat on which 
the lot fell to scape, he shall set alive before the LORD to 
reconcile with and to let him go free into the wilderness. And 
Aaron shall bring the ox of his sinoffering, and reconcile for 
himself and for his household, and kill him. And then he shall 
take a censer full of burning coals out of the altar that is 
before the LORD, and his handful of sweet cense beaten small, and 
bring them within the vail and put the cense upon the fire before 
the LORD: that the cloud of the cense may cover the mercy seat 
that is upon the witness, that he die not. And he shall take of 
the blood of the ox and sprinkle it with his finger before the 
mercy seat eastward: even seven times. Then shall he kill the goat 
that is the people's sinoffering, and bring his blood within the 
vail, and do with his blood as he did with the blood of the ox, 
and let him sprinkle it toward the mercy seat, and before the 
mercy seat: and reconcile the holy place from the uncleanness of 
the children of Israel, and from their trespasses and all their 
sins. And so let him do also unto the tabernacle of witness that 
dwelleth with them, even among their uncleannesses. And there 
shall be nobody in the tabernacle of witness, when he goeth in to 
make an atonement in the holy place, until he come out again. And 
he shall make an atonement for himself and for his household, and 
for all the multitude of Israel. Then he shall go out unto the 
altar that stondeth before the LORD, and reconcile it, and shall 
take of the blood of the ox and of the blood of the goat, and put 
it upon the horns of the altar round about, and sprinkle of the 
blood upon it with his finger seven times, and cleanse it, and 
hallow it from the uncleannesses of the children of Israel. And 
when he hath made an end of reconciling the holy place and the 
tabernacle of witness and the altar, let him bring the live goat 
and let Aaron put both his hands upon the head of the live goat, 
and confess over him all the misdeeds of the children of Israel, 
and all their trespasses, and all their sins: and let him put them 
upon the head of the goat and send him away by the hands of one 
that is acquainted in the wilderness. And the goat shall bear upon 
him all their misdeeds unto the wilderness, and he shall let the 
goat go free in the wilderness. And let Aaron go in to the 
tabernacle of witness and put off the line clothes which he put on 
when he went in into the holy place, and leave them there. And let 
him wash his flesh with water in the holy place, and put on his 
own raiment, and then come out and offer his burntoffering and the 
burntoffering of the people, and make an atonement for himself and 
for the people, and the fat of the sinoffering let him burn upon 
the altar. And let him that carried forth the scapegoat, wash his 
clothes and bathe his flesh in water, and then come into the host 
again. And the ox of the sinoffering and the goat of the 
sinoffering (whose blood was brought in to make an atonement in 
the holy place) let one carry out without the host and burn with 
fire: both their skins, their flesh and their dung. And let him 
that burneth them, wash his clothes and bathe his flesh in water, 
and then come into the host again. And it {this} shall be an 
ordinance for ever unto you. And even in the tenth day of the 
seventh month, ye shall humble your souls and shall do no work at 
all: whether it be one of your selves or a stranger that 
sojourneth among you, for that day shall an atonement be made for 
you to cleanse you from all your sins before the LORD, and ye 
shall be clean. It shall be a Sabbath of rest unto you, and ye 
shall humble your souls, and it shall be an ordinance for ever. 
And the priest that is anointed and whose hand was filled to 
minister in his father's stead, shall make the atonement and shall 
put on the holy linen {[clothes and holy]} vestments, and 
reconcile the holy sanctuary and the tabernacle of witness and the 
altar, and shall make an atonement also for the priests and for 
all the people of the congregation. And this shall be an 
everlasting ordinance unto you to make an atonement for the 
children of Israel for all their sins once a year: and it was done 
even as the LORD commanded Moses.

Chapter .xvij.

And the LORD talked with Moses saying: speak unto Aaron and unto 
his sons and unto all the children of Israel and say unto them, 
this is the thing which the LORD charged saying: whatsoever he be 
of the house of Israel that killeth an ox, lamb or goat in the 
host or out of the host and bringeth them not unto the door of the 
tabernacle of witness, to offer an offering unto the LORD before 
the dwelling place of the LORD, blood shall be imputed unto that 
man, as though he had shed blood, and that man shall perish from 
among his people. Wherefore let the children of Israel bring their 
offerings they offer in the wide field, unto the LORD: even unto 
the door of the tabernacle of witness and unto the priest, and 
offer them for peaceofferings unto the LORD. And the priest shall 
sprinkle the blood upon the altar of the LORD in the door of the 
tabernacle of witness, and burn the fat to be a sweet savour unto 
the LORD. And let them no more offer their offerings unto devils, 
after whom they go an whoring. And this shall be an ordinance for 
ever unto you thorowout your generations. And thou shalt say unto 
them: whatsoever man it be of the house of Israel or of the 
strangers that sojourn among you that offereth a burntoffering or 
any other offering, and bringeth it not unto the door of the 
tabernacle of witness to offer unto the LORD, that fellow shall 
perish from among his people. And whatsoever man it be of the 
house of Israel or of the strangers that sojourn among you that 
eateth any manner of blood, I will set my face against that soul 
that eateth blood, and will destroy him from among his people, for 
the life of the flesh is in the blood, and I have given it unto 
you upon the altar, to make an atonement for your souls, for blood 
shall make an atonement for the soul. And therefore I said unto 
the children of Israel: see that no soul of you eat blood, nor yet 
any stranger that sojourneth among you. Whatsoever man it be of 
the children of Israel or of the strangers that sojourn among you 
that hunteth and catcheth any beast or fowl that may be eaten, he 
shall pour out the blood and cover it with earth. For the life of 
all flesh is in the blood, therefore I said unto the children of 
Israel, ye shall eat the blood of no manner of flesh, for the life 
of all flesh is in his blood, and whosoever therefore eateth it 
shall perish. And whatsoever soul it be that eateth that which 
died alone or that which was torn with wild beasts: whether it be 
one of your selves or a stranger, he shall wash his clothes and 
bathe himself in water, and shall be unclean unto the even, and 
then is he clean. But and if he wash them not nor wash his flesh 
he shall bear his sin.

Chapter .xviij.

And the LORD talked with Moses saying: speak unto the children of 
Israel, and say unto them, I am the LORD your God. Wherefore after 
the doings of the land of Egypt wherein ye dwelt, see that ye do 
not: neither after the doings of the land of Canaan, whether I 
will bring you, neither walk ye in their ordinances, but do after 
my judgments, and keep mine ordinances, to walk therein: for I am 
the LORD your God. Keep therefore mine ordinances, and my 
judgments which if a man do he shall live thereby: for I am the 
LORD. See that ye go to none of your nyest kindred for to uncover 
their secrets, for I am the LORD. The secrets of thy father and 
thy mother, see thou unhele not: she is thy mother, therefore 
shalt thou not discover her secrets. The secrets of thy father's 
wife shalt thou not discover, for they are thy father's secrets. 
Thou shalt not discover the privity of thy sister, the daughter of 
thy father or of thy mother: whether she be born at home or 
without. Thou shalt not discover the secrets of thy son's daughter 
or thy daughter's daughter, for that is thine own privity: Thou 
shalt not discover the secrets of thy father's wife's daughter, 
which she bare to thy father, for she is thy sister: thou shalt 
therefore not discover her secrets. Thou shalt not uncover the 
secrets of thy father's sister, for she is thy father's next kin. 
{kinswoman.} Thou shalt not discover the secrets of thy mother's 
sister, for she is thy mother's next kin. {kinswoman.} Thou shalt 
not open {uncover} the secrets of thy father's brother: that is 
thou shalt not go in to his wife, for she is thine aunt. Thou 
shalt not discover {privities} the secrets of thy daughter-in-law 
she is thy son's wife: therefore uncover not her secrets. Thou 
shalt not unhele the secrets of thy brother's wife, for that is 
thy brother's privity. Thou shalt not discover the privates of the 
wife and her daughter also, neither shalt thou take her son's 
daughter or her daughter's daughter to uncover their secrets, they 
are her next kin, it were therefore wickedness. Thou shalt not 
take a wife and her sister thereto, to vex her that thou wouldest 
open her secrets as long as she liveth. Thou shalt not go unto a 
woman to open her secrets, {uncover her privity} as long as she is 
put apart for her uncleanness. Thou shalt not lie with thy 
neighbour's wife, to defile thyself with her. Thou shalt not give 
of thy seed to offer it unto Moloch, that thou defile not the name 
of thy God, for I am the LORD. Thou shalt not lie with mankind as 
with womankind, for that is abomination. Thou shalt lie with no 
manner of beast to defile thyself therewith, neither shall any 
woman stond before a beast to lie down thereto, for that is 
abomination. Defile not your selves in any of these things, for 
with all these things are these nations defiled which I cast out 
before you: and the land is defiled, and I will visit the 
wickedness thereof upon it. And the land shall spew out her 
inhabiters. Keep ye therefore mine ordinances and judgements, and 
see that ye commit none of these abominations: neither any of you 
nor any stranger that sojourneth among you (for all these 
abominations have the men of the land done which were there before 
you, and the land is defiled) lest that the land spew you out when 
ye have defiled it, as it spewed out the nations that were there 
before you. For whosoever shall commit any of these abominations, 
the same souls that commit them shall perish from among their 
people. Therefore see that ye keep mine ordinances, that ye commit 
none of these abominable customs which were committed before you: 
that ye defile not your selves therewith for I am the LORD your 
God.

Chapter .xix.

And the LORD spake unto Moses saying: speak unto all the multitude 
of the children of Israel, and say unto them. Be holy for I the 
LORD your God am holy. See that ye fear every man his father and 
his mother, and that ye keep my Sabbaths, for I am the LORD your 
God. Ye shall not turn unto idols nor make you gods of metal: I am 
the LORD your God. When ye offer your peaceofferings unto the 
LORD, ye shall offer them that ye may be accepted. And it shall be 
eaten the same day ye offer it and on the morrow, but whatsoever 
is left on the third day shall be burnt in the fire. If it be 
eaten the third day, it shall be unclean and not accepted. And he 
that eateth it shall bear his sin, because he hath defiled the 
hallowed things of the LORD, and that soul shall perish from among 
his people. When ye reap down the ripe corn of your land, ye shall 
not reap down the utmost borders of your fields, neither shalt 
thou gather that which is left behind in thy harvest. Thou shalt 
not pluck in all thy vineyard clean, neither gather in the grapes 
that are overscaped. But thou shalt leave them for the poor and 
stranger. I am the LORD your God. Ye shall not steal neither lie, 
neither deal falsely one with another. Ye shall not swear by my 
name falsely: that thou defilest not the name of thy God, I am the 
LORD. Thou shalt not beguile thy neighbour with cavillations, 
neither rob him violently, neither shall the workman's labour 
abide with thee until the morning. Thou shalt not curse the deaf, 
neither put a stumbling block before the blind: but shalt fear thy 
God. I am the LORD. Ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgement. 
Thou shalt not favour the poor nor honour the mighty, but shalt 
judge thy neighbour righteously. Thou shalt not go up and down a 
privy accuser among thy people, neither shalt thou help to shed 
the blood of thy neighbour: I am the LORD. Thou shalt not hate thy 
brother in thine heart but shalt in any wise rebuke thy neighbour: 
that thou bear not sin for his sake. Thou shalt not avenge thyself 
nor bear hate in thy mind against the children of thy people, but 
shalt love thy neighbour even as thyself. I am the LORD. Keep mine 
ordinances. Let none of thy cattle gender with a contrary kind, 
neither sow thy field with mingled seed, neither shalt thou put on 
any garment of linen and woollen. If a man have to do with a woman 
that is bond and hath been meddled with all of another man which 
neither is bought nor freedom given her, there shall be a pain 
upon it: but they shall not die, because she was not made free. 
And he shall bring for his trespassoffering unto the LORD: even 
unto the door of the tabernacle of witness, a ram for a trespass 
offering. And the priest shall make an atonement for him with the 
ram of the trespassoffering before the LORD, for his sin which he 
hath done: and it shall be forgiven him, as concerning the sin 
which he hath done. And when ye come to the land and have planted 
all manner of trees whereof men eat, ye shall hold them 
uncircumcised as concerning their fruit: even three years shall 
they be uncircumcised unto you and shall not be eaten of, and the 
fourth year all the fruit of them shall be holy and acceptable to 
the LORD. And the fifth year may ye eat of the fruit of them, and 
gather in the increase of them: I am the LORD your God. Ye shall 
eat nothing with the blood, ye shall use no witchcraft, nor 
observe dismal days, ye shall not round the locks of your heads, 
neither shalt thou mar the tufts of thy beard. Ye shall not rent 
your flesh for any soul's sake, nor print any marks upon you: I am 
the LORD. Thou shalt not pollute thy daughter, that thou wouldest 
maintain her to be an whore: lest the land fall to whoredom, and 
wax full of wickedness. See that ye keep my Sabbaths and fear my 
sanctuary: I am the LORD. Turn not to them that work with spirits, 
neither regard them that observe dismal days: that ye be not 
defiled by them, for I am the LORD your God. Thou shalt rise up 
before the hoarhead, and reverence the face of the old man and 
dread thy God, for I am the LORD. If a stranger sojourn by thee in 
your land, see that ye vex him not: But let the stranger that 
dwelleth with you, be as one of your selves, and love him as thy 
self, for ye were strangers in the land of Egypt. I am the LORD 
your God. Ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgement neither in 
meteyard, weight or measure. But ye shall have true balances, true 
weights, a true Epha and a true hin. I am the LORD your God which 
brought you out of the land of Egypt, that ye should observe all 
mine ordinances and judgments and that ye should keep them: I am 
the LORD.

Chapter .xx.

And the LORD talked with Moses saying: tell the children of 
Israel, whosoever he be of the children of Israel or of the 
strangers that dwell in Israel, that giveth of his seed unto 
Moloch he shall die for it: the people of the land shall stone him 
with stones. And I will set my face upon that fellow, and will 
destroy him from among his people: because he hath given of his 
seed unto Moloch, for to defile my sanctuary and to pollute mine 
holy name. And though that the people of the land hide their eyes 
from that fellow, when he giveth of his seed unto Moloch, so that 
they kill him not: yet I will put my face upon that man and upon 
his household, {generation} and will destroy him and all that go a 
whoring with him and commit whoredom with Moloch from among their 
people. If any soul turn unto them that work with spirits or 
makers of dismal days {turn him to enchanters or expounders of 
tokens} and go a whoring after them, I will put my face upon that 
soul and will destroy him from among his people. Sanctify your 
selves therefore and be holy, for I am the LORD your God. And see 
that ye keep mine ordinances and do them. For I am the LORD which 
sanctify you. Whosoever curseth his father or mother, shall die 
for it, his blood on his head, because he hath cursed his father 
or mother. He that breaketh wedlock with another man's wife shall 
die for it, because he hath broke wedlock with his neighbour's 
wife, and so shall she likewise. If a man lie with his father's 
wife and uncover his father's secrets, they shall both die for it, 
their blood be upon their heads. If a man lie with his daughter-
in-law they shall die both of them: they have wrought abomination, 
their blood upon their heads. If a man lie with the mankind after 
the manner as with womankind, they have both committed an 
abomination and shall die for it. Their blood be upon their heads. 
If a man take a wife and her mother thereto, it is wickedness. Men 
shall burn with fire both him and them, that there be no 
wickedness among you. If a man lie with a beast he shall die, and 
ye shall slay the beast. If a woman go unto a beast and lie down 
thereto: thou shalt kill the woman and the beast also they shall 
die, and their blood be upon their heads. If a man take his 
sister, his father's daughter or his mother's daughter, and see 
her secrets, and she see his secrets also: it is a wicked thing. 
Therefore let them perish in the sight of their people; he hath 
seen his sister's secretness, he shall therefore bear his sin. If 
a man lie with a woman in time of her natural disease and unheal 
{uncover} her secrets and uncover {open} her fountain, and she 
also open the fountain of her blood, they shall both perish from 
among their people. Thou shalt not uncover the secrets of thy 
mother's sister nor of thy father's sisters, for he that doth so, 
uncovereth his next kin: and they shall bear their misdoing. If a 
man lie with his uncle's wife, he hath uncovered his uncle's 
secrets: they shall bear their sin, and shall die childless. If a 
man take his brother's wife, it is an unclean thing, he hath 
uncovered his brother's secrets, they shall be childless 
therefore. See that ye keep therefore all mine ordinances and all 
my judgements, and that ye do them: that the land whither I bring 
you to dwell therein, spew you not out. And see that ye walk not 
in the manners of the nations which I cast out before you: For 
they committed all these things, and I abhorred them. But I have 
said unto you that ye shall enjoy their land, and that I will give 
it unto you to possess it: even a land that floweth with milk and 
honey. I am the LORD your God, which have separated you from other 
nations: that ye should put difference between clean beasts and 
unclean, and between unclean fowls and them that are clean. Make 
not your souls therefore abominable with beasts and fowls, and 
with all manner thing that creepeth upon the ground, which I have 
separated unto you to hold them unclean. Be holy unto me, for I 
the LORD am holy and have severed you from other nations: that ye 
should be mine. If there be man or woman that worketh with a 
spirit or a maker of dismal days, {expoundeth tokens} they shall 
die for it. Men shall stone them with stones, and their blood 
shall be upon them.

Chapter .xxj.

And the LORD said unto Moses: speak unto the priests the sons of 
Aaron and say unto them: A priest shall defile himself at the 
death of none of his people, but upon his kin that is nye unto 
him: as his mother, father, son, daughter and brother: and on his 
sister as long as she is a maid and dwelleth nye him and was never 
given to man: on her he may defile himself. But he shall not make 
himself unclean upon a ruler of his people to pollute himself 
withal. They shall make them no baldness upon their heads or shave 
off the locks of their beards, nor make any marks in their flesh. 
They shall be holy unto their God, and not pollute the name of 
their God, for the sacrifices of the LORD and the bread of their 
God they do offer: therefore they must be holy. They shall take no 
wife that is an whore, or polluted, or put from her husband: for a 
priest is holy unto his God. Sanctify him therefore, for he 
offereth up the bread of God: he shall therefore be holy unto 
thee, for I the LORD which sanctify you, am holy. If a priest's 
daughter fall to play the whore, she polluteth her father: 
therefore she shall be burnt with fire. He that is the high priest 
among his brethren upon whose head the anointing oil was poured 
and whose hand was filled to put on the vestments, shall not 
uncover his head nor rent his clothes, neither shall go to any 
dead body nor make himself unclean: no not on his father or 
mother, neither shall go out of the sanctuary, that he pollute not 
the holy place of his God, for the crown of the anointing oil of 
God, is upon him. I am the LORD. He shall take a maiden unto his 
wife: but no widow nor divorced nor polluted whore. But he shall 
take a maiden of his own people to wife, that he defile not his 
seed upon his people. For I am the LORD which sanctify him. And 
the LORD spake unto Moses saying, speak unto Aaron and say: No man 
of thy seed in their generations that hath any deformity upon him, 
shall prease for to offer the bread of his God: For none that hath 
any blemish shall come near: whether he be blind, lame, 
snoutnosed, or that hath any monstrous member, or broken footed, 
or broken handed, or crook backed, or perleyed, or goggle eyed, or 
mangy or skald, or hath his stones broken. No man that is deformed 
of the seed of Aaron the priest, shall come nye to offer the 
sacrifices of the LORD. If he have a deformity, he shall not prese 
to offer the bread of his God. Notwithstanding he shall eat of the 
bread of his God: even as well of the most holy, as of the holy: 
but shall not go in unto the vail nor come nye the altar, because 
he is deformed, that he pollute not my sanctuary, for I am the 
LORD that sanctify them. And Moses told it unto Aaron and to his 
sons, and unto all the children of Israel.

Chapter .xxij.

And the LORD communed with Moses saying: bid Aaron and his sons 
that they abstain from the hallowed things of the children of 
Israel which they have hallowed unto me, that they pollute not 
mine holy name: for I am the LORD. Say unto them: whosoever he be 
of all your seed among your generation after you, that goeth unto 
the hallowed things which the children of Israel shall have 
hallowed unto the LORD, his uncleanness shall be upon him: and 
that soul shall perish from out of my sight. I am the LORD. None 
of the seed of Aaron that is a leper or that hath a running sore, 
shall eat of the hallowed things until he be clean. And whosoever 
twitcheth any unclean soul or man whose seed runneth from him by 
night, or whosoever twicheth any worm that is unclean to him, or 
man that is unclean to him, whatsoever uncleanness he hath: the 
same soul that hath twiched any such thing, shall be unclean until 
even, and shall not eat of the hallowed things until he have 
washed his flesh with water. And then when the son is down he 
shall be clean and shall afterward eat of the hallowed things: for 
they are his food. Of a beast that dieth alone or is rent with 
wild beasts, he shall not eat, to defile himself therewith: I am 
the LORD. But let them keep therefore mine ordinance, lest they 
lade sin upon them and die therein when they have defiled them 
selves: for I am the LORD which sanctify them. There shall no 
stranger eat of the hallowed things, neither a guest of the 
priests, or an hired servant. But if the priest buy any fowl with 
money he may eat of it, and he also that is born in his house may 
eat of his bread. If the priest's daughter be married unto a 
stranger, she may not eat of the hallowed heave offerings. 
Notwithstanding if the priest's daughter be a widow or divorced 
and have no child but is returned unto her father's house again, 
she shall eat of her father's bread as well as she did in her 
youth. But there shall no stranger eat thereof. If a man eat of 
the hallowed things unwittingly, he shall put the fifth part 
thereunto, and make good unto the priest the hallowed thing. And 
let the priests see, that they defile not the hallowed things of 
the children of Israel which they have offered unto the LORD, lest 
they lade them selves with misdoing and trespass in eating their 
hallowed things, for I am the LORD which hallow them. And the LORD 
spake unto Moses saying: speak unto Aaron and his sons and unto 
all the children of Israel and say unto them, whatsoever he be of 
the house of Israel or stranger in Israel that will offer his 
offering: whatsoever vow or freewill offering it be which they 
will offer unto the LORD for a burntoffering to reconcile them 
selves, it must be a male without blemish of the oxen, sheep or 
goats, let them offer nothing that is deformed for they shall get 
no favour therewith. If a man will offer a peaceoffering unto the 
LORD and separate a vow or a freewill offering of the oxen or the 
flock, it must be without deformity, that it may be accepted. 
There may be no blemish therein: whether it be blind, broken, 
wounded or have a wen, or be mangy or scabbed; see that ye offer 
no such unto the LORD, nor put an offering of any such upon the 
altar unto the LORD. An ox or a sheep that hath any member out of 
proportion, mayst thou offer for a freewill offering: but in a vow 
it shall not be accepted. Thou shalt not offer unto the LORD that 
which hath his stones bruised, broken, plucked out or cut away, 
neither shalt make any such in your land, neither of a stranger's 
hand shall ye offer an offering to your God of any such. For they 
mar all in that they have deformities in them, and therefore can 
not be accepted for you. And the LORD spake unto Moses saying: 
when an ox, a sheep or a goat is brought forth, it shall be seven 
days under the dam. And from the eighth day forth, it shall be 
accepted unto a gift in the sacrifice of the LORD. And whether it 
be ox or sheep, ye shall not kill it, and her young: both in one 
day. When ye will offer a thankoffering unto the LORD, ye shall so 
offer it that ye may be accepted. And the same day it must be 
eaten up, so that ye leave none of it until the morrow. For I am 
the LORD, keep now my commandments and do them, for I am the LORD. 
And pollute not my holy name, that I may be hallowed among the 
children of Israel. For I am the LORD which hallow you, and 
brought you out of the land of Egypt, to be your God: for I am the 
LORD.

Chapter .xxiij.

And the LORD spake unto Moses saying: speak unto the children of 
Israel, and say unto them: These are the feasts of the LORD which 
ye shall call holy feasts. Six days ye shall work, and the seventh 
is the Sabbath of rest an holy feast: so that ye may do no work 
therein, for it is the Sabbath of the LORD, wheresoever ye dwell. 
These are the feasts of the LORD which ye shall proclaim holy in 
their seasons. The fourteenth day of the first month at evening is 
the LORD's Passover. And the fifteenth day of the same month is 
the feast of sweet bread unto the LORD, seven days ye must eat 
unleavened bread. The first day shall be an holy feast unto you, 
so that ye may do no laborious work therein. But ye shall offer 
sacrifices unto the LORD seven days, and the seventh day also 
shall be an holy feast, so that ye may do no laborious work 
therein. And the LORD spake unto Moses saying: speak unto the 
children of Israel and say unto them: when ye be come into the 
land which I give unto you and reap down your harvest, ye shall 
bring a sheaf of the first fruits of your harvest unto the priest, 
and he shall wave the sheaf before the LORD to be accepted for 
you: and even the morrow after the Sabbath the priest shall wave 
it. And ye shall offer the day when he waveth the sheaf, a lamb 
without blemish of a year old for a burntoffering unto the LORD: 
and the meatoffering thereof, two tenth deals of fine flour 
mingled with oil to be a sacrifice unto the LORD of a sweet 
savour: and the drink offering thereto, the fourth deal of an hin 
of wine. And ye shall eat neither bread, nor parched corn, nor 
frumenty of new corn: until the self same day that ye have brought 
an offering unto your God. And this shall be a law for ever unto 
your children after you, wheresoever ye dwell. And ye shall count 
from the morrow after the Sabbath: even from the day that ye 
brought the sheaf of the waveoffering, seven weeks complete: even 
unto the morrow after the seventh week ye shall number fifty days. 
And then ye shall bring a new meatoffering unto the LORD. And ye 
shall bring out of your habitations two wave loaves made of two 
tenth deals of fine flour leavened and baken, for first fruits 
unto the LORD. And ye shall bring with the bread seven lambs 
without deformity of one year of age, and one young ox, and two 
rams, which shall serve for burntofferings unto the LORD, with 
meatofferings and drink offerings longing to the same, to be a 
sacrifice of a sweet savour unto the LORD. And ye shall offer an 
he goat for a sinoffering: and two lambs of one year old for 
peaceofferings. And the priest shall wave them with the bread of 
the first fruits before the LORD, and with the two lambs. And they 
shall be holy unto the LORD, and be the priest's. And ye shall 
make a proclamation the same day that it be an holy feast unto 
you, and ye shall do no laborious work therein. And it shall be a 
law for ever thorowout all your habitations unto your children 
after you. When ye reap down your harvest, thou shalt not make 
clean riddance of thy field, neither shalt thou make any 
aftergathering of thy harvest: but shalt leave them unto the poor 
and the stranger. I am the LORD your God. And the LORD spake unto 
Moses saying: speak unto the children of Israel and say: The first 
day of the seventh month shall be a rest of remembrance unto you, 
to blow horns in an holy feast it shall be, and ye shall do no 
laborious work therein, and ye shall offer sacrifice unto the 
LORD. And the LORD spake unto Moses saying: also the tenth day of 
the self seventh month, is a day of atonement, and shall be on 
holy feast unto you, and ye shall humble your souls and offer 
sacrifice unto the LORD. Moreover ye shall do no work the same 
day, for it is a day of atonement to make an atonement for you 
before the LORD your God. For whatsoever soul it be that humbleth 
not himself that day, he shall be destroyed from among his people. 
And whatsoever soul do any manner work that day, the same I will 
destroy from among his people. See that ye do no manner work 
therefore. And it shall be a law for ever unto your generations 
after you in all your dwellings. A Sabbath of rest it shall be 
unto you, and ye shall humble your souls. The ninth day of the 
month at evening and so forth from evening to evening again, ye 
shall keep your Sabbath. And the LORD spake unto Moses saying: 
speak unto the children of Israel and say: the fifteenth day of 
the same seventh month shall be the feast of tabernacles seven 
days unto the LORD. The first day shall be an holy feast, so that 
ye shall do no laborious work therein. Seven days ye shall offer 
sacrifice unto the LORD, and the eighth day shall be an holy feast 
unto you, and ye shall offer sacrifice unto the LORD. It is the 
end of the feast, and ye shall do no laborious work therein. These 
are the feasts of the LORD which ye shall proclaim holy feasts, 
for to offer sacrifice unto the LORD, burntofferings, 
meatofferings, and drinkofferings every day: beside the Sabbaths 
of the LORD, and beside your gifts, and all your vows, and all 
your freewill offerings which ye shall give unto the LORD. 
Moreover in the fifteenth day of the seventh month after that ye 
have gathered in the fruits of the land, ye shall keep holy day 
unto the LORD seven days long. The first day shall be a day of 
rest, and the eighth day shall be a day of rest. And ye shall take 
you the first day, the fruits of goodly trees and the branches of 
palm trees and the boughs of thick trees, and willows of the 
brook, and shall rejoice before the LORD seven days. And ye shall 
keep it holy day unto the LORD seven days in the year. And it 
shall be a law for ever unto your children after you, that ye keep 
that feast in the seventh month. And ye shall dwell in booths 
seven days: even all that are Israelites born, shall dwell in 
booths, that your children after you may know how that I made the 
children of Israel dwell in booths, when I brought them out of the 
land of Egypt: for I am the LORD your God. And Moses told all the 
feasts of the LORD unto the children of Israel.

Chapter .xxiiij.

And the LORD spake unto Moses saying: command the children of 
Israel that they bring unto thee, pure oil olive beaten for lights 
to pour into the lamps always, without the vail of testimony 
{witness} within the tabernacle of witness. And Aaron shall dress 
them both evening and morning before the LORD always. And if shall 
be a law for ever among your children after you. And he shall 
dress the lamps upon the pure candlestick before the LORD 
perpetually. And thou shalt take fine flour and bake twelve 
wastels thereof, two tenth deals shall every wastel be. And make 
two rows of them, six on a row upon the pure table before the 
LORD, and put pure frankincense upon the rows. And it shall be 
bread of remembrance, and an offering to the LORD. Every Sabbath 
he shall put them in rows before the LORD evermore, given of the 
children of Israel, that it be an everlasting covenant. And they 
shall be Aaron's and his sons, and they shall eat them in the holy 
place. For they are most holy unto him of the offerings of the 
LORD, and shall be a duty for ever. And the son of an Israelitish 
wife whose father was an Egyptian, went out among the children of 
Israel. And this son of the Israelitish wife and a man of Israel, 
strove together in the host. And the Israelitish woman's son 
blasphemed the name and cursed, and they brought him unto Moses. 
And his mother's name was Selamith, the daughter of Dibri of the 
tribe of Dan: and they put him in ward, that Moses should declare 
unto them what the LORD said thereto. And the LORD spake unto 
Moses saying, bring him that cursed {blasphemed} without the host, 
and let all that heard him, put their hands upon his head, and let 
all the multitude stone him. And speak unto the children of Israel 
saying: Whosoever curseth his God, shall bear his sin: And he that 
blasphemeth the name of the LORD, shall die for it: all the 
multitude shall stone him to death. And the stranger as well as 
the Israelite if he curse the name, shall die for it. He that 
killeth any man, shall die for it, but he that killeth a beast 
shall pay for it, beast for beast. If a man maim his neighbour, as 
he hath done, so shall it be done to him again: broke for broke, 
eye for eye and tooth for tooth: even as he hath maimed a man, so 
shall he be maimed again. So now he that killeth a beast, shall 
pay for it: but he that killeth a man, shall die for it. Ye shall 
have one manner of law among you: even for the stranger as well as 
for one of your selves, for I am the LORD your God. And Moses told 
the children of Israel, that they should bring him that had 
cursed, out of the host, and stone him with stones. And the 
children of Israel did as the LORD commanded Moses.

Chapter .xxv.

And the LORD spake unto Moses in mount Sinai saying, speak unto 
the children of Israel and say unto them: When ye be come in to 
the land which I give you, let the land rest a Sabbath unto the 
LORD. Six years thou shalt sow thy field, and six years thou shalt 
cut thy vines and gather in thy fruits. But the seventh year shall 
be a Sabbath of rest unto the land. The LORD's Sabbath it shall 
be, and thou shalt neither sow thy field, nor cut thy vines. The 
corn that groweth by itself thou shalt not reap, neither gather 
the grapes that grow without thy dressing: but it shall be a 
Sabbath of rest unto the land. Nevertheless the Sabbath of the 
land shall be meat for you: even for thee and thy servant and for 
thy maid and for thy hired servant and for the stranger that 
dwelleth with thee: and for thy cattle and for the beasts that are 
in thy land, shall all the increase thereof be meat. Then number 
seven weeks of years, that is, seven times seven years: and the 
space of the seven weeks of years will be unto thee forty nine 
years. And then thou shalt make an horn blow: even in the tenth 
day of the seventh month, which is the day of atonement. And then 
shall ye make the horn blow, even thorowout all your land. And ye 
shall hallow the fiftieth year, and proclaim liberty thorowout the 
land unto all the inhabiters thereof. It shall be a year of horns 
blowing unto you and ye shall return: every man unto his 
possession and every man unto his kindred again. A year of horns 
blowing shall that fiftieth year be unto you. Ye shall not sow 
neither reap the corn that groweth by itself, nor gather the 
grapes that grow without thy labour. For it is a year of horns 
blowing and shall be holy unto you: how be it, yet ye shall eat of 
the increase of the field. And in this year of horns blowing ye 
shall return, every man unto his possession again. When thou 
sellest ought unto thy neighbour or buyest of thy neighbour's 
hand, ye shall not oppress one another: but according to the 
number of years after the trompet year, thou shalt buy of thy 
neighbour, and according unto the number of fruit years, he shall 
sell unto thee. According unto the multitude of years, thou shalt 
increase the price thereof and according to the fewness of years, 
thou shalt minish the price: for the number of fruit he shall sell 
unto thee. And see that no man oppress his neighbour, but fear thy 
God. For I am the LORD your God. Wherefore do after mine 
ordinances and keep my laws and do them, that ye may dwell in the 
land in safety. And the land shall give her fruit, and ye shall 
eat your fill and dwell therein in safety. If ye shall say, what 
shall we eat the seventh year inasmuch as we shall not sow nor 
gather in our increase?. I will send my blessing upon you in the 
sixth year, and it shall bring forth fruit for three years: and ye 
shall sow the eighth year and eat of old fruit until the ninth 
year, and even until her fruits come, ye shall eat of old store. 
Wherefore the land shall not be sold for ever, because that the 
land is mine, and ye but strangers and sojourners with me: and ye 
shall thorowout all the land of your possession, let the land go 
home free again. When thy brother is waxed poor and hath sold away 
of his possession: if any of his kin come to redeem it, he shall 
buy out that which his brother sold. And though he have no man to 
redeem it for him, yet if his hand can get sufficient to buy it 
out again, then let him count how long it hath been sold, and 
deliver the rest unto him to whom he sold it, and so he shall 
return unto his possession again. But and if his hand can not get 
sufficient to restore it to him again, then that which is sold 
shall remain in the hand of him that hath bought it, until the 
horn year: {jubilee} and in the horn year {of Jubilee} it shall 
come out, and he shall return unto his possession again. If a man 
sell a dwelling house in a walled city, he may buy it out again 
any time within a whole year after it is sold: and that shall be 
the space in which he may redeem it again. But and if it be not 
bought out again within the space of a full year, then the house 
in the walled city shall be stablished for ever unto him that 
bought it and to his successors after him and shall not go out in 
the trompet year. {of jubilee} But the houses in villages which 
have no walls round about them, shall be counted like unto the 
fields of the country, and may be bought out again at any season, 
and shall go out free in the trompet year. {of jubilee} 
Notwithstanding the cities of the Levites and the houses in the 
cities of their possessions the Levites may redeem at all seasons. 
And if a man purchase ought of the Levites: whether it be house or 
city that they possess, the bargain shall go out in the trompet 
year {of jubilee} for the houses of the cities of the Levites, are 
their possessions among the children of Israel. But the fields 
that lie round about their cities, shall not be bought: for they 
are their possessions for ever. If thy brother be waxed poor and 
fallen in decay with thee, receive him as a stranger or a 
sojourner, and let him live by thee. And thou shalt take none 
usury of him, nor yet vantage. But shalt fear thy God, that thy 
brother may live with thee. Thou shalt not lend him thy money upon 
usury, nor lend him of thy food to have advantage by it for I am 
the LORD your God which brought you out of the land of Egypt, to 
give you the land of Canaan and to be your God. If thy brother 
that dwelleth by thee wax poor and sell himself unto thee, thou 
shalt not let him labour as a bondservant doeth: but as an hired 
servant and as a sojourner he shall be with thee, and shall serve 
thee unto the trompet year, {of jubilee} and then shall he depart 
from thee: both he and his children with him, and shall return 
unto his own kindred again and unto the possessions of his 
fathers; for they are my servants which I brought out of the land 
of Egypt, and shall not be sold as bondmen. See therefore that 
thou reign not over him cruelly, but fear thy God. If thou wilt 
have bondservants and maidens, thou shalt buy them of the heathen 
that are round about you, and of the children of the strangers 
that are sojourners among you, and of their generations that are 
with you, which they begat in your land. And ye shall possess them 
and give them unto your children after you, to possess them for 
ever: and they shall be your bond men. But over your brethren the 
children of Israel, ye shall not reign one over another cruelly. 
When a stranger and a sojourner waxeth rich by thee, and thy 
brother that dwelleth by him waxeth poor and sell himself unto the 
stranger that dwelleth by thee or to any of the stranger's kin: 
after that he is sold he may be redeemed again: one of his 
brethren may buy him out: whether it be his uncle or his uncle's 
son, or any that is nye of kin unto him of his kindred: either if 
his hand can get so much he may be loosed. And he shall reckon 
with him that bought him, from the year that he was sold in unto 
the trompet year, and the price of his buying shall be according 
unto the number of years, and he shall be with him as a hired 
servant. If there be yet many years behind, according unto them he 
shall give again for his deliverance, of the money that he was 
sold for. If there remain but few years unto the trompet year, he 
shall so count with him, and according unto his years give him 
again for his redemption, and shall be with him year by year as an 
hired servant, and the other shall not reign cruelly over him in 
thy sight. If he be not bought free in the meantime, then he shall 
go out in the trompet year and his children with him; for the 
children of Israel are my servants which I brought out of the land 
of Egypt. I am the LORD your God.

Chapter .xxvi.

Ye shall make you no idols, nor graven image, neither rear you up 
any pillar, neither ye shall set up any image of stone in your 
land to bow your selves thereto: for I am the LORD your God; keep 
my Sabbaths and fear my sanctuary. For I am the LORD. If ye shall 
walk in mine ordinances and keep my commandments and do them, then 
I will send you rain in the right season and your land shall yield 
her increase and the trees of the field shall give their fruit. 
And the threshing shall reach unto wine harvest, and the wine 
harvest shall reach unto sowing time, and ye shall eat your bread 
in plenteousness, and shall dwell in your land peaceably. And I 
will send peace in your land, that ye shall sleep, and no man 
shall make you afraid. And I will rid evil beasts out of your 
land, and there shall no sword go thorowout your land. And ye 
shall chase your enemies, and they shall fall before you upon the 
sword. And five of you shall chase an hundred, and an hundred of 
you shall put ten thousand to flight, and your enemies shall fall 
before you upon the sword. And I will turn unto you and increase 
you and multiply you, and set up my testament with you. And ye 
shall eat old store, and cast out the old for plenteousness of the 
new. I will make my dwelling place among you, and my soul shall 
not loathe you. And I will walk among you and will be your God, 
and ye shall be my people. For I am the LORD your God, which 
brought you out of the land of the Egyptians, that ye should not 
be their bondmen, and I brake the bows of your yokes, and made you 
go up right. But and if ye will not hearken unto me, nor will do 
all these my commandments, or if ye shall despise mine ordinances 
either if your souls refuse my laws, so that ye will not do all my 
commandments, but shall break mine appointment: then I will do 
this again unto you: I will visit you with vexations, swelling and 
fevers, that shall make your eyes dazzle, and with sorrows of 
heart. And ye shall sow your seed in vain, for your enemies shall 
eat it. And I will set my face against you and ye shall fall 
before your enemies, and they that hate you shall reign over you, 
and ye shall flee when no man followeth you. And if ye will not 
yet for all this hearken unto me, then will I punish you seven 
times more for your sins, and will break the pride of your 
strength. For I will make the heaven over you as hard as iron, and 
your land as hard as brass. And so your labour shall be spent in 
vain. For your land shall not give her increase, neither the trees 
of the land shall give their fruits. And if ye walk contrary unto 
me and will not hearken unto me, I will bring seven times more 
plagues upon you according to your sins. I will send in wild 
beasts upon you, which shall rob you of your children and destroy 
your cattle, and make you so few in number that your high ways 
shall grow unto a wilderness. And if ye will not be learned yet 
for all this but shall walk contrary unto me, then will I also 
walk contrary unto you and will punish you yet seven times for 
your sins. I will send a sword upon you, that shall avenge my 
testament with you. And when ye are fled unto your cities, I will 
send the pestilence among you, ye shall be delivered into the 
hands of your enemies. And when I have broken the staff of your 
bread: that ten wives shall bake your bread in one oven and men 
shall deliver you your bread again by weight, then shall ye eat 
and shall not be satisfied. And if ye will not yet for all this 
hearken unto me, but shall walk contrary unto me, then I will walk 
contrary unto you also wrathfully, and will also chastise you 
seven times for your sins: so that ye shall eat the flesh of your 
sons and the flesh of your daughters. And I will destroy your 
altars built upon high hills, and overthrow your images, and cast 
your carcasses upon the bodies of your idols, and my soul shall 
abhor you. And I will make your cities desolate, and bring your 
sanctuaries unto nought, and will not smell the savours of your 
sweet odours. And I will bring the land unto a wilderness: so that 
your enemies which dwell therein shall wonder at it. And I will 
straw you among the heathen, and will draw out a sword after you, 
and your land shall be waste, and your cities desolate. Then the 
land shall rejoice in her Sabbaths, as long as it lieth void and 
ye in your enemies' land: even then shall the land keep holy day 
and rejoice in her Sabbaths. And as long as it lieth void it shall 
rest, for that it could not rest in your Sabbaths, when ye dwelt 
therein. And upon them that are left alive of you, I will send a 
faintness into their hearts in the land of their enemies: so that 
the sound of a leaf that falleth, shall chase them and they shall 
flee as though they fled a sword, and shall fall no man following 
them. And they shall fall one upon another, as it were before a 
sword even no man following them, and ye shall have no power to 
stond before your enemies: And ye shall perish among the heathen, 
and the land of your enemies shall eat you up. And they that are 
left of you, shall pine away in their unrighteousness, even in 
their enemies' land, and also in the misdeeds of their fathers 
shall they consume. And they shall confess their misdeeds and the 
misdeeds of their fathers in their trespasses which they have 
trespassed against me, and for that also that they have walked 
contrary unto me. Therefore I also will walk contrary unto them, 
and will bring them into the land of their enemies. And then at 
the least way their uncircumcised hearts shall be tamed, and then 
they shall make an atonement for their misdeeds. And I will 
remember my bond with Iacob and my testament with Isaac, and my 
testament with Abraham, and will think on the land. For the land 
shall be left of them and shall have pleasure in her Sabbaths, 
while she lieth waste without them, and they shall make an 
atonement for their misdeeds, because they despised my laws and 
their souls refused mine ordinances. And yet for all that when 
they be in the land of their enemies, I will not so cast them away 
nor my soul shall not so abhor them, that I will utterly destroy 
them and break mine appointment with them: for I am the LORD their 
God. I will therefore remember unto them the first covenant made 
when I brought them out of the land of Egypt in the sight of the 
heathen to be their God: for I am the LORD. These are the 
ordinances, judgements, and laws which the LORD made between him 
and the children of Israel in mount Sinai by the hand of Moses.

Chapter .xxvij.

And the LORD spake unto Moses saying: speak unto the children of 
Israel and say unto them: If any man will give a singular vow unto 
the LORD according to the value of his soul, then shall the male 
from twenty years unto forty be set at fifty sicles of silver, 
after the sicle of the sanctuary, and the female at thirty sicles. 
And from five years to twenty the male shall be set at twenty 
sicles, and the female at ten sicles. And from a month unto five 
years, the male shall be set at five sicles of silver, and the 
female at three. And the man that is forty and above, shall be 
valued at fifteen sicles, and the woman at ten. If he be too poor 
so to be set, then let him come before the priest: and let the 
priest value him, according as the hand of him that vowed is able 
to get. If it be of the beasts of which men bring an offering unto 
the LORD: all that any man giveth of such unto the LORD, shall be 
holy. He may not alter it nor change it: a good for a bad or a bad 
for good. If he change beast for beast, then both the same beast 
and it also wherewith it was changed shall be holy. If it be any 
manner of unclean beast of which men may not offer unto the LORD, 
let him bring the beast before the priest and let the priest value 
it. And whether it be good or bad as the priest setteth it, so 
shall it be. And if he will buy it again, let him give the fifth 
part more to that it was set at. If any man dedicate his house, it 
shall be holy unto the LORD. And the priest shall set it; whether 
it be good or bad, and as the priest hath set it, so it shall be. 
If he that sanctified it will redeem his house, let him give the 
fifth part of the money that it was judged at thereto, and it 
shall be his. If a man hallow a piece of his inherited land unto 
the LORD, it shall be set according to that it beareth. If it bear 
an homer of barley, it shall be set at fifty sicles of silver. If 
he hallow his field immediately from the trompet year, it shall be 
worth according as it is esteemed. But and if he hallow his field 
after the trumpet year, the priest shall reckon the price with him 
according to the years that remain unto the trumpet year, and 
thereafter it shall be lower set. If he that sanctified the field 
will redeem it again, let him put the fifth part of the price that 
it was set at, thereunto, and it shall be his: if he will not it 
shall be redeemed no more. But when the field goeth out in the 
trompet year, it shall be holy unto the LORD: even as a thing 
dedicated, and it shall be the priest's possession. If a man 
sanctify unto the LORD a field, which he hath bought and is not of 
his inheritance, then the priest shall reckon with him what it is 
worth unto the trompet year, {year of jubilee} and he shall give 
the price that it is set at the same day, and it shall be holy 
unto the LORD. But in the trompet year, the field shall return 
unto him of whom he bought it, whose inheritance of land it was. 
And all setting shall be according to the holy sicle. One sicle 
maketh twenty geras. But the firstborn of the beasts that pertain 
unto the LORD, may no man sanctify: whether it be ox or sheep, for 
they are the LORD's already. If it be an unclean beast, then let 
him redeem it as it is set at, and give the fifth part more 
thereto. If it be not redeemed, then let it be sold as it is 
rated. Notwithstanding no dedicated thing that a man dedicateth 
unto the LORD, of all his goods, whether it be man or beast or 
land of his inheritance, shall be sold or redeemed: for all 
dedicate things are most holy unto the LORD. No dedicated thing 
therefore that is dedicate of man, may be redeemed, but must needs 
die. All these tithes of the land, whether it be of the corn of 
the field or fruit of the trees, shall be holy unto the LORD. If 
any man will redeem ought of his tithes, let him add the fifth 
part more thereto. And the tithes of oxen and sheep and of all 
that goeth under the herdman's keeping, shall be holy tithes unto 
the LORD. Men shall not look if it be good or bad nor shall change 
it. If any man change it then both it and that it was changed 
withall, shall be holy and may not be redeemed. These are the 
commandments which the LORD gave Moses in charge to give unto the 
children of Israel in mount Sinai.

The end of the third book of Moses.


The Fourth Book of Moses, called Numbers {Numeri}

Chapter .j.

And the LORD spake unto Moses in the wilderness of Sinai, in the 
tabernacle of witness, the first day of the second month, and in 
the second year after they were come out of the land of Egypt 
saying: take ye the sum of all the multitude of the children of 
Israel, in their kindreds and households of their fathers and 
number them by name all that are males, poll by poll, from twenty 
years and above: even all that are able to go forth in to war in 
Israel, thou and Aaron shall number them in their armies, and with 
you shall be of every tribe a head man in the house of his father. 
And these are the names of the men that shall stond with you: in 
Ruben, Elizur the son of Sedeur: In Simeon, Selumiel: the son of 
Zuri Sadai: In the tribe of Iuda, Nahesson the son of Aminadab: In 
Isachar, Nathaneel the son of Zuar: In Zabulon, Eliab the son of 
Helon. Among the children of Ioseph: In Ephraim, Elisama the son 
of Amihud: In Manasse, Gamaliel the son of Pedazur: In BenIamin, 
Abidan the son of Gedeoni: In Dan, Ahiezer the son of Ammi Sadai: 
In Aser, Pagiel the son of Ochran: In Gad, Elisaph the son of 
Deguel: In Naphtali, Ahira the son of Enan. These were councillors 
of the congregation and lords in the tribes of their fathers and 
captains over thousands in Israel. And Moses and Aaron took these 
men above named and gathered all the congregation together, the 
first day of the second month, and reckoned them after their birth 
and kindreds and houses of their fathers by name from twenty years 
and above head by head, as the LORD commanded Moses, even so he 
numbered them in the wilderness of Sinai. And the children of 
Ruben Israel's eldest son in their generations, kindreds and 
houses of their fathers, when they were numbered every man by 
name, all that were males from twenty years and above, as many as 
were able to go forth in war: were numbered in the tribe of Ruben, 
forty six thousand and five hundred. Among the children of Simeon: 
their generation in their kindreds and houses of their fathers 
(when every man's name was told) of all the males from twenty 
years and above, whatsoever was meet for the war: were numbered in 
the tribe of Simeon forty nine thousand and three hundred. Among 
the children of Gad: their generation in their kindreds and 
households of their fathers, when they were told by name, from 
twenty years and above, all that were mete for the war: were 
numbered in the tribe of Gad forty five thousand, six hundred and 
fifty. Among the children of Iuda: their generation in their 
kindreds and houses of their fathers (by the number of names) from 
twenty years and above, all that were able to war, were told in 
the tribe of Iuda seventy four thousand and six hundred. Among the 
children of Isachar: their generation, in their kindreds and 
houses of their fathers (when their names were counted) from 
twenty years and above, whatsoever was apt for war, were numbered 
in the tribe of Isachar fifty four thousand and four hundred. 
Among the children of Zabulon: their generation, in their kindreds 
and houses of their fathers (after the number of names) from 
twenty years and above, whosoever was mete for the war: were 
counted in the tribe of Zabulon fifty seven thousand and four 
hundred. Among the children of Ioseph: first among the children of 
Ephraim: their generation, in their kindreds and houses of their 
fathers (when the names of all that were apt to the war were told) 
from twenty years and above: were in number in the tribe of 
Ephraim, forty thousand, and six hundred. Among the children of 
Manasse: their generation, in their kindreds and houses of their 
fathers (when the names of all that were apt to war were told) 
from twenty and above were numbered in the tribe of Manasse thirty 
two thousand and two hundred. Among the children of BenIamin: 
their generation, in their kindreds and houses of their fathers 
(by the tale of names) from twenty years and above of all that 
were mete for war, were numbered in the tribe of BenIamin thirty 
five thousand and four hundred. Among the children of Dan: their 
generation in their kindreds and houses of their fathers (in the 
sum of names) of all that was apt to war from twenty years and 
above, were numbered in the tribe of Dan fifty seven thousand and 
seven hundred. Among the children of Asser: their generation, in 
their kindreds and houses of their fathers (when they were summed 
by name) from twenty years and above, all that were apt to war 
were numbered in the tribe of Asser forty one thousand and five 
hundred. Among the children of Naphtali: their generation in their 
kindreds and houses of their fathers (when their names were told) 
from twenty years and above, whatsoever was mete to war: were 
numbered in the tribe of Naphtali fifty three thousand and four 
hundred. These are the numbers which Moses and Aaron numbered with 
the twelve princes of Israel: of every house of their fathers a 
man. And all the numbers of the children of Israel, in the houses 
of their fathers, from twenty years and above, whatsoever was mete 
for the war in Israel, drew unto the sum of six hundred [and 
three] thousand, five hundred and fifty. But the Levites in the 
tribe of their fathers were not numbered among them. And the LORD 
spake unto Moses saying: only see that thou number not the tribe 
of Levi, neither take the sum of them among the children of 
Israel. But thou shalt appoint the Levites unto the habitation of 
witness, and to all the apparel thereof and unto all that longeth 
thereto. For they shall bear the tabernacle and all the ordinance 
thereof, and they shall minister it and shall pitch their tents 
round about it. And when the tabernacle goeth forth the Levites 
shall take it down: and when the tabernacle is pitched, they shall 
set it up: for if any stranger come near, he shall die. And the 
children of Israel shall pitch their tents, every man in his own 
company and every man by his own standard thorowout all their 
hosts. But the Levites shall pitch round about the habitation of 
witness, that there fall no wrath upon the congregation of the 
children of Israel, and the Levites shall wait upon the habitation 
of witness. And the children of Israel did according to all that 
the LORD commanded Moses.

Chapter .ij.

And the LORD spake unto Moses and Aaron saying: The children of 
Israel shall pitch: every man by his own standard with the arms of 
their father's houses, a way from the presence of the tabernacle 
of witness. On the eastside toward the rising of the son, shall 
they of the standard of the host of Iuda pitch with their arms: 
And Nahesson the son of Aminadab shall be captain over the sons of 
Iuda. And his host and the number of them seventy four thousand 
and six hundred. And next unto him shall the tribe of Isachar 
pitch and Nathaneel the son of Zuar captain over the children of 
Isachar: his host and the number of them fifty four thousand and 
four hundred. And then the tribe of Zabulon: with Eliab the son of 
Helon, captain over the children of Zabulon, and his host in the 
number of them: fifty seven thousand and four hundred. So that all 
they that pertain unto the host of Iuda, are an hundred thousand 
eighty six thousand and four hundred in their companies: and these 
shall go in the forefront, when they journey. And on the south 
side, the standard of the host of Ruben shall lie with their 
companies and the captain over the sons of Ruben, Elizur the son 
of Sedeur, and his host and the number of them forty six thousand, 
and five hundred. And fast by him shall the tribe of Simeon pitch, 
and the captain over the sons of Simeon. Salumiel the son of Zuri 
Sadai, and his host and the number of them forty nine thousand and 
three hundred. And the tribe of Gad also: And the captain over the 
sons of Gad, Eliasaph the son of Deguel and his host and the 
number of them forty five thousand six hundred and fifty. So that 
all the number that pertain unto the host of Ruben, are an hundred 
thousand, fifty one thousand, four hundred and fifty, with their 
companies, and they shall be the second in the journey. And the 
tabernacle of witness with the host of the Levites, shall go in 
the midst of the hosts: as they lie in their tents, even so shall 
they proceed in the journey, every man in his quarter about their 
standards. On the west side, the standard and the host of Ephraim 
shall lie with their companies. And the captain over the sons of 
Ephraim, Elisama the son of Amihud: and his host and the number of 
them forty thousand and five hundred. And fast by him, the tribe 
of Manasse, and the captain over the sons of Manasse, Gamaliel the 
son of Peda Zur and his host and the number of them thirty two 
thousand and two hundred. And the tribe of BenIamin also: and the 
captain over the sons of BenIamin, Abidan the son of Gedeoni, and 
his host and the number of them thirty five thousand and four 
hundred. All the number that pertained unto the host of Ephraim, 
were an hundred thousand eight thousand and an hundred in their 
hosts: and they shall be the third in the journey. And the 
standard and the host of Dan shall lie on the north side with 
their companies: and the captain over the children of Dan, Ahiezer 
the son of Ammi Sadai: and his host and the number of them sixty 
two thousand and seven hundred. And fast by him shall the tribe of 
Asser pitch: and the captain over the sons of Asser, Pagiel the 
son of Ochran: and his host and the number of them forty one 
thousand and five hundred. And the tribe of Naphtali also, and the 
captain over the children of Naphtali: Ahira the son of Enan: and 
his host and the number of them fifty three thousand and four 
hundred. So that the whole number of all that pertained unto the 
host of Dan, was an hundred thousand fifty seven thousand and six 
hundred. And they shall be the last in the journey with their 
standards. These are the sums of the children of Israel in the 
houses of their fathers: even all the numbers of the hosts with 
their companies six hundred thousand three thousand five hundred 
and fifty. And yet the Levites were not numbered among the 
children of Israel, as the LORD commanded Moses. And the children 
of Israel did according to all that the LORD commanded Moses, and 
so they pitched with their standards, and so they journeyed: every 
man in his kindred, and in the household of his father.

Chapter .iij.

These are the generations of Aaron and Moses, when the LORD spake 
unto Moses in Mount Sinai, and these are the names of the sons of 
Aaron: Nadab the eldest son, and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar. These 
are the names of the sons of Aaron which were priests anointed and 
their hands filled to minister, but Nadab and Abihu died before 
the LORD, as they brought strange fire before the LORD in the 
wilderness of Sinai, and had no children. And Eleazar and Ithamar 
ministered in the sight of Aaron their father. And the LORD spake 
unto Moses saying: bring the tribe of Levi, and set them before 
Aaron the priest, and let them serve him and wait upon him, and 
upon all the multitude, before the tabernacle of witness, to do 
the service of the habitation. And they shall wait upon all the 
apparel of the tabernacle of witness, and upon the children of 
Israel, to do the service of the habitation. And thou shalt give 
the Levites unto Aaron and his sons, for they are given unto him 
of the children of Israel. And thou shalt appoint Aaron and his 
sons to wait on their priests' office: and the stranger that 
cometh nye, shall die for it. And the LORD spake unto Moses 
saying: behold, I have taken the Levites from among the children 
of Israel, for all the firstborn that openeth the matrice among 
the children of Israel, so that the Levites shall be mine: because 
all the firstborn are mine: for the same day that I smote all the 
first born in the land of Egypt, I hallowed unto me all the 
firstborn in Israel, both man and beast, and mine they shall be: 
for I am the LORD. And the LORD spake unto Moses in the wilderness 
of Sinai saying: Number the children of Levi in the houses of 
their fathers and kindreds, all that are males from a month old 
and above. And Moses numbered them at the word of the LORD, as he 
was commanded. And these are the names of the children of Levi: 
Gerson, Cahath, and Merari. And these are the names of the 
children of Gerson in their kindreds: Libni and Semei. And the 
sons of Cahath in their kindred were Amram, Iezehar, Hebron and 
Usiel. And the sons of Merari in their kindreds were Maheli and 
Musi. These are the kindreds of Levi in the houses of their 
fathers. And of Gerson came the kindred of the Libnites and the 
Semeites, which are the kindreds of the Gersonites. And the sum of 
them (when all the males were told) from a month old and above, 
were seven thousand and five hundred. And the kindreds of the 
Gersonites pitched behind the habitation westward. And the captain 
of the most ancient house among the Gersonites, was Eliasaph the 
son of Lael. And the office of the children of Gerson in the 
tabernacle of witness was the habitation and the tent with the 
covering thereof and the hanging of the door of the tabernacle of 
witness, and the hangings of the court, and the curtain of the 
door of the court: which court went round about the dwelling, and 
the altar, and the cords that pertained unto all the service 
thereof. And of Cahath came the kindred of the Amramites and the 
kindred of the Iezeharites and of the Hebronites and of the 
Usielites: And these are the kindreds of the Cahathites. And the 
number of all the males from a month old and above, was eight 
thousand and six hundred: which waited on the holy place. And the 
kindred of the children of Cahath, pitched on the south side of 
the dwelling. And the captain in the most ancient house of the 
kindreds of the Cahathites, was Elizaphan the son of Usiel, and 
their office was: [to keep] the ark, the table, the candlestick, 
and the altar, and the holy vessels to minister with and the vail 
with all that served thereto. And Eleazar the son of Aaron the 
priest, was captain over all the captains of the Levites, and had 
the oversight of them that waited upon the holy things. And of 
Merari came the kindreds of the Mahelites and of the Musites: and 
these are the kindreds of the Merarites. And the number of them 
(when all the males from a month old and above was told) drew unto 
six thousand and two hundred. And the captain of the most ancient 
house among the kindreds of the Merarites, was Zuriel the son of 
Abihail which pitched on the north side of the dwelling. And the 
office of the sons of Merari was: the boards of the dwelling and 
the bars, pillars with the sockets thereof, and all the 
instruments there of and all that served thereto: and the pillars 
of the court round about and their sockets, with their pins and 
cords. But on the forefront of the habitation and before the 
tabernacle of witness eastward, shall Moses and Aaron and his sons 
pitch and wait on the sanctuary in the stead of the children of 
Israel. And the stranger that cometh nye, shall die for it. And 
the whole sum of the Levites which Moses and Aaron numbered, at 
the commandment of the LORD thorowout their kindreds even, of all 
the males of a month old and above, was twenty two thousand. And 
the LORD said unto Moses: Number all the first born that are males 
among the children of Israel, from a month old and above, and take 
the number of their names. And thou shalt appoint the Levites to 
me the LORD, for all the firstborn among the children of Israel, 
and the cattle of the Levites for the firstborn of the children of 
Israel. And Moses numbered as the LORD commanded him, all the 
firstborn of the children of Israel. And all the firstborn males, 
in the sum of names, from a month old and above, were numbered 
twenty two thousand two hundred and seventy three. And the LORD 
spake unto Moses saying: take the Levites for all the firstborn of 
the children of Israel, and the cattle of the Levites for their 
cattle: and the Levites shall be mine which am the LORD. And for 
the redeeming of the two hundred and seventy three which are more 
than the Levites in the firstborn of the children of Israel, take 
five sicles of every piece, after the sicles of the holy place, 
twenty geras the sicles. And give the money wherewith the odd 
number of them is redeemed, unto Aaron and his sons. And Moses 
took the redemption money of the overplus that were more than the 
Levites, among the firstborn of the children of Israel: and it 
came to a thousand three hundred and sixty five sicles, of the 
holy sicle. And he gave that redemption money unto Aaron and his 
sons at the word of the LORD, even as the LORD commanded Moses.

Chapter .iiij.

And the LORD spake unto Moses and Aaron, and bade them take the 
sum of the children of Cahath from among the sons of Levi, in 
their kindreds and houses of their fathers from thirty years and 
above until fifty, all that were able to war, for to do the work 
in the tabernacle of witness: even in the most holy place. {[This 
shall be the office of the Kahath in the tabernacle of witness 
which is most holy.]} And when the host removeth, Aaron and his 
sons shall come and take down the vail, and cover the ark of 
witness therewith, and shall put thereon a covering of taxus' 
skins, and shall spread a cloth that is altogether of jacinth 
above all, and put the staves thereof in. And upon the shew table, 
they shall spread a cloth of jacinth, and put thereon, the dishes, 
spoons, flat pieces and pots to pour with, and the daily bread 
shall be thereon: and they shall spread upon them a covering of 
purple, and cover the same with a covering of taxus' skins, and 
put the staves thereof in. And they shall take a cloth of jacinth 
and cover the candlestick of light and her lamps and her snuffers, 
and firepans, and all her oil vessels which they occupy about it, 
and shall put upon her and on all her instruments, a covering of 
taxus' skins, and put it upon staves. And upon the golden altar 
they shall spread a cloth of Iacinth, and put on her staves. And 
they shall take all the things which they occupy to minister with 
in the holy place, and put a cloth of Iacinth upon them and cover 
them with a covering of taxus' skins and put them on staves. And 
they shall take away the ashes out of the altar, and spread a 
scarlet cloth thereon: and put about it, the firepans, the 
fleshhooks, the shovels, the basins, and all that belongeth unto 
the altar, and they shall spread upon it a covering of taxus' 
skins, and put on the staves of it. And when Aaron and his sons 
have made an end of covering the sanctuary and all things of the 
sanctuary, against that the host remove, then the sons of Cahath 
shall come in for to bear, and so let them not twich the sanctuary 
lest they die. And this is the charge of the sons of Cahath in the 
tabernacle of witness. And Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest, 
shall have the charge to prepare oil for the lights and sweet 
cense, and the daily meatoffering and the anointing oil, and the 
oversight of all the dwelling and of all that therein is, both 
over the sanctuary and over all that pertaineth thereto. And the 
LORD spake unto Moses and Aaron saying: destroy not the tribe of 
the kindreds of the Cahathites, from among the Levites. But thus 
do unto them that they may live and not die, when they go unto the 
most holy place. Aaron and his sons shall go in and put them, 
every man unto his service and unto his burthen. But let them not 
go in to see when they cover the sanctuary, lest they die. And the 
LORD spake unto Moses saying: Take the sum of the children of 
Gerson, in the houses of their fathers and in their kindreds: from 
thirty years and above, until fifty, all that are able to go forth 
in war, for to do service in the tabernacle of witness. And this 
is the service of the kindred of the Gersonites, to serve and to 
bear. They shall bear the curtains of the dwelling and the roof of 
the tabernacle of witness and his covering and the covering of 
taxus' skins that is on high {an hye} above upon it, and the 
hanging of the door of the tabernacle of witness: and the hanging 
of the court and the hanging of the gate of the court that is 
round about the dwelling and the altar, and the cords of them, and 
all the instruments that serve unto them and all that is made for 
them. And at the mouth of Aaron and his sons, shall all the 
service of the children of the Gersonites be done, in all their 
charges and in all their service, and ye shall appoint them unto 
all their charges that they shall wait upon. And this is the 
service of the kindred of the children of the Gersonites in the 
tabernacle of witness, and their wait shall be in the hand of 
Ithamar the son of Aaron the priest. And thou shalt number the 
sons of Merari in their kindreds and in the houses of their 
fathers, from thirty years and above unto fifty. All that is able 
to go forth in war, to do the service of the tabernacle of 
witness. And this is the charge that they must wait upon in all 
that they must serve in the tabernacle of witness: The boards of 
the dwelling, and the bars, pillars, and sockets thereof, and the 
pillars of the court round about, and their sockets, pins and 
cords with all that pertaineth and serveth unto them. And by name 
ye shall reckon the things that they must wait upon to bear. This 
is the service of the kindreds of the sons of Merari in all their 
service in the tabernacle of witness by the hand of Ithamar the 
son of Aaron the priest. And Moses and Aaron and the princes of 
the multitude numbered the sons of the Cahathites in their 
kindreds and houses of their fathers, from thirty years and above 
unto fifty, and that were able to go forth in the host and to do 
service in the tabernacle of witness. And the number of them in 
their kindreds were two thousand, seven hundred and fifty. These 
are the numbers of the kindreds of the Cahathites, of all that did 
service in the tabernacle of witness, which Moses and Aaron did 
number at the commandment of the LORD of by the hand of Moses. And 
the sons of Gerson were numbered in their kindreds and in the 
houses of their fathers, from thirty years up unto fifty, all that 
were able to go forth in the host for to do service in the 
tabernacle of witness. And the number of them in their kindreds, 
and in the houses of their fathers, was two thousand, six hundred 
and thirty. This is the number of the kindreds of the sons of 
Gerson, of all that did service in the tabernacle of witness, 
which Moses and Aaron did number at the commandment of the LORD. 
And the kindreds of the sons of Merari were numbered in their 
kindreds and in the houses of their fathers, from thirty years up 
unto fifty. All that were able to go forth with the host, to do 
service in the tabernacle of witness. And the number of them was 
in their kindreds, three thousand and two hundred. This is the 
number of the kindreds of the sons of Merari, which Moses and 
Aaron numbered at the bidding of the LORD, by the hand of Moses. 
The whole sum which Moses, Aaron and the lords of Israel numbered 
among the Levites in their kindreds and households of their 
fathers, from thirty years up unto fifty every man to do his 
office and service and to bear his burthen in the tabernacle of 
witness: was eight thousand, five hundred and eighty which they 
numbered at the commandment of the LORD by the hand of Moses every 
man unto his service and burthen: as the LORD commanded Moses.

Chapter .v.

And the LORD spake unto Moses saying: command the children of 
Israel that they put out of the host, all the lepers and all that 
have issues and all that are defiled upon the dead, whether they 
be males or females ye shall put them out of the host, that they 
defile not the tents among which I {ye} dwell. And the children of 
Israel did so, and put them out of the host: even as the LORD 
commanded Moses, so did the children of Israel. And the LORD spake 
unto Moses saying: speak unto the children of Israel: whether it 
be man or woman, when they have sinned any manner of sin which a 
man doeth wherewith a man trespasseth against the LORD, so that 
the soul hath done amiss: then they shall knowledge their sins 
which they have done, and restore again the hurt that they have 
done in the whole, and put the fifth part of it more thereto, and 
give it unto him whom he hath trespassed against. But and if he 
that maketh the amends have no man to do it to, then the amends 
that is made shall be the LORD's and the priest's, beside the ram 
of the atonement offering wherewith he maketh an atonement for 
himself. And all heave offerings of all the hallowed things which 
the children of Israel bring unto the priest, shall be the 
priest's, and every man's hallowed things shall be his own, but 
whatsoever any man giveth the priest, it shall be the priest's. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses saying: Speak unto the children of 
Israel, and say unto them: If any man's wife go aside and trespass 
against him, so that another man lie with her fleshly and the 
thing be hid from the eyes of her husband and is not come to light 
that she is defiled (for there is no witness against her) in as 
much as she was not taken with the manner, and the spirit of 
jealousy cometh upon him and he is jealous over his wife and she 
defiled, or happily the spirit of jealousy cometh upon him, and he 
is jealous over his wife and she yet undefiled. Then let her 
husband bring her unto the priest and bring an offering for her: 
the tenth part of an Epha of barley meal, but shall pour none oil 
thereunto, nor put frankincense thereon: for it is an offering of 
jealousy, and an offering that maketh remembrance of sin. And let 
the priest bring her and set her before the LORD, and let him take 
holy water in an earthen vessel and of the dust that is in the 
floor of the habitation, and put it into the water. And the priest 
shall set the wife before the LORD and uncover her head, and put 
the memorial of the offering in her hands which is the jealousy 
offering, and the priest shall have bitter and cursing water in 
his hand, and he shall conjure her and shall say unto her: If no 
man have lien with thee neither hast gone aside, and defiled 
thyself behind thy husband, then have thou no harm of this bitter 
cursing water. But and if thou hast gone aside behind thine 
husband and art defiled and some other man hath lien with thee 
beside thine husband (and let the priest conjure her with the 
conjuration of the curse and say unto her) the LORD make thee a 
curse and a conjuration among thy people: so that the LORD make 
thy thigh rot, and thy belly swell and this bitter cursing water 
go into the bowels of thee, that thy belly swell and thy thigh 
rot, and the wife shall say: Amen Amen. And the priest shall write 
this curse in a bill and wash it out in the bitter water. And when 
the cursing water is in her that it is bitter, then let the priest 
take the jealousy offering out of the wife's hand, and wave it 
before the LORD, and bring it unto the altar: and he shall take an 
handful of the memorial offering and burn it upon the altar, and 
then make her drink the water and when he hath made her drink the 
water. If she be defiled and have trespassed against her husband, 
then shall the cursing water go into her and be so bitter, that 
her belly shall swell and her thigh shall rot, and she shall be a 
curse among her people. And if she be not defiled but is clean, 
then she shall have no harm, but that she may conceive. This is 
the law of jealousy, when a wife goeth a side behind her husband 
and is defiled, or when the spirit of jealousy cometh upon a man, 
so that he is jealous over his wife: then he shall bring her 
before the LORD, and the priest shall minister all this law unto 
her, and the man shall be guiltless, and the wife shall bear her 
sin.

Chapter .vi.

And the LORD spake unto Moses saying: speak unto children of 
Israel and say unto them: when either man or woman appointeth to 
vow a vow of abstinence for to abstain unto the LORD, he shall 
abstain from wine and strong drink, and shall drink no vinegar of 
wine or of strong drink, nor drink whatsoever is pressed out of 
grapes: and shall eat no fresh grapes neither yet dried, as long 
as his abstinence endureth. Moreover he shall eat nothing that is 
made of the vine tree, no not so much as the kernels or the husk 
of the grape. And as long as the vow of his abstinence endureth, 
there shall no razor nor shears come upon his head, until his days 
be out which he fasteth unto the LORD, and he shall be holy and 
shall let the locks of his hair grow. As long as he abstaineth 
unto the LORD he shall come at no dead body: he shall not make 
himself unclean at the death of his father, mother, brother or 
sister: For the abstinence of his God is upon his head. And 
therefore as long as his abstinence lasteth, he shall be holy unto 
the LORD. And if it fortune that any man by chance die suddenly 
before him, and defile the head of his abstinence, then must he 
shave his head the day of his cleansing: even the seventh day he 
shall shave it. And the eighth day he shall bring two turtles or 
two young pigeons to the priest, unto the door of the tabernacle 
of witness. And the priest shall offer the one for a sinoffering 
and the other for a burntoffering and make an atonement for him, 
as concerning that he sinned upon the dead, and shall also hallow 
his head the same day and he shall abstain unto the LORD the time 
of his abstinency, and shall bring a lamb of an year old for a 
trespass offering: but the days that were before are lost, because 
his abstinence was defiled. This is the law of the abstainer, when 
the time of his abstinence is out; he shall be brought unto the 
door of the tabernacle of witness and he shall bring his offering 
unto the LORD: an he lamb of a year old without blemish for a 
burntoffering and a she lamb of a year old without blemish for a 
sinoffering, a ram without blemish also for a peaceoffering, and a 
basket of sweet bread of fine flour mingled with oil and wafers of 
sweet bread anointed with oil with meatofferings and 
drinkofferings that long thereto. And the priest shall bring him 
before the LORD and offer his sinoffering and his burntoffering, 
and shall offer the ram for a peaceoffering unto the LORD with the 
basket of sweet bread, and the priest shall offer also his 
meatoffering and his drinkoffering. And the abstainer shall shave 
his head in the door of the tabernacle of witness and shall take 
the hair of his sober head and put it in the fire which is under 
the peaceoffering. Then the priest shall take the sodden shoulder 
of the ram and one sweet cake out of the basket and one sweet 
wafer also and put them in the hand of the abstainer after he hath 
shaven his abstinence off, and the priest shall wave them unto the 
LORD, which offering shall be holy unto the priest with the 
wavebreast and heave shoulder: and then the abstainer may drink 
wine. This is the law of the abstainer which hath vowed his 
offering unto the LORD for his abstinence, besides that his hand 
can get. And according to the vow which he vowed, even so he must 
do in the law of his abstinence. And the LORD talked with Moses 
saying: speak unto Aaron and his sons saying: of this wise ye 
shall bless the children of Israel saying unto them. The LORD 
{lorde} bless thee and keep thee. The LORD {lorde} make his face 
shine upon thee and be merciful unto thee. The LORD {lorde} lift 
up his countenance upon thee, and give thee peace. For ye shall 
put my name upon the children of Israel, that I may bless them.

Chapter .vij.

And when Moses had full set up the habitation and anointed it and 
sanctified it and all the apparel thereof, and had anointed and 
sanctified the altar also and all the vessels thereof: then the 
princes of Israel, heads over the houses of their fathers which 
were the lords of the tribes that stood and numbered, offered and 
brought their gifts before the LORD six covered chariots and 
twelve oxen: two and two a chariot and an ox every man, and they 
brought them before the habitation. And the LORD spake unto Moses 
saying: take it of them and let them be to do the service of the 
tabernacle of witness, and give them unto the Levites, every man 
according unto his office. And Moses took the chariots and the 
oxen, and gave them unto the Levites: two chariots and four oxen 
he gave unto the sons of Gerson according unto their office. And 
four chariots and eight oxen he gave unto the sons of Merari 
according unto their offices, under the hands of Ithamar the son 
of Aaron the priest. But unto the sons of Cahath he gave none, for 
the office that pertained to them was holy, and therefore they 
must bear upon shoulders. And the princes offered unto the 
dedicating of the altar in the day that it was anointed, and 
brought their gifts before the altar. And the LORD said unto 
Moses: let the princes bring their offerings, every day one 
prince, unto the dedicating of the altar. He that offered his 
offering the first day, was Nahesson the son of Aminadab of the 
tribe of Iuda. And his offering was: a silver charger, of an 
hundred and thirty sicles weight: and a silver bowl of seventy 
sicles of the holy sicle, both of them full of fine wheaten flour 
mingled with oil for a meatoffering: and a spoon of ten sicles of 
gold full of cense: and an ox, {bullock} a ram and a lamb of a 
year old for burntofferings, and an he goat for a sinoffering: and 
for peace offerings two oxen, five rams, five he goats and five 
lambs of a year old. And this was the gift of Nahesson the son of 
Aminadab. The second day, did Nathaneel offer, the son of Zuar, 
captain over Isachar. And his offering which he brought was: a 
silver charger of an hundred and thirty sicles weight, and a 
silver bowl of seventy sicles, of the holy sicle: both full of 
fine wheaten flour mingled with oil for a meat offering: and a 
golden spoon of ten sicles, full of cense: And an ox, a ram and a 
lamb of a year old for burntofferings, and for peaceofferings two 
oxen five rams, five he goats and five lambs of one year old. And 
this was the offering of Nathaneel the son of Zuar. The third day, 
Eliab the son of Helon the chiefest among the children of Zabulon, 
brought his offering. And his offering was, a silver charger of an 
hundred and thirty sicles weight, and a silver bowl of seventy 
sicles of the holy sicle, and both full of fine flour mingled with 
oil for a meatoffering: and a golden spoon of ten sicles full of 
cense: and an ox and a ram and a lamb of a year old for 
burntofferings, and an he goat for a sinoffering: and for 
peaceofferings two oxen five rams five he goats and five lambs of 
one year old. And this was the offering of Eliab the son of Helon. 
The fourth day, Elizur the son of Sedeur, chief lord among the 
children of Ruben, brought his offering. And his gift was: a 
silver charger of an hundred and thirty sicles weight, and, a 
silver bowl of seventy sicles of the holy sicle, and both full of 
fine flour mingled with oil for a meatoffering: and a golden spoon 
of ten sicles full of cense: and an ox, a ram and a lamb of a year 
old for burntofferings, and an he goat for a sinoffering: and for 
peaceofferings two oxen five rams five he goats and five lambs of 
one year old. And this was the offering of Elizur the son of 
Sedeur. The fifth day, Selumiel the son of Zuri Sadai, chief lord 
among the children of Simeon, offered: whose gift was: a silver 
charger of an hundred and thirty sicles weight: and a silver bowl 
of seventy sicles the holy sicle: and both full of fine flour 
mingled with oil for a meatoffering: and a golden spoon of ten 
sicles full of cense. And an ox, a ram, and a lamb of a year old 
for burntofferings, and an he goat for a sinoffering: and for 
peaceofferings two oxen five rams five he goats and five lambs of 
one year old. And this was the offering of Selumiel the son of 
Zuri Sadai. The sixth day, Eliasaph the son of Deguel the chief 
lord among the children of Gad, offered: whose gift was: a silver 
charger of an hundred and thirty sicles weight, and a silver bowl 
of seventy sicles of the holy sicle, and both full of fine flour 
mingled with oil for a meatoffering: and a golden spoon of ten 
sicles full of cense. And an ox, a ram and a lamb of a year old 
for burntofferings, and an he goat for a sinoffering. And for 
peaceofferings two oxen five rams five he goats and five lambs of 
one year old. And this was the offering of Eliasaph the son of 
Deguel. The seventh day, Elisama the son of Amihud, the chief lord 
of the children of Ephraim, offered. And his gift was: a silver 
charger of an hundred and thirty sicles weight, and a silver bowl 
of seventy sicles, of the holy sicle: and both full of fine flour 
mingled with oil for a meat offering: and a golden spoon of ten 
sicles, full of cense. And an ox, a ram and a lamb of a year old 
for burntofferings, and an he goat for a sinoffering: and for 
peaceofferings two oxen five rams five he goats and five lambs of 
one year old. And this was the offering of Elisama the son of 
Amihud. The eighth day, offered Gamaliel the son of Pedazur, the 
chief lord of the children of Manasse. And his gift was: a silver 
charger of an hundred and thirty sicles weight, and a silver bowl 
of seventy sicles of the holy sicle, and both full of fine flour 
mingled with oil for a meatoffering: and a golden spoon of ten 
sicles full of cense: And an ox, a ram and a lamb of a year old 
for burntofferings, and an he goat for a sinoffering: and for 
peaceofferings two oxen five rams five he goats and five lambs of 
one year old. And this was the offering of Gamaliel the son of 
Pedazur. The ninth day, Abidan the son of Gedeoni the chief lord 
among the children of BenIamin offered. And his gift was: a silver 
charger of an hundred and thirty sicles weight, and a silver bowl 
of seventy sicles of the holy sicle, and both full of fine flour 
mingled with oil for a meatoffering: and a golden spoon of ten 
sicles full of cense: and an ox, a ram and a lamb of a year old 
for burntofferings, and an he goat for a sinoffering: and for 
peaceofferings two oxen five rams five he goats and five lambs of 
one year old. And this was the offering of Abidan the son of 
Gedeoni. The tenth day, Ahiezer the son of Ammi Sadai, chief lord 
among the children of Dan offered. And his gift was: a silver 
charger of an hundred and thirty sicles weight, and a silver bowl 
of seventy sicles, of the holy sicle: and both full of fine flour 
mingled with oil for a meatoffering: and a golden spoon of ten 
sicles full of cense: and an ox, a ram and a lamb of a year old 
for burntofferings, and an he goat for a sinoffering: and for 
peaceofferings two oxen five rams five he goats and five lambs of 
one year old. And this was the offering of Ahiezer the son of Ammi 
Sadai. The eleventh day, Pagiel the son of Ocran the chief lord 
among the children of Asser offered: And his gift was: a silver 
charger of an hundred and thirty sicles weight, and a silver bowl 
of seventy sicles of the holy sicle, and both full of fine flour 
mingled with oil for a meatoffering: and a golden spoon of ten 
sicles full of cense: And an ox, a ram and a lamb of a year old 
for burntofferings, and an he goat for a sinoffering: and for 
peaceofferings two oxen, five rams five he goats and five lambs of 
one year old. And this was the offering of Pagiel the son of 
Ocran. The twelfth day, Ahira the son of Enan, chief lord among 
the children of Naphtali offered. And his gift was: a silver 
charger of an hundred and thirty sicles weight, and a silver bowl 
of seventy sicles of the holy sicle, and both full of fine flour 
mingled with oil for a meatoffering: and a golden spoon of ten 
sicles full of cense: and an ox, a ram and a lamb of a year old 
for burntofferings, and an he goat for a sinoffering: and for 
peaceofferings two oxen five rams five he goats and five lambs of 
one year old. And this was the offering of Ahira, the son of Enan. 
Of this manner was the dedication of the altar, when it was 
anointed: unto the which was brought of the princes of Israel 
twelve chargers of silver twelve silver bowls and twelve spoons of 
gold: every charger containing an hundred and thirty sicles of 
silver, and every bowl seventy so that all the silver of all the 
vessels, was two thousand and four hundred sicles of the holy 
sicle. And the twelve golden spoons which were full of cense, 
contained ten sicles apiece of the holy sicle: so that all the 
gold of the spoons, was an hundred and twenty sicles. All the oxen 
that were brought for the burntofferings were twelve and the rams 
twelve and the lambs twelve of a year old apiece, with the 
meatofferings: with he goats for sinofferings. And all the oxen of 
the peaceofferings were twenty four the rams sixty the goats sixty 
and lambs of a year old apiece sixty and this was the dedication 
of the altar, after that it was anointed. And when Moses was gone 
into the tabernacle of witness to speak with him, he heard the 
voice of one speaking unto him from of the mercy seat that was 
upon the ark of witness: even from between the two cherubins he 
spake unto him.

Chapter .viij.

And the LORD spake unto Moses saying: speak unto Aaron and say 
unto him: when thou puttest on the lamps see that they light all 
seven upon the forefront of the candlestick. And Aaron did even 
so, and put the lamps upon the forefront of the candlestick, as 
the LORD commanded Moses, and the work of the candlestick was of 
stiff gold: both the shaft and the flowers thereof. And according 
unto the vision which the LORD had shewed Moses even so he made 
the candlestick. And the LORD spake unto Moses saying: take the 
Levites from among the children of Israel, and cleanse them. And 
this do unto them when thou cleansest them, sprinkle water of 
purifying upon them and make a razor to run along upon all the 
flesh of them, and let them wash their clothes, and then they 
shall be clean. And let them take a bullock and his meatoffering, 
fine flour mingled with oil: and another bullock shalt thou take 
to be a sinoffering. Then bring the Levites before the tabernacle 
of witness and gather the hole multitude of the children of Israel 
together. And bring the Levites before the LORD, and let the 
children of Israel put their hands upon the Levites. And let Aaron 
heave the Levites before the LORD, for an heaveoffering given of 
the children of Israel, and then let them be appointed to wait 
upon the service of the LORD. And let the Levites put their hands 
upon the heads of the bullocks, and then offer them: the one for a 
sinoffering and the other for a burntoffering unto the LORD, to 
make an atonement for the Levites. And make the Levites stond 
before Aaron and his sons, and have them to be a heaveoffering 
unto the LORD. And thou shalt separate the Levites, from among the 
children of Israel, that they be mine: and after that let them go 
and do the service of the tabernacle of witness. Cleanse them and 
wave them, for they are given unto me from among the children of 
Israel: for I have taken them unto me for all the firstborn that 
open any matrice among the children of Israel. For all the 
firstborn among the children of Israel are mine both man and 
beast: because the same time that I smote the firstborn in the 
land of Egypt, I sanctified them for myself: and I have taken the 
Levites for all the firstborn among the children of Israel, and 
have given them unto Aaron and his sons from among the children of 
Israel, to do the service of the children of Israel in the 
tabernacle of witness and to make an atonement for the children of 
Israel, that there be no plague among the children of Israel, if 
they come nye unto the sanctuary. And Moses and Aaron and all the 
congregation of the children of Israel did unto the Levites 
according unto all that the LORD commanded Moses. And the Levites 
purified them selves, and washed their clothes. And Aaron waved 
them before the LORD, and made an atonement for them to cleanse 
them. And after that they went in to do their service in the 
tabernacle of witness, before Aaron and his sons. And according as 
the LORD had commanded Moses as concerning the Levites, even so 
they did unto them. And the LORD spake unto Moses saying: this 
shall be the manner of the Levites: from twenty five years upward 
they shall go in to wait upon the service in the tabernacle of 
witness, and at fifty they shall cease waiting upon the service 
thereof, and shall labour no more: but shall minister unto their 
brethren in the tabernacle of witness, and there wait, but shall 
do no more service. And see that thou do after this manner unto 
the Levites in their waiting times.

Chapter .ix.

And the LORD spake unto Moses in the wilderness of Sinai, in the 
first month of the second year, after they were come out of the 
land of Egypt saying: let the children of Israel offer Passover in 
his season: even the fourteenth day of this month at even they 
shall keep it in his season, according to all the ordinances and 
manners thereof. And Moses bade the children of Israel that they 
should offer Passover, and they offered Passover the fourteenth 
day of the first month at even in the wilderness of Sinai: and did 
according to all that the LORD commanded Moses. And it chanced 
that certain men which were defiled with a dead corpse that they 
might not offer Passover the same day, came before Moses and Aaron 
the same day, {time} and said: we are defiled upon a dead corpse, 
wherefore are we kept back that we may not offer an offering unto 
the LORD in the due season, among the children of Israel? And 
Moses said unto them: tarry, that I may hear what the LORD will 
command you. And the LORD spake unto Moses saying: speak unto the 
children of Israel and say: If any man among you or your children 
after you be unclean by the reason of a corpse or is in the way 
far off, then let him offer Passover unto the LORD: the fourteenth 
day of the second month at even, and eat it with sweet bread and 
sour herbs, and let them leave none of it unto the morning nor 
break any bone of it. And according to all the ordinance of the 
Passover let them offer it. But if a man be clean and not let in a 
journey, and yet was negligent to offer Passover, the same soul 
shall perish from his people, because he brought not an offering 
unto the LORD in his due season: and he shall bear his sin. And 
when a stranger dwelleth among you and will offer Passover unto 
the LORD, according to the ordinance of Passover and manner 
thereof shall he offer it. And ye shall have one law both for the 
stranger and for him that was born at home in the land. And the 
same day that the habitation was reared up, a cloud covered it on 
high {an hye} upon the tabernacle of witness: and at even there 
was upon the habitation, as it were the similitude of fire until 
the morning. And so it was alway, that the cloud covered it by 
day, and the similitude of fire by night. And when the cloud was 
taken up from of the tabernacle, then the children of Israel 
journeyed: and where the cloud abode there the children of Israel 
pitched their tents. At the mouth of the LORD the children of 
Israel journeyed, and at the mouth of the LORD they pitched. And 
as long as the cloud abode upon the habitation, they lay still, 
and when the cloud tarried still upon the habitation long time, 
the children of Israel waited upon the LORD and journeyed not. If 
it chanced that the cloud abode any space of time upon the 
habitation, then they kept their tents at the mouth of the LORD: 
and they journeyed also at the commandment of the LORD. And if it 
happened that the cloud was upon the habitation from evening unto 
morning and was taken up in the morning, then they journeyed. 
Whether it was by day or by night that the cloud was taken up, 
they journeyed. But when the cloud tarried two days or a month or 
a long season upon the habitation, as long as it tarried thereon, 
the children of Israel kept their tents and journeyed not. And as 
soon as the cloud was taken up, they journeyed. At the mouth of 
the LORD they rested, and at the commandment of the LORD they 
journeyed. And thus they kept the wait {watch} of the LORD, at the 
commandment of the LORD by the hand of Moses.

Chapter .x.

And the LORD spake unto Moses saying: Make thee two trumpets of 
hard {beaten} silver, that thou mayst use them to call the 
congregation together, and when the host shall journey. When they 
blow with them, all the multitude shall resort to thee, unto the 
door of the tabernacle of witness. If but one trumpet blow only, 
then the princes which are heads over the thousands of Israel 
shall come unto thee. And when ye trump the first time, the hosts 
that lie on the east parts shall go forward. And when ye trump the 
second time, then the hosts that lie on the south side shall take 
their journey: for they shall trump when they take their journeys. 
And in gathering the congregation together, ye shall blow and not 
trump. And the sons of Aaron the priests shall blow the trumpets 
and shall have them and it shall be a law unto you for ever and 
among your children after you. And when ye shall go to war in your 
land against your enemies that vex you, ye shall trump with the 
trumpets and ye shall be remembered before the LORD your God and 
saved from your enemies. Also when ye be merry in your feast days 
and in the first days of your months, ye shall blow the trumpets 
over your burnt sacrifices and peaceofferings, that it may be a 
remembrance of you before your God. I am the LORD {lorde} your 
God. And it came to pass the twentieth day of the second month in 
the second year, that the cloud was taken up from off the 
habitation of witness. And the children of Israel took their 
journey out of the desert of Sinai, and the cloud rested in the 
wilderness of Pharan. And the first took their journey at the 
mouth of the LORD, by the hand of Moses: even the standard of the 
host of Iuda removed first with their armies, whose captain was 
Nahesson the son of Aminadab. And over the host of the tribe of 
the children of Isachar, was Nathanael the son of Zuar. And over 
the host of the tribe of the children of Zabulon, was Eliab the 
son of Helon. And the habitation was taken down: and the sons of 
Gerson and Merari went forth bearing the habitation. Then the 
standard of the host of Ruben went forth with their armies, whose 
captain was Elizur the son of Sedeur. And over the host of the 
tribe of the children of Simeon, was Salamiel [the son of Zuri 
saddai. And over the host of the tribe of the children of Gad was 
Eliasaph] the son of Deguel. Then the Cahathites went forward and 
bare the holy things, and the other did set up the habitation 
against they came. Then the standard of the host of the children 
of Ephraim went forth with their armies, whose captain was Elisama 
the son of Amiud. And over the host of the tribe of the sons of 
Manasse, was Gamaliel the son of Pedazur. And over the host of the 
tribe of the sons of BenIamin, was Abidan the son of Gedeoni. And 
hindmost of all the host came the standard of the host of the 
children of Dan with their armies: whose captain was, Ahiezar the 
son of Ammi Saddai. And over the host of the tribe of the children 
of Asser, was Pagiel the son of Ochran. And over the host of the 
tribe of the children of Nephthali, was Ahira the son of Enan, of 
this manner were the journeys of the children of Israel, with 
their armies when they removed. And Moses said unto Hobab the son 
of Raguel the Madianite, Moses' father-in-law: we go unto the 
place of which the LORD said I will give it you. Go with us and we 
will do thee good, for the LORD hath promised good unto Israel. 
And he said unto him: I will not: but will go to mine own land and 
to my kindred. And Moses said, oh nay, leave us not, for thou 
knowest where is best for us to pitch in the wilderness: and thou 
shalt be our eyes. And if thou go with us, look what goodness the 
LORD sheweth upon us, the same we will shew upon thee. And they 
departed from the mount of the LORD three days' journey, and the 
ark of the testament of the LORD went before them in the three 
days' journey to search out a resting place for them. And the 
cloud of the LORD was over them by day, when they went out of the 
tents. And when the ark went forth, Moses said: Rise up LORD and 
let thine enemies be scattered, and let them that hate thee flee 
before thee. And when the ark rested, he said: return LORD, unto 
the many thousands of Israel.

Chapter .xi.

And the people waxed unpatient, {complained} and it displeased the 
ears of the LORD. And when the LORD heard it he was wroth, and the 
fire of the LORD burnt among them and consumed the uttermost of 
the host. And the people cried unto Moses, and he made 
intercession unto the LORD and the fire quenched. And they called 
the name of the place Tabera because the fire of the LORD burnt 
among them. And the rascal people that was among them fell a 
lusting. And the children of Israel also went to and wept and 
said: who shall give us flesh to eat? we remember the fish which 
we should eat in Egypt for nought, and of the Cucumbers and 
melons, leeks, onions and garlic. But now our souls are dried 
away, for our eyes look on nothing else, save upon Manna. The 
Manna was as it had been coriander seed, and to see to like 
Bedellion. And the people went about and gathered it, and ground 
it in mills, or beat it in mortars and boke it in pans and made 
cakes of it. And the taste of it was like unto the taste of an 
oilcake. And when the dew fell about the host in the night, the 
manna fell therewith. And when Moses heard the people weep in 
their households every man in the door of his tent, then the wrath 
of the LORD waxed hot exceedingly: and it grieved Moses also. And 
Moses said unto the LORD: wherefore dealest thou so cruelly with 
thy servant? wherefore do I not find favour in thy sight, seeing 
that thou puttest the weight of this people upon me? have I 
conceived all this people, or have I begotten them, that thou 
shouldest say unto me, carry them in thy bosom (as a nurse beareth 
the sucking child) unto the land which thou swarest unto their 
fathers? where should I have flesh to give unto all this people? 
For they weep unto me saying: give us flesh that we may eat. I am 
not able to bear all this people alone, for it is too heavy for 
me. Wherefore if thou deal thus with me, kill me, I pray thee, if 
I have found favour in thy sight: and let me not see my 
wretchedness. And the LORD said unto Moses: gather unto me seventy 
of the elders of Israel, which thou knowest that they are the 
elders of the people and officers over them, and bring them unto 
the tabernacle of witness, and let them stond there with thee. And 
I will come down and talk with thee there, and take of the spirit 
which is upon thee and put upon them, and they shall bear with 
thee in the burthen of the people, and so shalt thou not bear 
alone. And say unto the people: hallow your selves against 
tomorrow, that ye may eat flesh, for ye have whined in the ears of 
the LORD saying: who shall give us flesh to eat, for we were happy 
when we were in Egypt? therefore the LORD will give you flesh, and 
ye shall eat: Ye shall not eat one day only either two or five 
days, either ten or twenty days: but even a month long, and until 
it come out at the nostrils of you, that ye be ready to parbreak: 
because that ye have cast the LORD aside which is among you, and 
have wept before him saying: why came we out of Egypt. And Moses 
said: six hundred thousand footmen are there of the people, among 
which I am. And thou hast said: I will give them flesh and they 
shall eat a month long. Shall the sheep and the oxen be slain for 
them to find them, either shall all the fish of the sea be 
gathered together to serve them? And the LORD {Lorde} said unto 
Moses: is the LORD's {lordes} hand waxed short? Thou shalt see 
whether my word shall come to pass unto thee or not. And Moses 
went out and told the people the saying of the LORD, and gathered 
the seventy elders of the people, and set them round about the 
tabernacle. And the LORD came down in a cloud and spake unto him, 
and took of the spirit that was upon him, and put it upon the 
seventy elders. And as the spirit rested upon them, they 
prophesied and did nought else. But there remained two of the men 
in the host: the one called Eldad, and the other Medad. And the 
spirit rested upon them for they were of them that were written, 
but they went not out unto the tabernacle: and they prophesied in 
the host. And there ran a young man and told Moses and said: Eldad 
and Medad do prophesy in the host. And Iosua the son of Nun the 
servant of Moses which he had chosen out, answered and said: 
master Moses, forbid them. And Moses said unto him: enviest thou 
for my sake? would God that all the LORD's people could prophesy, 
and that the LORD would put his spirit upon them. And then both 
Moses and the elders of Israel, gat them into the host. And there 
went forth a wind from the LORD and brought quails from the sea 
and let them fall about the host, even a day's journey round about 
on every side of the host, and two cubits high upon the earth. And 
the people stood up all that night and on the morrow, and gathered 
quails. And he that gathered the least, gathered ten homers full. 
And they killed them round about the host. And while the flesh was 
yet between their teeth, yer it was chewed up, the wrath of the 
LORD waxed hot upon the people, and the LORD slew of the people an 
exceeding mighty slaughter. And they called the name of the place, 
the graves of lust: because they buried the people that lusted 
there. And the people took their journey from the graves of lust 
{kibrath hathavah} unto Hazeroth, and bode at Hazeroth.

Chapter .xij.

And Miriam and Aaron spake against Moses, because of his wife of 
Inde which he had taken: for he had taken to wife one of India. 
And they said: doth the LORD speak only thorow Moses? doth he not 
speak also by us? And the LORD heard it. But Moses was a very meek 
man above all the men of the earth. And the LORD spake at once 
unto Moses unto Aaron and Miriam: come out ye three unto the 
tabernacle of witness: and they came out all three. And the LORD 
came down in the pillar of the cloud and stood in the door of the 
tabernacle and called Aaron and Miriam. And they went out both of 
them. And he said: hear my words. If there be a prophet of the 
LORD's among you, I will shew myself unto him in a vision and will 
speak unto him in a dream: But my servant Moses is not so, which 
is faithful in all mine house. Unto him I speak mouth to mouth and 
he seeth the sight and the fashion of the LORD, and not thorow 
riddles. Wherefore then were ye not afraid to speak against my 
servant Moses? And the LORD was angry with them and went his way, 
and the cloud departed from the tabernacle. And behold, Miriam was 
become leprous, as it were snow. And when Aaron looked upon Miriam 
and saw that she was leprous, he said unto Moses: Oh I beseech 
thee my lord, put not the sin upon us which we have foolishly 
committed and sinned. Oh, let her not be as one that came dead out 
of his mother's womb: for half her flesh is eaten away. And Moses 
cried unto the LORD saying: Oh God, heal her. And the LORD said 
unto Moses: If her father had spit in her face, should she not be 
ashamed seven days? let her be shut out of the host seven days, 
and after that let her be received in again. And Miriam was shut 
out of the host seven days: and the people removed not, till she 
was brought in again. And afterward they removed from Hazeroth, 
and pitched in the wilderness of Pharan.

Chapter .xiij.

And the LORD spake unto Moses saying: Send men out to search the 
land of Canaan, which I give unto the children of Israel: of every 
tribe of their fathers a man and let them all be such as are 
rulers among them. And Moses at the commandment of the LORD sent 
forth out of the wilderness of Pharan: such men as were all heads 
among the children of Israel, whose names are these: In the tribe 
of Ruben, Sammua the son of Zacur: In the tribe of Simeon, Saphat 
the son of Hori. In the tribe of Iuda, Caleph the son of Iephune. 
In the tribe of Isachar, Igeal the son of Ioseph. In the tribe of 
Ephraim, Hosea the son of Nun. In the tribe of BenIamin, Palti the 
son of Raphu. In the tribe of Zabulon, Gadiel the son of Sodi. In 
the tribe of Ioseph: In the tribe of Manasse, Gaddi the son of 
Susi. In the tribe of Dan, Amiel the son of Gemali. In the tribe 
of Asser, Sethur the son of Micheel. In the tribe of Nephtali, 
Nahebi the son of Uaphsi. In the tribe of Gad, Guel the son of 
Machi. These are the names of the men which Moses sent to spy out 
the land. And Moses called the name of Hosea the son of Nun, 
Iosua. And Moses sent them forth to spy out the land of Canaan, 
and said unto them: get you southward and go up into the high 
country, and see the land what manner thing it is and the people 
that dwelleth therein: whether they be strong or weak, either few 
or many, and what the land is that they dwell in, whether it be 
good or bad, and what manner of cities they dwell in: whether they 
dwell in tents or walled towns, and what manner of land it is: 
whether it be fat or lean, and whether there be trees therein or 
not. And be of a good courage, and bring of the fruits of the 
land. And it was about the time that grapes are first ripe. And 
they went up and searched out the land from the wilderness of Zin 
unto Rehob as men go to Hemath, and they ascended unto the south 
and came unto Hebron, where Ahiman was and Sefai and Thalmani the 
sons of Enack. Hebron was built seven years before Zoan in Egypt. 
And they came unto the river of Escol and they cut down there a 
branch with one cluster of grapes and bare it upon a staff between 
twain, and also of the pomegranates and of the figs of the place. 
The river was called Escol, because of the cluster of grapes which 
the children of Israel cut down there. And they turned back again 
from searching the land, at forty days' end. And they went and 
came to Moses and Aaron and unto all the multitude of the children 
of Israel, unto the wilderness of Pharan: even unto Cades, and 
brought them word and also unto all the congregation, and shewed 
them the fruit of the land. And they told him saying: we came unto 
the land whither thou sendedst us, and surely it is a land that 
floweth with milk and honey and here is of the fruit of it. 
Nevertheless the people be strong that dwell in the land, and the 
cities are walled and exceeding great, and moreover we saw the 
children of Enack there. The Amaleks dwell in the south country, 
and the Hethites, Iebusites and the Amorites dwell in the 
mountains, and the Cananites dwell by the sea and along by the 
coast of Iordan. And Caleb stilled the murmur of the people 
against Moses saying: let us go up and conquer it, for we be able 
to overcome it. But the men that went up with him, said: We be not 
able to go up against the people, for they are stronger than we: 
And they brought up an evil report of the land which they had 
searched, unto the children of Israel saying: The land which we 
have gone thorow to search it out, is a land that eateth up the 
inhabiters thereof, and the people that we saw in it are men of 
stature. And there we saw also giants, the children of Enack which 
are of the giants. And we seemed in our sight as it were 
grasshoppers and so we did in their sight.

Chapter .xiiij.

And the multitude cried out, and the people wept thorowout that 
night, and all the children of Israel murmured against Moses and 
Aaron. And the whole congregation said unto them: would God that 
we had died in the land of Egypt, either we would that we had died 
in this wilderness. Wherefore hath the LORD brought us unto this 
land to fall upon the sword, that both our wives, and also our 
children should be a prey? is it not better that we return unto 
Egypt again? And they said one to another: let us make a captain 
and return unto Egypt again. And Moses and Aaron fell on their 
faces before all the congregation of the multitude of the children 
of Israel. And Iosua the son of Nun, and Caleb the son of Iephune 
which were of them that searched the land rent their clothes and 
spake unto all the company of the children of Israel saying: The 
land which we walked thorow to search it, is a very good land. If 
the LORD have lust to us, he will bring us into this land and give 
it us, which is a land that floweth with milk and honey. But in 
any wise rebel not against the LORD. Moreover fear ye not the 
people of the land, for they are but bread for us. Their shield is 
departed from them, and the LORD is with us: fear them not 
therefore. And all the whole multitude bade stone them with 
stones. But the glory of the LORD appeared in the tabernacle of 
witness, unto all the children of Israel. And the LORD said unto 
Moses: How long shall this people rail upon me, and how long will 
it be, yer they believe me, for all my signs which I have shewed 
among them? I will smite them with the pestilence and destroy 
them, and will make of thee a greater nation and a mightier than 
they. And Moses said unto the LORD: then the Egyptians shall hear 
it, for thou broughtest this people with thy might from among 
them. And it will be told to the inhabiters of this land also, for 
they have heard likewise, that thou the LORD art among this 
people, and that thou art seen face to face, and that thy cloud 
stondeth over them and that thou goest before them by day time in 
a pillar of cloud, and in a pillar of fire by night. If thou shalt 
kill all this people as they were but one man then the nations 
which have heard the fame of thee, will speak saying: because the 
LORD was not able to bring in this people into the land which he 
swore unto them, therefore he slew them in the wilderness. So now 
let the power of my Lord {|LORDE|} be great, according as thou 
hast spoken saying: the LORD is long yer he be angry, and full of 
mercy, and suffereth sin and trespass, and leaveth no man 
innocent, and visiteth the unrighteousness of the fathers upon the 
children, even upon the third and fourth generation, be merciful I 
beseech ye therefore, unto the sin of this people according unto 
thy great mercy, and according as thou hast forgiven this people 
from Egypt even unto this place. And the LORD said: I have 
forgiven it, according to thy request. But as truly as I live, all 
the earth shall be filled with my glory. For of all those men 
which have seen my glory and my miracles which I did in Egypt and 
in the wilderness, and yet have tempted me now this ten times and 
have not hearkened unto my voice, there shall not one see the land 
which I sware unto their fathers, neither shall any of them that 
railed upon me, see it. But my servant Caleb, because there is 
another manner spirit with him, and because he hath followed me 
unto the utmost: him I will bring into the land which he hath 
walked in, and his seed shall conquer it, and also the Amalekites 
and Cananites which dwell in the low countries. Tomorrow turn you 
and get you into the wilderness: even the way toward the Red Sea. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses and Aaron saying: how long shall 
this evil multitude murmur against me? I have heard the murmurings 
of the children of Israel which they murmur against me. Tell them, 
that the LORD sayeth: As truly as I live, I will do unto you even 
as ye have spoken in mine ears. Your carcasses shall lie in this 
wilderness, neither shall any of these numbers which were numbered 
from twenty years and above of you which have murmured against me 
come in to the land over which I lifted mine hand to make you 
dwell therein, save Caleb the son of Iephune, and Iosua the son of 
Nun. And your children which ye said should be a prey, them I will 
bring in, and they shall know the land which ye have refused, and 
your carcases shall lie in this wilderness And your children shall 
wander in this wilderness forty years and suffer for your whoredom 
until your carcases be wasted in the wilderness, after the number 
of the days in which ye searched out the land forty days, and 
every day a year: so that they shall bear your unrighteousness 
forty years, and ye shall feel my vengeance I the LORD have said 
that I will do it unto all this evil congregation that are 
gathered together against me: even in this wilderness ye shall be 
consumed, and here ye shall die. And the men which Moses sent to 
search the land, and which (when they came again) made all the 
people to murmur against it in that they brought up a slander upon 
the land: died for their bringing up that evil slander upon it, 
and were plagued before the LORD. But Iosua the son of Nun and 
Caleb the son of Iephune which were of the men that went to search 
the land, lived still. And Moses told these sayings unto all the 
children of Israel, and the people took great sorrow. And they 
rose up early in the morning and gat them up into the top of the 
mountain saying: lo we be here, and will go up unto the place of 
which the LORD said, for we have sinned. And Moses said: wherefore 
will ye go on this manner beyond the word of the LORD? it will not 
come well to pass: go not up for the LORD is not among you that ye 
be not slain before your enemies. For the Amalekites and the 
Cananites are there before you, and ye will fall upon the sword: 
because ye are turned away from the LORD, and therefore the LORD 
will not be with you. But they were blinded to go up into the 
hilltop: Never the later, the ark of the testament of the LORD and 
Moses departed not out of the host. Then the Amalekites and the 
Cananites which dwelt in that hill, came down and smote them and 
hewed them: even unto Horma.

Chapter .xv.

And the LORD spake unto Moses saying: speak unto the children of 
Israel and say unto them: when ye be come into the land of your 
habitation which I give unto you, and will offer an offering upon 
the fire unto the LORD, whether it be a burntoffering or a special 
vow or freewill offering or if it be in your principal feasts to 
make a sweet savour unto the LORD, of the oxen or of the flock. 
Then, let him that offereth his offering unto the LORD, bring also 
a meatoffering of a tenth deal of flour mingled with the fourth 
part of an hin of oil, and the fourth part of an hin of wine for a 
drinkoffering, and offer with the burntoffering or any other 
offering when it is a lamb. And unto a ram thou shalt offer a 
meatoffering of two tenth deals of flour, mingled with the third 
part of an hin of oil, and to a drinkoffering thou shalt offer the 
third part of an hin of wine, to be a sweet savour unto the LORD. 
When thou offerest an ox to a burntoffering or in any special vow 
or peaceoffering unto the LORD, then thou shalt bring unto an ox, 
a meatoffering of three tenth deals of flour mingled with half an 
hin of oil. And thou shalt bring for a drinkoffering half an hin 
of wine, that is an offering of a sweet savour unto the LORD. This 
is the manner that shall be done unto one ox, one ram, a lamb or a 
kid. And according to the number of such offerings, thou shalt 
increase the meatofferings and the drinkofferings. All that are of 
your selves shall do these things after this manner, when he 
offereth an offering of sweet savour unto the LORD. And if there 
be a stranger with you or be among you in your generations, and 
will offer an offering of a sweet savour unto the LORD: even as ye 
do, so he shall do. One ordinance shall serve both for you of the 
congregation, and also for the stranger. And it shall be an 
ordinance for ever among your children after you, that the 
stranger and ye shall be like before the LORD. One law and one 
manner shall serve, both for you and for the stranger that 
dwelleth with you. And the LORD spake unto Moses saying: speak 
unto the children of Israel and say unto them: when ye be come in 
to the land whither I will bring you, then when ye will eat of the 
bread of the land, ye shall give an heaveoffering unto the LORD. 
Ye shall give a cake of the first of your dough unto an heave 
offering: as ye do the heaveoffering of the barn, even so ye shall 
heave it. Of the first of your dough ye must give unto the LORD an 
heaveoffering, thorowout your generations. If ye oversee your 
selves and observe not all these commandments which the LORD hath 
spoken unto Moses, and all that the LORD hath commanded you by the 
hand of Moses, from the first day forward that the LORD commanded 
among your generation: when ought is committed ignorantly before 
the eyes of the congregation, then all the multitude shall offer a 
calf for a burntoffering to be a sweet savour unto the LORD, and 
the meatoffering and the drinkoffering thereto, according to the 
manner: and an he goat for a sinoffering. And the priest shall 
make an atonement for all the multitude of the children of Israel, 
and it shall be forgiven them for it was ignorance. And they shall 
bring their gifts unto the offering of the LORD, and their 
sinoffering before the LORD for their ignorance. And it shall be 
forgiven unto all the multitude of the children of Israel, and 
unto the stranger that dwelleth among you: for the ignorance 
pertaineth unto all the people. If any one soul sin thorow 
ignorance he shall bring a she goat of a year old for a 
sinoffering. And the priest shall make an atonement for the soul 
that sinned ignorantly with the sinoffering before the LORD and 
reconcile him, and it shall be forgiven him. And both thou that 
art born one of the children of Israel and the stranger that 
dwelleth among you shall have both one law, if ye sin thorow 
ignorance. And the soul that doth ought presumptuously, whether he 
be an Israelite or a stranger, the same hath despised the LORD. 
And that soul shall be destroyed from among his people, because he 
hath despised the word of the LORD and hath broken his 
commandments, that soul therefore shall perish and his sin shall 
be upon him. And while the children of Israel were in the 
wilderness, they found a man gathering sticks upon the Sabbath 
day. And they that found him gathering sticks, brought him unto 
Moses and Aaron and unto all the congregation: and they put him in 
ward, for it was not declared what should be done unto him. And 
the LORD said unto Moses: the man shall die: let all the multitude 
stone him with stones without the host. And all the multitude 
brought him without the host and stoned him with stones, and he 
died as the LORD commanded Moses. And the LORD spake unto Moses 
saying: speak unto the children of Israel and bid them, that they 
make them guards upon the quarters of their garments thorowout 
their generations, and let them make the guards of ribbons of 
Iacinth. And the guard shall be unto you to look upon it, that ye 
remember all the commandments of the LORD and do them: that ye 
seek not a way after your own hearts and after your own eyes, for 
to go a whoring after them: but that ye remember and do all my 
commandments and be holy unto your God, for I am the LORD your 
God, which brought you out of the land of Egypt, to be your God. I 
am the LORD God.

Chapter .xvi.

And Corah the son of Iezehar the son of Cahath the son of Levi: 
and Dathan and Abiram the son of Eliab, and On the son of Peleth, 
the son of Ruben: stood up before Moses, with other of the 
children of Israel two hundred and fifty, heads of the 
congregation, and councillors, and men of fame, and they gathered 
them selves together against Moses and Aaron and said unto them: 
ye have done enough. For all the multitude are holy every one of 
them, and the LORD is among them. Why therefore heave ye your 
selves up above the congregation of the LORD. When Moses heard it, 
he fell upon his face and spake unto Corah and unto all his 
company saying: tomorrow the LORD will shew who is his and who is 
holy, and will take them unto him, and whom soever he hath chosen, 
he will cause to come to him. This do: take firepans, thou Corah 
and all thy company, and do fire therein and put cense thereto 
before the LORD tomorrow: And then whomsoever the LORD doeth 
chose, the same is holy. Ye make enough to do ye children of Levi. 
And Moses said unto Corah: hear ye children of Levi, Seemeth it 
but a small thing unto you, that the God of Israel hath separated 
you from the multitude of Israel to bring you to him, to do the 
service of the dwelling place of the LORD, and to stond before the 
people to minister unto them? he hath taken thee to him and all 
thy brethren the sons of Levi with thee, and ye seek the office of 
the priest also. For which cause both thou and all thy company are 
gathered together against the LORD: for what is Aaron, that ye 
should murmur against him. And Moses sent to call Dathan and 
Abiram the sons of Eliab, and they answered: we will not come. 
Seemeth it a small thing unto thee that thou hast brought us out 
of a land that floweth with milk and honey, to kill us in the 
wilderness. But that thou shouldest reign over us also? More over 
thou hast brought us unto no land that floweth with milk and 
honey, neither hast given us possessions of fields or of vines. 
Either wilt thou pull out the eyes of these men? we will not come. 
And Moses waxed very angry and said unto the LORD: Turn not unto 
their offerings. I have not taken so much as an ass from them, 
neither have vexed any of them. Then Moses said unto Corah: Be 
thou and all thy company before the LORD: both thou, they and 
Aaron tomorrow. And take every man his censer and put cense in 
them, and come before the LORD every man with his censer: two 
hundred and fifty censers, and Aaron with his censer. And they 
took every man his censer and put fire in them and laid cense 
thereon, and stood in the door of the tabernacle of witness, and 
Moses and Aaron also. And Corah gathered all the congregation 
against them unto the door of the tabernacle of witness. And the 
glory of the LORD appeared unto all the congregation. And the LORD 
spake unto Moses and Aaron saying: separate your selves from this 
congregation, that I may consume them at once. And they fell upon 
their faces and said: O most mighty God of the spirits of all 
flesh, one man hath sinned, and wilt thou be wroth with all the 
multitude? And the LORD spake unto Moses saying: speak unto the 
congregation and say: Get you away from about the dwelling of 
Corah, Dathan and Abiram. And Moses rose up and went unto Dathan 
and Abiram, and the elders of Israel followed him. And he spake 
unto the congregation saying: depart from the tents of these 
wicked men and twich nothing of theirs: lest ye perish in all 
their sins. And they gat them from the dwelling of Corah, Dathan 
and Abiram, on every side. And Dathan and Abiram came out and 
stood in the door of their tents with their wives, their sons and 
their children. And Moses said: Hereby ye shall know that the LORD 
hath sent me to do all these works, and that I have not done them 
of mine own mind: If these men die the common death of all men or 
if they be visited after the visitation of all men, then the LORD 
hath not sent me. But and if the LORD make a new thing, and the 
earth open her mouth and swallow them and all that pertain unto 
them, so that they go down quick in to hell: then ye shall 
understand, that these men have railed upon the LORD. And as soon 
as he had made an end of speaking all these words, the ground 
clove asunder that was under them, and the earth opened her mouth 
and swallowed them and their houses and all the men that were with 
Corah and all their goods. And they and all that pertained unto 
them, went down alive unto hell, and the earth closed upon them, 
and they perished from among the congregation. And all Israel that 
were about them, fled at the cry of them. For they said: The earth 
might happily swallow us also. And there came out a fire from the 
LORD and consumed the two hundred and fifty men that offered 
cense. And the LORD spake unto Moses saying: Speak unto Eleazer 
the son of Aaron the priest and let him take up the censers out of 
the burning and scatter the fire here and there, for the censers 
of these sinners are hallowed in their deaths: and let them be 
beaten into thin plates and fastened upon the altar. For they 
offered them before the LORD, and therefore they are holy and they 
shall be a sign unto the children of Israel. And Eleazar the 
priest took the brazen censers which they that were burnt had 
offered, and beat them and fastened them upon the altar, to be a 
remembrance unto the children of Israel, that no stranger which is 
not of the seed of Aaron, come near to offer cense before the 
LORD, that he be not made like unto Corah and his company: as the 
LORD said unto him by the hand of Moses. And on the morrow all the 
multitude of the children of Israel murmured against Moses and 
Aaron saying: ye have killed the people of the LORD. And when the 
multitude was gathered against Moses and Aaron, they looked toward 
the tabernacle of witness; And behold, the cloud had covered it 
and the glory of the LORD appeared. And Moses and Aaron went 
before the tabernacle of witness. And the LORD spake unto Moses 
saying: Get you from this congregation, that I may consume them 
quickly. And they fell upon their faces. And Moses said unto 
Aaron: take a censer and put fire therein out of the altar, and 
pour on cense, and go quickly unto the congregation and make an 
atonement for them. For there is wrath gone out from the LORD, and 
there is a plague begun. And Aaron took as Moses commanded him, 
and ran unto the congregation: and behold, the plague was begun 
among the people, and he put on cense, and made an atonement for 
the people. And he stood between the dead, and them that were 
alive, and the plague ceased. And the number of them that died in 
the plague, were fourteen thousand and seven hundred: beside them 
that died about the business of Corah. And Aaron went again unto 
Moses unto the door of the tabernacle of witness, and the plague 
ceased.

Chapter .xvij.

And the LORD spake unto Moses saying: speak unto the children of 
Israel and take of them, for every principal house a rod, of their 
princes over the houses of their fathers: even twelve rods, and 
write every man's name upon his rod. And write Aaron's name upon 
the staff of Levi: for every headman over the houses of their 
fathers shall have a rod. And put them in the tabernacle of 
witness where I will meet you. And his rod whom I chose, shall 
blossom: So I will make cease from me the grudgings of the 
children of Israel which they grudge against you. And Moses spake 
unto the children of Israel, and all the princes gave him for 
every prince over their fathers' houses, a rod: even twelve rods, 
and the rod of Aaron was among the rods. And Moses put the rods 
before the LORD in the tabernacle of witness: And on the morrow, 
Moses went in to the tabernacle: and behold, the rod of Aaron of 
the house of Levi was budded and bare blossoms and almonds. And 
Moses brought out all the staves from before the LORD, unto all 
the children of Israel, and they looked upon them, and took every 
man his staff. And the LORD said unto Moses: bring Aaron's rod 
again before the witness to be kept for a token unto the children 
of rebellion, that their murmurings may cease from me, that they 
die not. And Moses did as the LORD commanded him. And the children 
of Israel spake unto Moses saying: behold, we are destroyed and 
all come to nought: for whosoever cometh nye the dwelling of the 
LORD, dieth. Shall we utterly consume away?

Chapter .xviij.

And the LORD said unto Aaron: Thou and thy sons and thy father's 
house with thee, shall bear the fault of that which is done amiss 
in the holy place. And thou and thy sons with thee, shall bear the 
fault of that which is done amiss in your priesthood. And thy 
brethren also the tribe of Levi, the tribe of thy father take with 
thee, and let them be joined unto thee and minister unto thee. And 
thou and thy sons with thee shall minister before the tabernacle 
of witness. And let them wait upon thee and upon all the 
tabernacle: only let them not come nye the holy vessels and the 
altar, that both they and ye also die not. And let them be by thee 
and wait on the tabernacle of witness, and on all the service of 
the tabernacle, and let no stranger come nye unto you. Wait 
therefore upon the holy place and upon the altar, that there fall 
no more wrath upon the children of Israel: behold, I have taken 
your brethren the Levites from among children of Israel, to be 
yours, as gifts given unto the LORD to do the service of the 
tabernacle of witness. And see that both thou and thy sons with 
thee take heed unto your priests' office, in all things that 
pertain unto the altar and within the vail. And see that ye serve, 
for I have given your priests' office unto you for a gift to do 
service: and the stranger that cometh nye, shall die. And the LORD 
spake unto Aaron: behold, I have given thee the keeping of mine 
heave offerings in all the hallowed things of the children of 
Israel. And unto thee I have given them unto anointing and to thy 
sons: to be a duty for ever. This shall be thine of most holy 
sacrifices: All their gifts, thorowout all their meatofferings, 
sinofferings and trespassofferings which they bring unto me. They 
shall be most holy unto thee and unto thy sons. And ye shall eat 
it in the most holy place: all that are males shall eat of it, for 
it shall be holy unto thee. And this shall be thine: the 
heaveoffering of their gifts, thorowout all the waveofferings of 
the children of Israel, for I have given them unto thee and thy 
sons, and thy daughters with thee, to be a duty for ever: and all 
that are clean in thy house, shall eat of it, all the fat of the 
oil, of the wine and of the corn: their first fruits which they 
give unto the LORD that have I given unto thee. The first fruits 
of all that is in their lands which they bring unto the LORD, 
shall be thine: and all that are clean in thine house, shall eat 
of it. All dedicate things in Israel, shall be thine. All that 
breaketh the matrice of all flesh that men bring unto the LORD, 
both of man and beast, shall be thine. Neverthelater the firstborn 
of man shall be redeemed, and the firstborn of unclean beasts 
shall be redeemed. And their redemptions shall be at a month old, 
valued at five sicles of silver, of the holy sicle. A sicle maketh 
twenty Geras. But the firstborn of oxen, sheep and goats shall not 
be redeemed. For they are holy, and thou shalt sprinkle their 
blood upon the altar, and shalt burn their fat to be a sacrifice 
of a sweet savour unto the LORD. And the flesh of them shall be 
thine, as the wavebreast and all the right shoulder is thine. All 
the holy heave offerings which the children of Israel heave unto 
the LORD, I give thee and thy sons and thy daughters with thee to 
be a duty for ever. And it shall be a salted covenant for ever, 
before the LORD: unto thee and to thy seed with thee. And the LORD 
spake unto Aaron: thou shalt have none inheritance in their land, 
nor part among them. For I am thy part and thy inheritance among 
the children of Israel. And behold I have given the children of 
Levi, the tenth in Israel to inherit, for the service which they 
serve in the tabernacle of witness, that the children of Israel 
henceforth come not nye the tabernacle of witness, and bear sin 
and die. And the Levites shall do the service in the tabernacle of 
witness and bear their sin, and it shall be a law for ever unto 
your children after you: But among the children of Israel they 
shall inherit none inheritance. For the tithes of the children of 
Israel which they heave unto the LORD, I have given the Levites to 
inherit. Wherefore I have said unto them: Among the children of 
Israel ye shall inherit none inheritance. And the LORD spake unto 
Moses saying: speak unto the Levites and say unto them: when ye 
take of the children of Israel the tithes which I have given you 
of them to your inheritance, ye shall take an heaveoffering of 
that same for the LORD: even the tenth of that tithe. And it shall 
be reckoned unto you for your heaveoffering, even as though ye 
gave corn out of the barn or a full offering from the wine press. 
And of this manner ye shall heave an heaveoffering unto the LORD, 
of all your tithes which ye receive of the children of Israel, and 
ye shall give there of the LORD's heave offering unto Aaron the 
priest. Of all your gifts, ye shall take out the LORD's 
heaveoffering: even the fat of all their hallowed things. And thou 
shalt say unto them: when ye have taken away the fat of it from 
it, it shall be counted unto the Levites, as the increase of corn 
and wine. And ye shall eat it in all places both ye and your 
households, for it is your rewards for your service in the 
tabernacle of witness. And ye shall bear no sin by the reason of 
it, when ye have taken from it the fat of it: neither shall ye 
unhallow the hallowed things of the children of Israel, and so 
shall ye not die.

Chapter .xix.

And the LORD spake unto Moses and Aaron saying: this is the 
ordinance of the law which the LORD commandeth saying: speak unto 
the children of Israel and let them take thee a red cow without 
spot wherein is no blemish, and which never bare yoke upon her. 
And ye shall give her unto Eleazer the priest, and he shall bring 
her without the host and cause her to be slain before him. And 
Eleazar the priest shall take of her blood upon his finger, and 
sprinkle it straight toward the tabernacle of witness seven times. 
And he shall cause the cow to be burnt in his sight: both skin, 
flesh and blood, with the dung also. And let the priest take 
cypress wood, and Hyssop and purple cloth, and cast it upon the 
cow as she burneth. And let the priest wash his clothes and bathe 
his flesh in water, and then come into the host, and the priest 
shall be unclean unto the evening. And he that burneth her, shall 
wash his clothes in water and bathe his flesh also in water, and 
be unclean until evening. And one that is clean, shall go and take 
up the ashes of the cow, and put them without the host in a clean 
place, where they shall be kept to make sprinkling water for the 
multitude of the children of Israel: for it is a sinoffering. And 
let him that gathereth the ashes of the cow, wash his clothes, and 
remain unclean until evening. And this shall be unto the children 
of Israel and unto the stranger that dwelleth among them, a manner 
for ever. He that twicheth any dead person, shall be unclean seven 
days. And he shall purify himself with the ashes the third day and 
then he shall be clean the seventh day. And if he purify not 
himself the third day, then the seventh day, he shall not be 
clean. Whosoever twicheth any person that dieth and sprinkleth not 
himself, defileth the dwelling of the LORD: and therefore that 
soul shall be rooted out of Israel, because he hath not sprinkled 
the sprinkling water upon him, he shall be unclean, and his 
uncleanness shall remain upon him. This is the law of the man that 
dieth in a tent: all that come into the tent and all that is in 
the tent, shall be unclean seven days. And all the vessels that be 
open which have no lid nor covering upon them, are unclean. And 
whosoever twicheth one that is slain with a sword in the fields, 
or a dead person, or a bone of a dead man, or a grave: shall be 
unclean seven days. And they shall take for an unclean person, of 
the burnt ashes of the sinoffering, and put running water thereto 
into a vessel. And a clean person shall take Hyssop and dip it in 
the water, and sprinkle it upon the tent and upon all the vessels 
and on the souls that were there, and upon him that twiched a bone 
or a slain person or a dead body or a grave. And the clean person 
shall sprinkle upon the unclean the third day and the seventh day. 
And the seventh day he shall purify himself and wash his clothes 
and bathe himself in water, and shall be clean at evening. If any 
be unclean and sprinkle not himself, the same soul shall be 
destroyed from among the congregation: for he hath defiled the 
holy place of the LORD. And he that sprinkleth the sprinkling 
water, shall wash his clothes. And he that twicheth the sprinkling 
water, shall be unclean until even. And whatsoever the unclean 
person twicheth, shall be unclean. And the soul that twiched it, 
shall be unclean until the evening.

Chapter .xx.

And the whole multitude of the children of Israel, came into the 
desert of Sin in the first month, and the people dwelt at Cades. 
And there died MirIam, and was buried there. Moreover there was no 
water for the multitude, wherefore they gathered them selves 
together against Moses and against Aaron. And the people chode 
with Moses and spake saying: would God that we had perished when 
our brethren perished before the LORD. Why have ye brought the 
congregation of the LORD unto this wilderness, that both we and 
our cattle should die here? Wherefore brought ye us out of Egypt, 
to bring us into this ungracious place, which is no place of seed 
nor of figs nor vines nor of pomegranates, neither is there any 
water to drink? And Moses and Aaron went from the congregation 
unto the door of the tabernacle of witness, and fell upon their 
faces. And the glory of the LORD appeared unto them. And the LORD 
spake unto Moses saying: take the staff, and gather thou and thy 
brother Aaron the congregation together, and say unto the rock 
before their eyes, that he give forth his water. And thou shalt 
bring them water out of the rock and shalt give the company drink, 
and their beasts also. And Moses took the staff from before the 
LORD, as he commanded him And Moses and Aaron gathered the 
congregation together before the rock, and he said unto them: hear 
ye rebellious, must we fetch you water out of this rock? And Moses 
lift up his hand with his staff and smote the rock two times, and 
the water came out abundantly, and the multitude drank and their 
beasts also. And the LORD spake unto Moses and Aaron: Because ye 
believed me not, to sanctify me in the eyes of the children of 
Israel, therefore ye shall not bring this congregation into the 
land which I have given them. This is the water of strife, because 
the children of Israel strove with the LORD, and he was sanctified 
upon them. And Moses sent messengers from Cades unto the king of 
Edom. Thus sayeth thy brother Israel: Thou knowest all the travail 
that hath happened us, how our fathers went down into Egypt, and 
how we have dwelt in Egypt a long time, and, how the Egyptians 
vexed both us and our fathers. Then we cried unto the LORD and he 
heard our voices, and sent an angel and hath fetched us out of 
Egypt. And behold, we are in Cades, a city hard by the borders of 
thy country: let us go a good fellowship thorow thy country: we 
will not go thorow the fields nor thorow the vineyards, neither 
will we drink of the water of the fountains: but we will go by the 
highway and neither turn unto the right hand nor to the left, 
until we be past thy country. And Edom answered him: See thou come 
not by me, lest I come out against thee with the sword. And the 
children of Israel said unto him: we will go by the beaten way: 
and if either we or our cattle drink of thy water, we will pay for 
it, we will do no more but pass thorow by foot only. And he said: 
ye shall not go thorow. And Edom came out against him with much 
people and with a mighty power. And thus Edom denied to give 
Israel passage thorow his country; And Israel turned away from 
him. And the children of Israel removed from Cades and went unto 
mount Hor with all the congregation. And the LORD spake unto Moses 
and Aaron in mount Hor, hard upon the coasts of the land of Edom 
saying: let Aaron be put unto his people, for he shall not come 
into the land which I have given unto the children of Israel: 
because ye disobeyed my mouth at the water of strife. Take Aaron 
and Eleazer his son, and bring them up into mount Hor, and strip 
Aaron out of his vestments and put them upon Eleazer his son, and 
let Aaron be put unto his people and die there. And Moses did as 
the LORD commanded: and they went up into mount Hor in the sight 
of all the multitude. And Moses took off Aaron's clothes and put 
them upon Eleazer his son, and Aaron died there in the top of the 
mount. And Moses and Eleazer came down out of the mount. And all 
the house of Israel mourned for Aaron thirty days

Chapter .xxj.

And when king Arad the Cananite which dwelt in the south parts, 
heard tell that Israel came by the way that the spies had found 
out: he came and fought with Israel and took some of them 
prisoners. Then Israel vowed a vow unto the LORD and said: If thou 
wilt give this people into our hands, we will destroy their 
cities. And the LORD heard the voice of Israel, and delivered them 
the Cananites. And they destroyed both them and their cities, and 
called the place Horma. Then they departed from mount Hor toward 
the red sea: to compass the land of Edom. And the souls of the 
people fainted by the way. And the people spake against God and 
against Moses: wherefore hast thou brought us out of Egypt, for to 
die in the wilderness, for here is neither bread nor water, and 
our souls loatheth this light bread. Then the LORD sent fiery 
serpents among the people, which stung them: so that much people 
died in Israel. And the people came to Moses and said: we have 
sinned, for we have spoken against the LORD and against thee: make 
intercession to the LORD, that he take away the serpents from us. 
And Moses made intercession for the people. And the LORD said unto 
Moses: make thee a serpent and hang it up for a sign, and let as 
many as are bitten look upon it and they shall live. And Moses 
made a serpent of brass and set it up for a sign. And when the 
serpents had bitten any man, he went and beheld the serpent of 
brass and recovered. And the children of Israel removed and 
pitched in Oboth. And they departed from Oboth and lay at Egebarim 
in the wilderness which is before Moab on the east side. And they 
removed thence, and pitched upon the river of Zarad. And they 
departed thence and pitched on the other side of Arnon, which 
river is in the wilderness, and cometh out of the coasts of the 
Amorites: for Arnon is the border of Moab, between Moab and the 
Amorites. Wherefore it is spoken in the book of the war of the 
LORD: go with a violence, both on the river of Arnon and on the 
river's head, which shooteth down to dwell at Ar, and leaneth upon 
the coasts of Moab. And from thence they came to Bear, which is 
the well whereof the LORD spake unto Moses: gather the people 
together, that I may give them water. Then Israel sang this song: 
Arise up well, sing thereto: The well which the rulers digged and 
the captains of the people with the help of the lawgiver and with 
their staves. And from this wilderness they went to Matana, and 
from Matana to Nahaliel, and from Nahaliel to Bamoth, and from 
Bamoth to the valley that is in the field of Moab in the top of 
Phasgah which boweth toward the wilderness. {Iesimon} And Israel 
sent messengers unto Sehon, king of the Amorites, saying: let us 
go thorow thy land: We will not turn into thy fields nor into thy 
vineyards, neither drink of the water of the wells: but we will go 
along by the common way, until we be past thy country. And Sehon 
would give Israel no licence to pass thorow his country, but 
gathered all his people together and went out against Israel into 
the wilderness. And he came to Iaheza and fought with Israel. And 
Israel smote him with the edge of the sword and conquered his 
land, from Arnon unto Iabock: even unto the children of Ammon. For 
the borders of the children of Ammon, are strong. And Israel took 
all these cities and dwelt in all the cities of the Amorites: in 
Hesbon and in all the towns that long thereto. For Hesbon was the 
city of Sehon the king of the Amorites which Sehon had fought 
before with the king of the Moabites, and had taken all his land 
out of his hand, even unto Arnon. Wherefore it is a proverb: go to 
Hesbon and let the city of Sehon be built and made ready for there 
is a fire gone out of Hesbon and a flame from the city of Sehon 
and hath consumed Ar of the Moabites and the men of the hills of 
Arnon. Woe be to thee Moab: O people of Chamos ye are forloren. 
{undone} His sons are put to flight and his daughters brought 
captive unto Sehon king of the Amorites. Their light is out from 
Hesbon unto Dibon and we made a wilderness even unto Nopha which 
reacheth unto Mediba. And thus Israel dwelt in the land of the 
Amorites. And Moses sent to search out Iaezer, and they took the 
towns belonging thereto and conquered the Amorites that were 
there. And then they turned and went up toward Bason. And Og the 
king of Bason came out against them, both he and all his people, 
to war at Edrei. And the LORD said unto Moses: fear him not, for I 
have delivered him into thy hands with all his people and his 
land. And thou shalt do with him as thou didst with Sehon the king 
of the Amorites which dwelt at Hesbon. And they smote him and his 
sons and all his people, until there was nothing left him. And 
they conquered his land.

Chapter .xxij.

And the children of Israel removed and pitched in the fields of 
Moab, on the other side of Iordan, by Iericho. And Balac the son 
of Ziphor saw all that Israel had done to the Amorites, and the 
Moabites were sore afraid of the people, because they were many, 
and abhorred the children of Israel: And Moab said unto the elders 
of Madian, now this company hath licked up all that are round 
about us, as an ox licketh up the grass of the field. And Balac 
the son of Ziphor was king of the Moabites at that time. And he 
sent messengers unto Balam the son of Beor, the interpreter which 
dwelt upon the river of the land of the children of his folk, to 
call him saying: behold, there is a people come out of Egypt which 
covereth the face of the earth and lie even hard by me. Come now a 
fellowship and curse me this people. For they are too mighty for 
me, so peradventure I might be able to smite them and to drive 
them out of the land. For I wot that whom thou blessest shall be 
blessed, and whom thou cursest shall be cursed. And the elders of 
Moab went with the elders of Madian, and the reward of the 
soothsaying in their hands. And they came unto Balam and told him 
the words of Balac. And he said unto them: tarry here all night 
and I will bring you word, even as the LORD shall say unto me. And 
the lords of Moab abode with Balam. And God came unto Balam and 
said: what men are these which are with thee? And Balam said unto 
God: Balac the son of Ziphor king of Moab hath sent unto me 
saying: behold, there is a people come out of Egypt and covereth 
the face of the earth: come now therefore and curse me them, that 
so peradventure I may be able to overcome them in battle, and to 
drive them out. And God said unto Balam: thou shalt not go with 
them, neither curse the people, for they are blessed. And Balam 
rose up in the morning and said unto the lords of Balac: get you 
unto your land, for the LORD will not suffer me to go with you. 
And the lords of Moab rose up and went unto Balac and said, Balam 
would not come with us. And Balac sent again a greater company of 
lords and more honourable than they. And they came to Balam and 
told him: Thus sayeth Balac the son of Ziphor: oh, let nothing let 
thee to come unto me, for I will greatly promote thee unto great 
honour, and will do whatsoever thou sayest unto me, come therefore 
I pray thee, curse me this people. And Balam answered and said 
unto the servants of Balac: If Balac would give me his house full 
of silver and gold, I can go no further than the word of the LORD 
my God, to do less or more. Nevertheless tarry ye here all night: 
that I may wete, what the LORD will say unto me once more. And God 
came to Balam by night and said unto him: If the men come to fetch 
thee, rise up and go with them: but what I say unto thee, that 
only thou shalt do. And Balam rose up early and saddled his ass 
and went with the lords of Moab. But God was angry because he 
went. And the angel of the LORD stood in the way against him. And 
he rid upon his ass and two servants with him. And when the ass 
saw the angel of the LORD stond in the way and his sword drawn in 
his hand, she turned aside out of the way and went out into the 
field. And Balam smote the ass, to turn her into the way. And the 
angel of the LORD went and stood in a path between the vineyards, 
where was a wall on the one side and another on the other. When 
the ass saw the angel of the LORD, she wrenched unto the wall and 
thrust Balam's foot unto the wall, and he smote her again. And the 
angel of the LORD went further and stood in a narrow place, where 
was no way to turn, either to the right hand or to the left. And 
when the ass saw the angel of the LORD, she fell down under Balam: 
and Balam was wroth and smote the ass with a staff. And the LORD 
opened the mouth of the ass, and she said unto Balam: what have I 
done unto thee, that thou smitest me thus three times? And Balam 
said unto the Ass: because thou hast mocked me? I would that I had 
a sword in mine hand, that I might now kill thee. And the ass said 
unto Balam: am not I thine Ass which thou hast ridden upon since 
thou wast born unto this day? Was I ever wont to do so unto thee? 
And he said, nay. And the LORD {lorde} opened the eyes of Balam 
that he saw the angel of the LORD {Lorde} stonding in the way, 
with his sword drawn in his hand. And he bowed himself and fell 
flat on his face. And the angel of the LORD said unto him: 
Wherefore smitest thou thine ass this three times? behold, I came 
out to resist thee, for the way is contrary unto me, and the ass 
saw me and avoided me three times: or else (had she not turned 
from me) I had surely slain thee and saved her alive. And Balam 
said unto the angel of the LORD: I have sinned: for I wist not 
that thou stoodest in the way against me. Now therefore if it 
displease thine eyes, I will turn again. And the angel said unto 
Balam, go with the men: but in any wise, what I say unto thee, 
that say. And Balam went with the lords of Balac. And when Balac 
heard that Balam was come he went out against him unto a city of 
Moab that stood in the border of Arnon, which was the utmost part 
of his country. And Balac said unto Balam: did I not send for 
thee, to call thee? wherefore camest thou not unto me? thinkest 
thou that I am not able to promote thee unto honour? And Balam 
said unto Balac: Lo I am come unto thee. But I can say nothing at 
all save what God putteth in my mouth that must I speak. And Balam 
went with Balac, and they came unto the city of Huzoth. {large 
city} And Balac offered oxen and sheep and sent for Balam and for 
the lords that were with him. And on the morning Balac took Balam 
and brought him up into the high place of Baal, and thence he saw 
unto the utmost part of the people.

Chapter .xxiij.

And Balam said unto Balac: build me here seven altars and provide 
here seven oxen and seven rams. And Balac did as Balam said. And 
Balac and Balam offered on every altar an ox and a ram. And Balam 
said unto Balac: stond by the sacrifice, while I go to wete 
whether the LORD will come and meet me, and whatsoever he sheweth 
me, I will tell thee, and he went forthwith. And God came unto 
Balam, and Balam said unto him: I have prepared seven altars, and 
have offered upon every altar, an ox and a ram. And the LORD put a 
saying in Balam's mouth and said: go again to Balac and say on 
this wise. And he went again unto him and lo, he stood by his 
sacrifice, both he and all the lords of Moab. And he began his 
parable and said: Balac the king of Moab hath fetched me from 
Mesopotamia out of the mountains of the east saying: come and 
curse me Iacob, come and defy me Israel. How shall I curse whom 
God curseth not and how shall I defy whom the LORD defieth not? 
from the top of the rocks I see him and from the hills I behold 
him: Lo, the people shall dwell by himself and shall not be 
reckoned among other nations. Who can tell the dust of Iacob and 
the number of the fourth part of Israel. I pray God that my soul, 
may die the death of the righteous, and that my last end may be 
like his. And Balac said unto Balam, what hast thou done unto me? 
I fetched thee to curse mine enemies: and behold, thou blessest 
them. And he answered and said: must I not keep that and speak it, 
which the LORD hath put in my mouth? And Balac said unto him: Come 
I pray thee with me unto another place, whence thou shalt see 
them, and shalt see but the utmost part of them and shalt not see 
them all and curse me them there. And he brought him into a plain 
field where men might see far, even to the top of Pisga, and built 
seven altars and offered an ox and a ram on every altar. And he 
said unto Balac: stond here by thy sacrifice while I go yonder. 
And the LORD met Balam and put words in his mouth and said: go 
again unto Balac and thus say. And when he came to him: behold, he 
stood by his sacrifice and the lords of Moab with him; And Balac 
said unto him: what sayeth the LORD? And he took up his parable 
and said: rise up Balac and hear, and hearken unto me thou son of 
Ziphor. The Lorde {|God|} is not a man, that he can lie, neither 
the son of a man that he can repent: should he say and not do, or 
should he speak and not make it good? behold, I have begun to 
bless and have blessed, and can not go back therefrom. He beheld 
no wickedness in Iacob nor saw Idolatry in Israel: The LORD his 
God is with him, and the tromp {triumph} of a king among them. God 
that brought them out of Egypt, is as the strength of an unicorn 
unto them, for there is no sorcerer, in Iacob, nor soothsayer in 
Israel. When the time cometh, it will be said of Iacob and of 
Israel, what God hath wrought. Behold, the people shall rise up as 
a lioness and heave up himself as a lion, and shall not lie down 
again, until he have eaten of the prey and drunk of the blood of 
them that are slain. And Balac said unto Balam: neither curse them 
nor bless them. And Balam answered and said unto Balac: told not I 
thee saying, all that the LORD biddeth me, that I must do? And 
Balac said unto Balam: come I pray thee, I will bring thee yet 
unto another place: so peradventure it shall please God, that thou 
mayst curse them there. And Balac brought Balam unto the top of 
Peor, that boweth toward the wilderness. And Balam said unto 
Balac: make me here seven altars, and prepare me here seven 
bullocks and seven rams. And Balac did as Balam had said, and 
offered a bullock and a ram on every altar.

Chapter .xxiiij.

When Balam saw that it pleased the LORD that he should bless 
Israel, he went not as he did twice before to fetch soothsaying, 
but set his face toward the wilderness, and lift up his eyes and 
looked upon Israel as he lay with his tribes, and the spirit of 
God came upon him. And he took up his parable and said: Balam the 
son of Beor hath said, and the man whose eye is open hath said: he 
hath said which heareth the words of God and seeth the visions of 
the almighty, which falleth down and his eyes are opened. How 
goodly are the tents of Iacob and thine habitations Israel, even 
as the broad valleys and as gardens by the river's side, as the 
tents which the LORD hath pitched and as cypress trees upon the 
water. The water shall flow out of his bucket and his seed shall 
be many waters, and his king shall be higher than Agag; And his 
kingdom shall be exalted. God that brought him out of Egypt is as 
the strength of an unicorn unto him, and he shall eat the nations 
that are his enemies and break their bones and pierce them thorow 
with his arrows. He couched himself and lay down as a lion and as 
a lioness, who shall stir him up? blessed is he that blesseth 
thee, and cursed is he that curseth thee. And Balac was wroth with 
Balam and smote his hands together, and said unto him: I sent for 
thee to curse mine enemies: and behold, thou hast blessed them 
this three times, and now get thee quickly unto thy place. I 
thought that I would promote thee unto honour, but the LORD hath 
kept thee back from worship. And Balam said unto Balac: told I not 
thy messengers which thou sentest unto me saying: If Balac would 
give me his house full of silver and gold, I can not pass the 
mouth of the LORD, to do either good or bad of mine own mind. What 
the LORD sayeth, that must I speak. And now behold, I go unto my 
people: come let me shew thee, what this people shall do to thy 
folk in the latter days. And he began his parable and said: Balam 
the son of Beor hath said, and the man that hath his eye open hath 
said, and he hath said that heareth the words of God and hath the 
knowledge of the most high and beholdeth the vision of the 
almighty, and when he falleth down hath his eyes opened. I see him 
but not now, I behold him but not nye. There shall come a star of 
Iacob and rise a scepter of Israel, which shall smite the coasts 
of Moab and undermine all the children of Seth. And Edom shall be 
his possession, and the possession of Seir shall be their enemies, 
and Israel shall do manfully. And out of Iacob shall come he that 
shall destroy the remnant of the cities. And he looked on Amalek 
and began his parable and said: Amalek is the first of the 
nations, but his latter end shall perish utterly. And he looked on 
the Kenites, and took his parable and said: strong is thy dwelling 
place and put thy nest upon a rock. Neverthelater thou shalt be a 
burning to Kain, until Assur take thee prisoner. And he took his 
parable and said: Alas, who shall live when God doeth this? The 
ships shall come out of the coast of Cittim and subdue Assur and 
subdue Eber, and he himself shall perish at the last. And Balam 
rose up and went and dwelt in his place: and Balac also went his 
way.

Chapter .xxv.

And Israel dwelt in Sittim, and the people began to commit 
whoredom with the daughters of Moab, which called the people unto 
the sacrifice of their gods. And the people ate and worshipped 
their gods, and Israel coupled himself unto Baal Peor. Then the 
LORD was angry with Israel, and said unto Moses: take all the 
heads of the people, and hang them up unto the LORD against the 
son, that the wrath of the LORD may turn away from Israel. And 
Moses said unto the judges of Israel: go and slay those men that 
joined them selves unto Baal Peor. And behold, one of the children 
of Israel came and brought unto his brethren, a Madianitish wife 
even in the sight of Moses and in the sight of all the multitude 
of the children of Israel, as they were weeping in the door of the 
tabernacle of witness. And when Phineas the son of Eleazer the son 
of Aaron the priest saw it, he rose up out of the company and took 
a weapon in his hand, and went after the man of Israel into the 
whorehouse, and thrust them thorow: both the man of Israel and 
also the woman even thorow the belly of her. And the plague ceased 
from the children of Israel. And there died in the plague twenty 
four thousand. And the LORD spake unto Moses saying: Phineas the 
son of Eleazer the son of Aaron the priest, hath turned mine anger 
away from the children of Israel, because he was jealous for my 
sake among them, that I had not consumed the children of Israel in 
my jealousy. Wherefore say: behold, I give unto him my covenant of 
peace, and he shall have it and his seed after him, even the 
covenant of the priest's office for ever, because he was jealous 
for his God's {goddes} sake and made an atonement for the children 
of Israel. The name of the Israelite which was smitten with the 
Madianitish wife, was Simri the son of Salu, a lord of an ancient 
house among the Simeonites. And the name of the Madianitish wife, 
was Cosbi the daughter of Zur and head over the people of an 
ancient house in Madian. And the LORD spake unto Moses saying: vex 
the Madianites and smite them, for they have troubled you with 
their wiles with thee which they have beguiled you, thorow Peor 
and thorow their sister Cosbi the daughter of a lord in Madian, 
which was slain in the day of the plague for Peor's sake.

Chapter .xxvi.

And after the plague, the LORD spake unto Moses and unto Eleazer 
saying: take the number of all the multitude of the children of 
Israel from twenty years and above thorowout their fathers' 
houses, all that are able to go to war in Israel. And Moses and 
Eleazer the priest told them in the fields of Moab, by Iordan fast 
by Iericho, from twenty years and above, as the LORD commanded 
Moses. And the children of Israel that came of Egypt were: Ruben 
the eldest son of Israel. The children of Ruben were, Hanoch, of 
whom cometh the kindred of the Hanochites: and of Palu, cometh the 
kindred of the Paluites: And of Hesron, cometh the kindred of the 
Hesronites: and of Carmi, cometh the kindred of the Carmites. 
These are the kindreds of the Rubenites, which were in number 
forty three thousand seven hundred and thirty. And the sons of 
Palu were Eliab. And the sons of Eliab were: Nemuel, Dathan and 
Abiram. This is that Dathan and Abiram councillors in the 
congregation, which strove against Moses and Aaron in the company 
of Corah, when they strove against the LORD. And the earth opened 
her mouth and swallowed them and Corah also, when the multitude 
died, what time the fire consumed two hundred and fifty men, and 
they became a sign: Notwithstanding, the children of Corah died 
not. And the children of Simeon in their kindreds were: Nemuel, of 
whom cometh the kindred of the Nemuelites: Iamin, of whom cometh 
the kindred of the Iaminites: Iachin, of whom cometh the kindred 
of the Iachinites: Serah of whom cometh the kindred of the 
Serahites: Saul of whom cometh the kindred of the Saulites. These 
are the kindreds of the Simeonites: in number twenty two thousand 
and two hundred. And the children of Gad in their kindreds were: 
Zephon, of whom cometh the kindred of the Zephonites: and of 
Haggi, cometh the kindred of the Haggites: and of Suni, cometh the 
kindred of the Sunites: and of Aseni, cometh the kindred of the 
Asenites: and of Eri cometh the kindred of the Erites: and of Arod 
cometh the kindred of the Arodites: and of Ariel cometh the 
kindred of the Arielites. These are the kindreds of the children 
of Gad, in number forty thousand and five hundred. The children of 
Iuda: Er and Onan, which died in the land of Canaan. But the 
children of Iuda in their kindred were: Sela of whom cometh the 
kindred of the Selamites: and of Phares cometh the kindred of the 
Pharesites: and of Serah cometh the kindred of the Serahites. And 
the children of Phares were Hesron, of whom cometh the kindred of 
the Hesronites: and of Hamul cometh the kindred of the Hamulites. 
These are the kindreds of Iuda, in number seventy six thousand and 
five hundred. And the children of Isachar in their kindreds were: 
Tola, of whom cometh the kindred of the Tolaites: and Phuva, of 
whom cometh the kindred of the Phuvaites: and of Iasub cometh the 
kindred of the Iasubites: and of Simron cometh the kindred of the 
Simronites. These are the kindreds of Isachar in number sixty four 
thousand and three hundred. The children of Zabulon in their 
kindreds were: Sered, of whom cometh the kindred of the Seredites: 
and Elon, of whom cometh the kindred of the Elonites: and of 
Iaheliel, cometh the kindred of the Iahelelites. These are the 
kindreds of Zabulon: in number sixty thousand and five hundred. 
The children of Ioseph in their kindreds were: Manasse and 
Ephraim. The children of Manasse: Machir, of whom cometh the 
kindred of the Machirites. And Machir begat Gilead, of whom cometh 
the kindred of the Gileadites. And these are the children of 
Gilead: Hieser, of whom cometh the kindred of the Hieserites: and 
of Helech cometh the kindred of the Helechites: and of Asriel the 
kindred of the Asrielites: and of Sichem cometh the kindred of the 
Sichemites: and of Simida cometh the kindred of the Simidites: and 
of Hepher cometh the kindred of the Hepherites. And Zelaphead the 
son of Hepher had no sons but daughters. And the names of the 
daughters of Zelaphead were: Mahela, Noa, Hagla, Milcha and 
Thirza. These are the kindreds of Manasse, in number fifty two 
thousand and seven hundred. These are the children of Ephraim in 
their kindreds: Suthelah, of whom cometh the kindred of the 
Suthelahites: and Becher, of whom cometh the kindred of the 
Becherites: and of Thaha cometh the kindred of the Thahanites. And 
these are the children of Suthelah: Eran, of whom cometh the 
kindred of the Eranites. These are the kindreds of the children of 
Ephraim in number thirty two thousand and five hundred. And these 
are the children of Ioseph in their kindreds. These are the 
children of BenIamin in their kindreds: Bela, of whom cometh the 
kindred of the Belaites: and of Asbel cometh the kindred of the 
Asbelites: and of Ahiram, the kindred of the Ahiramites: and of 
Supham the kindred of the Suphamites: and of Hupham the kindred of 
the Huphamites. And the children of Bela were Ard and Naaman from 
whence come the kindreds of the Ardites and of the Naamites. These 
are the children of BenIamin in their kindreds, and in number 
forty five thousand and six hundred. These are the children of Dan 
in their kindreds: Suham, of whom cometh the kindred of the 
Suhamites. These are the kindreds of Dan in their generations. And 
all the kindreds of the Suhamites were in number sixty four 
thousand and four hundred. The children of Asser in their kindreds 
were: Iemna, of whom cometh the kindred of the Iemnites: and 
Iesui, of whom cometh the kindred of the Iesuites: and of Bria 
cometh the kindred of Brites. And the children of Bria were Heber, 
of whom cometh the kindred of the Heberites: and of Malchiel came 
the kindred of the Malchielites. And the daughter of Aser was 
called Sarah. These are the kindreds of Aser in number fifty three 
thousand and four hundred. The children of Nephthali in their 
kindreds were: Iaheziel, of whom came the kindred of the 
Iahezielites: and Guni, of whom came the kindred of the Gunites: 
and of Iezer, came the kindred of the Iezerites: and of Selem the 
kindred of Selemites. These are the kindreds of Naphthali in their 
generations in number forty five thousand and four hundred. These 
are the numbers of the children of Israel: six hundred thousand, 
and a thousand seven hundred and thirty. And the LORD spake unto 
Moses saying: unto these the land shall be divided to inherit, 
according to the number of names: to many thou shalt give the more 
inheritance and to few the less: to every tribe shall the 
inheritance be given according to the number thereof. 
Notwithstanding, the land shall be divided by lot, and according 
to the names of the tribes of their fathers, they shall inherit: 
and according to their lot thou shalt divide their land, both to 
the many and to the few. These are the sums of the Levites in 
their kindreds: of Gerson, came the kindred of the Gersonites: and 
of Cahath came the kindred of the Cahathites: and of Merari came 
the kindred of the Merarites. These are the kindreds of Levi: the 
kindred of the Libnites, the kindred of the Hebronites, the 
kindred of the Mahelites, the kindred of the Musites, the kindred 
of the Karahites. Kahath begat Amram, and Amram's wife was called 
Iochebed a daughter of Levi, which was born him in Egypt. And she 
bare unto Amram, Aaron, Moses and Miriam their sister. And unto 
Aaron were born, Nadab, Abihu, Eleazer and Ithamar. But Nadab and 
Abihu died, as they offered strange fire before the LORD. And the 
number of them was twenty three thousand, of all the males from a 
month old and above. For they were not numbered among the children 
of Israel, because there was no inheritance given them among the 
children of Israel. These are the numbers of the children of 
Israel which Moses and Eleazer the priest numbered in the fields 
of Moab, fast by Iordan nye to Iericho. And among these there was 
not a man of the number of the children of Israel which Moses and 
Aaron told in the wilderness of Sinai. For the LORD said unto 
them, that they should die in the wilderness and that there should 
not be left a man of them: save Caleb the son of Iephune and Iosua 
the son of Nun.

Chapter .xxvij.

And the daughters of Zelaphead the son of Heber the son of Gilead, 
the son of Machir the son of Manasse, of the kindreds of Manasse 
the son of Ioseph (whose names were Mahela, Noha, Hagla, Melcha 
and Thirza) came and stood before Moses and Eleazer the priest and 
before the lords and all the multitude in the door of the 
tabernacle of witness saying: our father died in the wilderness, 
and was not among the company of them that gathered them selves 
together against the LORD in the congregation of Corah: But died 
in his own sin, and had no sons. Wherefore should the name of our 
father's be taken away from among his kindred, because he had no 
son? Give unto us a possession among the brethren of our father. 
And Moses brought their cause before the LORD. And the LORD spake 
unto Moses saying: The daughters of Zelaphead speak right: thou 
shalt give them a possession to inherit among their father's 
brethren, and shalt turn the inheritance of their father unto 
them. And speak unto the children of Israel saying: If a man die 
and have no son, ye shall turn his inheritance unto his daughter. 
If he have no daughter, ye shall give his inheritance unto his 
brethren. If he have no brethren, ye shall give his inheritance 
unto his father's brethren. If he have no father's brethren, ye 
shall give his inheritance unto him that is next to him of his 
kindred, and let him possess it. And this shall be unto the 
children of Israel an ordinance, and a law, as the LORD hath 
commanded Moses. And the LORD said unto Moses: get thee up into 
this mount Abarim, and behold, the land which I have given unto 
the children of Israel. And when thou hast seen it, thou shalt be 
gathered unto thy people also, as Aaron thy brother was gathered 
unto his people. For ye were disobedient unto my mouth in the 
desert of Zin in the strife of the congregation, that ye 
sanctified me not in the water before their eyes. That is the 
water of strife in Cades in the wilderness of Zin. And Moses spake 
unto the LORD saying: let the LORD God of the spirits of all 
flesh, set a man over the congregation, which may go in and out 
before them, and to lead them in and out, that the congregation of 
the LORD be not as a flock of sheep without a shepherd. And the 
LORD said unto Moses: take Iosua the son of Nun in whom there is 
spirit, and put thine hands upon him, and set him before Eleazer 
the priest and before all the congregation and give him a charge 
in their sight. And put of thy praise upon him that all the 
company of the children of Israel may hear. And he shall stond 
before Eleazar the priest which shall ask counsel {councell} for 
him after the manner of the light {judgement of Urim} before the 
LORD: And at the mouth of Eleazer shall both he and all the 
children of Israel with him and all the congregation, go in and 
out. And Moses did as the LORD commanded him, and he took Iosua 
and set him before Eleazer the priest and before all the 
congregation, and put his hands upon him and give him a charge, as 
the LORD commanded thorow the hand of Moses.

Chapter .xxviij.

And the LORD spake unto Moses saying: give the children of Israel 
a charge and say unto them, that they take heed to offer unto me 
the offering of my bread in the sacrifice of sweet savour, in his 
due season. And say unto them. This is the offering which ye shall 
offer unto the LORD: two lambs of a year old without spot day by 
day to be a burntoffering perpetually. One lamb thou shalt offer 
in the morning, and the other at even. And thereto the tenth part 
of an Epha of flour for a meatoffering mingled with beaten oil, 
the fourth part of an hin: which is a daily offering ordained in 
the mount Sinai unto a sweet savour in the sacrifice of the LORD. 
And the drinkoffering of the same: the fourth part of an hin unto 
one lamb, and pour the drinkoffering in the holy place, to be good 
drink unto the LORD. And the other lamb thou shalt offer at even, 
with the meatoffering and the drinkoffering after the manner of 
the morning: a sacrifice of a sweet savour unto the LORD. And on 
the Sabbath day two lambs of a year old apiece and without spot, 
and two tenth deals of flour for a meatoffering mingled with oil, 
and the drinkoffering thereto. This is the burntoffering of every 
Sabbath, besides the daily burntoffering and his drinkoffering. 
And in the first day of your months, ye shall offer a 
burntoffering unto the LORD: two young bullocks, and a ram, and 
seven lambs of a year old without spot, and three tenth deals of 
flour for a meatoffering mingled with oil unto one bullock, and 
two tenth deals of flour for a meatoffering mingled with oil unto 
one ram. And ever more, a tenth deal of flour mingled with oil, 
for a meatoffering unto one lamb. That is a burntoffering of a 
sweet savour in the sacrifice of the LORD. And their drink 
offerings shall be half an hin of wine unto one bullock, and the 
third part of an hin of wine unto a ram and the fourth part of an 
hin unto a lamb. This is the burntoffering of every month 
thorowout all the months of the year: and one he goat for a 
sinoffering unto the LORD, which shall be offered with the daily 
burntoffering and his drinkoffering. And the fourteenth day of the 
first month shall be passover unto the LORD. And the fifteenth day 
of the same month shall be a feast, in which seven days men must 
eat unleavened bread. The first day shall be an holy feast, so 
that ye shall do no manner of laborious work therein. And ye shall 
offer a burntoffering unto the LORD two bullocks, one ram, and 
seven lambs of a year old without spot, and their meatoffering of 
flour mingled with oil three tenth deals unto a bullock, and two 
tenth deals unto a ram, and ever more one tenth deal unto a lamb, 
thorowout the seven lambs: and an he goat for a sinoffering to 
make an atonement for you. And ye shall offer these, beside the 
burntoffering in the morning that is always offered. And after 
this manner ye shall offer thorowout the seven days, the food of 
the sacrifice of sweet favour unto the LORD. And it shall be done 
beside the daily burntoffering and his drinkoffering. And the 
seventh day shall be an holy feast unto you, so that ye shall do 
no laborious work therein. And the day of your first fruits when 
ye bring a new meatoffering unto the LORD in your weeks, shall be 
an holy feast unto you: so that ye shall do no labourious work 
therein. And ye shall offer a burntoffering of a sweet savour unto 
the LORD: two young bullocks, and a ram, and seven lambs of a year 
old apiece, with their meatofferings of flour mingled with oil 
three tenth deals unto a bullock two tenth deals to a ram, and 
ever more one tenth deal unto a lamb thorowout the seven lambs, 
and an he goat to make an atonement for you. And this ye shall do 
besides the daily burntoffering, and his meatoffering: and they 
shall be without spot, with their drinkofferings.

Chapter .xxix.

Also {and} the first day of the seventh month shall be an holy 
feast unto you, and ye shall do no labourious work therein. It 
shall be a day of trumpet blowing unto you. And ye shall offer a 
burntoffering of a sweet savour unto the LORD: one young bullock 
and one ram and seven lambs of a year old apiece that are pure. 
And their meatofferings of flour mingled with oil: three tenth 
deals unto the bullock, and two unto the ram, and one tenth deal 
unto one lamb thorow the seven lambs. And an he goat for a 
sinoffering to make an atonement for you, beside the burntoffering 
of the month and his meatoffering and beside the daily 
burntoffering and his meatoffering, and the drinkofferings of the 
same: according unto the manner of them for a savour of sweetness 
in the sacrifice of the LORD. And the tenth day of that same 
seventh month shall be an holy feast unto you, and ye shall humble 
your souls and shall do no manner work therein. And ye shall offer 
a burntoffering unto the LORD of a sweet savour: one bullock, and 
a ram, and seven lambs of a year old apiece, without fault and 
their meatofferings of flour mingled with oil: three tenth deals 
to a bullock, and two to a ram and always a tenth deal unto a 
lamb, thorowout the seven lambs. And one he goat for a 
sinoffering, beside the sinoffering of atonement and the daily 
burntoffering, and the meat and drinkofferings that long to the 
same. And the fifteenth day of the seventh month shall be holy day 
and ye shall do no laborious work therein, and ye shall keep a 
feast unto the LORD of seven days long. And ye shall offer a 
burntoffering of a sweet savour unto the LORD: thirteen bullocks 
two rams and fourteen lambs which are yearlings and pure, with 
oil, three tenth deals unto every one of the thirteen bullocks: 
two tenth deals to either of the rams, and one tenth deal unto 
each of the fourteen lambs. And one he goat unto a sinoffering, 
beside the daily burntoffering with his meat and drinkofferings. 
And the second day twelve young bullocks, two rams, and fourteen 
yearling lambs without spot: and their meatofferings and 
drinkofferings unto the bullocks, rams and lambs, according to the 
number of them and after the manner. And an he goat for a 
sinoffering, beside the daily burntoffering and his meat and 
drinkofferings. And the third day eleven bullocks two rams and 
fourteen yearling lambs without spot: and their meat and 
drinkofferings unto the bullocks, rams and lambs, after the number 
of them and according to the manner. And an he goat for a 
sinoffering, beside the daily burntoffering and his meat and 
drinkofferings. And the fourth day ten bullocks two rams and 
fourteen lambs, yearlings and pure: and their meat and 
drinkofferings unto the bullocks, rams and lambs, according to 
their number and after the manner. And an he goat for a 
sinoffering, beside the daily burntoffering and his meat and 
drinkofferings. And the fifth day nine bullocks two rams and 
fourteen lambs of one year old apiece without spot. And their meat 
and drinkofferings unto the bullocks, rams and lambs, according to 
the number of them and after the manner. And an he goat for a 
sinoffering, beside the daily burntoffering and his meat and 
drinkofferings. And the sixth day eight bullocks two rams and 
fourteen yearling lambs without spot. And their meat and 
drinkofferings unto the bullocks, rams and lambs, according to the 
manner. And an he goat for a sinoffering, beside the daily 
burntoffering and his meat and drinkofferings. And the seventh day 
seven bullocks two rams and fourteen lambs that are yearlings and 
pure. And their meat and drinkofferings unto the bullocks, rams 
and lambs, according to their number and to the manner. And an 
hegoat for a sinoffering, beside the daily burntoffering and his 
meat and drinkofferings. And the eighth day shall be the 
conclusion of the feast unto you, and ye shall do no manner 
laborious work therein. And ye shall offer a burntoffering of a 
sweet savour unto the LORD: one bullock, one ram and seven 
yearling lambs without spot. And the meat and drinkofferings unto 
the bullock, ram and lambs, according to their numbers and 
according to the manner. And an he goat for a sinoffering beside 
the daily burntoffering and his meat and drinkofferings. These 
things ye shall do unto the LORD in your feasts: beside your vows 
and freewill offerings, in your burntofferings, meatofferings, 
drinkofferings and peaceofferings. And Moses told the children of 
Israel, according to all that the LORD commanded him.

Chapter .xxx.

And Moses spake unto the heads of the tribes of the children of 
Israel saying: this is the thing which the LORD commandeth. If a 
man vow a vow unto the LORD or swear an oath and bind his soul, he 
shall not go back with his word: but shall fulfil all that 
proceedeth out of his mouth. If a damsel vow a vow unto the LORD 
and bind herself being in her father's house and unmarried: If her 
father hear her vow and bond which she hath made upon her soul, 
and hold his peace thereto: then all her vows and bonds which she 
hath made upon her soul shall stond in effect. But and if her 
father forbid her the same day that he heareth it, none of her 
vows nor bonds which she hath made upon her soul shall be of 
value, and the LORD shall forgive her, because her father forbade 
her. If she had an husband when she vowed or pronounced ought out 
of her lips wherewith she bound her soul, and her husband heard it 
and held his peace thereat the same day he heard it: Then her vows 
and her bonds wherewith she bound her soul, shall stond in effect. 
But and if her husband forbade her the same day that he heard it, 
then hath he made her vow which she had upon her of none effect, 
and that also which she pronounced with her lips wherewith she 
bound her soul, and the LORD shall forgive her. The vow of a widow 
and of her that is divorced, and all that they have bound their 
souls withal, shall stond in effect with them. If she vowed in her 
husband's house or bound her soul with an oath, and her husband 
heard it and held his peace and forbade her not: then all her vows 
and bonds wherewith she bound her soul, shall stond. But if her 
husband disannulled them the same day that he heard them, then 
nothing that proceeded out of her lips in vows and bonds wherewith 
she bound her soul shall stond in effect: for her husband hath 
lowsed them, and the LORD shall forgive her. All vows and oaths 
that bind to humble the soul, may her husband stablish or break. 
But if her husband hold his peace from one day unto another, then 
he stablisheth all her vows and bonds which she had upon her, 
because he held his peace the same day that he heard them. And if 
he afterward break them, he shall bear her sin himself. These are 
the ordinances which the LORD commanded Moses, between a man and 
his wife, and between the father and his daughter, being a damsel 
in her father's house.

Chapter .xxxj.

And the LORD spake unto Moses saying: avenge the children of 
Israel of the Madianites, and afterward be gathered unto thy 
people. And Moses spake unto the folk saying: Harness some of you 
unto war, and let them go upon the Madianites and avenge the LORD 
of the Madianites. Ye shall send unto the war a thousand of every 
tribe thorowout all the tribes of Israel. And there were taken out 
of the thousands of Israel twelve thousand prepared unto war, of 
every tribe a thousand. And Moses sent them a thousand of every 
tribe, with Phineas the son of Eleazer the priest to war, and the 
holy vessels and the trumpets to blow with in his hand. And they 
warred against the Madianites, as the LORD commanded Moses, and 
slew all the males. And they slew the kings of Madian among other 
that were slain: Eui, Rekem, Zur, Hur and Reba: five kings of 
Madian. And they slew Balam the son of Beor with the sword. And 
the children of Israel took all the women of Madian prisoners and 
their children, and spoiled all their cattle, their substance and 
their goods. And they burnt all their cities wherein they dwelt, 
and all their castles with fire. And they took all the spoil and 
all they could catch, both of men and beasts. And they brought the 
captives and that which they had taken and all the spoil unto 
Moses and Eleazer the priest and unto the company of the children 
of Israel, even unto the host, in the fields of Moab by Iordan nye 
to Iericho. And Moses and Eleazer the priest and all the lords of 
the congregation went out of the host against them. And Moses was 
angry with the officers of the host, with the captains over 
thousands and over hundreds, which came from war and battle, and 
said unto them: Have ye saved the women alive? behold, these 
caused the children of Israel thorow Balam, to commit trespass 
against the LORD, by the reason of Peor, and there followed a 
plague among the congregation of the LORD. Now therefore slay all 
the men children and the women that have lien with men fleshly: 
But all the women children that have not lien with men, keep alive 
for your selves. And lodge without the host seven days all that 
have killed any person and all that have twiched any dead body, 
and purify both your selves and your prisoners the third day and 
the seventh. And sprinkle all your raiments and all that is made 
of skins, and all work of goats' hair, and all things made of 
wood. And Eleazer the priest said unto all the men of war which 
went out to battle: this is the ordinance of the law which the 
LORD commanded Moses: Gold, silver, brass, iron, tin and lead, and 
all that may abide the fire, ye shall make it go thorow the fire, 
and then it is clean. Neverthelater, it shall be sprinkled with 
sprinkling water. And all that suffereth not the fire, ye shall 
make go thorow the water. And wash your clothes the seventh day, 
and then ye are clean. And afterward come into the host. And the 
LORD spake unto Moses saying: take the sum of the prey that was 
taken, both of the women and of cattle, thou and Eleazer the 
priest and the ancient heads of the congregation. And divide it 
into two parts, between them that took the war upon them and went 
out to battle and all the congregation. And take a portion unto 
the LORD of the men of war which went out to battle one of five 
hundred, of the women and of the oxen and of the asses and of the 
sheep and ye shall take it of their half and give it unto Eleazer 
the priest, an heave offering unto the LORD. And of the half of 
the children of Israel, take one of fifty, of the women, of the 
oxen, of the asses and of the sheep, and of all manner of beasts, 
and give them unto the Levites which wait upon the habitation of 
the LORD. And Moses and Eleazer the priest did as the LORD 
commanded Moses. And the booty and the prey which the men of war 
had caught, was six hundred thousand and seventy five thousand 
sheep: and seventy two thousand oxen: and sixty one thousand 
asses: and thirty two thousand women that had lien by no man. And 
the half which was the part of them that went out to war, was 
three hundred thousand and thirty seven thousand and five hundred 
sheep: And the LORD's part of the sheep was six hundred and 
seventy five. And the oxen were thirty six thousand, of which the 
LORD's part was seventy two. And the asses were thirty thousand 
and five hundred, of which the LORD's part was sixty one. And the 
women were sixteen thousand, of which the LORD's part was thirty 
two souls. And Moses gave that sum which was the LORD's heave 
offering unto Eleazer the priest: as the LORD commanded Moses. And 
the other half of the children of Israel which Moses separated 
from the men of war (that is to wete, the half that pertained unto 
the congregation) was three hundred thousand and thirty seven 
thousand and five hundred sheep: and thirty six thousand oxen: and 
thirty thousand asses and five hundred: and sixteen thousand 
women. And Moses took of this half that pertained unto the 
children of Israel: one of every fifty, both of the women and of 
the cattle, and gave them unto the Levites which waited upon the 
habitation of the LORD, as the LORD commanded Moses. And the 
officers of thousands of the host, the captains over the thousands 
and the captains over the hundreds came forth and said unto Moses: 
Thy servants have taken the sum of the men of war, which were 
under our hand, and there lacked not one man of them. We have 
therefore brought a present unto the LORD what every man found of 
Iewels of gold, chains, bracelets, rings, earrings and spangles, 
to make an atonement for our souls before the LORD. And Moses and 
Eleazer took the gold of them: Iewels of all manner fashions. And 
all the gold of the heave offering of the LORD, of the captains 
over thousands and hundreds was sixteen thousand seven hundred and 
fifty sicles, which {for} the men of war had spoiled, every man 
for himself. And Moses and Eleazer the priest took the gold of the 
captains over the thousands and over the hundreds, and brought it 
into the tabernacle of witness: to be a memorial unto the children 
of Israel, before the LORD.

Chapter .xxxij.

The children of Ruben and the children of Gad, had an exceeding 
great multitude of cattle. And when they saw the land of Iaeser 
and the land of Gilead that it was an apt place for cattle, they 
came and spake unto Moses and Eleazer the priest and unto the 
lords of the congregation saying. The land of Ataroth, Dibo and 
Beon, which country the LORD smote before the congregation of 
Israel: is a land for cattle and we thy servants have cattle 
wherefore (said they) if we have found grace in thy sight, let 
this land be given unto thy servants to possess, and bring us not 
over Iordan. And Moses said unto the children of Gad and of Ruben: 
shall your brethren go to war and ye tarry here? Wherefore 
discourage ye the hearts of the children of Israel for to go over 
into the land which the LORD hath given them? This did your 
fathers, when I sent them from Cades bernea to see the land. And 
they went up even unto the river of Escol and saw the land, and 
discouraged the hearts of the children of Israel, that they should 
not go into the land which the LORD had given them. And the LORD 
was wroth the same time and sware saying: None of the men that 
came out of Egypt from twenty years old and above, shall see the 
land which I swore unto Abraham, Isaac and Iacob, because they 
have not continually followed me: save Caleb the son of Iephune 
the Kenesite, and Iosua the son of Nun, for they have followed me 
continually. And the LORD was angry with Israel, and made them 
wander in the wilderness forty years, until all the generation 
that had done evil in the sight of the LORD were consumed. And 
behold, ye are risen up in your father's stead, the increase of 
sinful men, to augment the fierce wrath of the LORD to Israelward. 
For if ye turn away from after him, he will yet again leave the 
people in the wilderness, so shall ye destroy all this folk. And 
they went near him and said: we will build sheepfolds here for our 
sheep and for our cattle, and cities for our children: But we our 
selves will go ready armed before the children of Israel, until we 
have brought them unto their place. And our children shall dwell 
in the strong {fenced} cities, because of the inhabiters of the 
land. And we will not return unto our houses, until the children 
of Israel have inherited: every man his inheritance. For we will 
not inherit with them on yonder side Iordan forward, because our 
inheritance is fallen to us on this side Iordan eastward. And 
Moses said unto them: If ye will do this thing, that ye will go 
all harnessed before the LORD to war, and will go all of you in 
harness over Iordan before the LORD, until he have cast out his 
enemies before him, and until the land be subdued before the LORD, 
then ye shall return and be without sin against the LORD and 
against Israel, and this land shall be your possession before the 
LORD. But and if ye will not do so, behold, ye sin against the 
LORD: and be sure your sin will find you out. Build your cities 
for your children and folds for your sheep, and see ye do that ye 
have spoken. And the Children of Gad and of Ruben spake unto Moses 
saying: thy servants will do as my lord commandeth. Our children, 
our wives, substance and all our cattle shall remain here in the 
cities of Gilead. But we thy servants will go all harnessed for 
the war unto battle before the LORD, as my lord hath said. And 
Moses commanded Eleazer the priest: and Iosua the son of Nun and 
the ancient heads of the tribes of the children of Israel, and 
said unto them: If the children of Gad and Ruben will go with you 
over Iordan, all prepared to fight before the LORD: then when the 
land is subdued unto you, give them the land of Gilead to possess, 
but and if they will not go over with you in harness, then they 
shall have their possessions among you in the land of Canaan. And 
the children of Gad and Ruben answered saying: that which the LORD 
hath said unto thy servants we will do. We will go harnessed 
before the LORD into the land of Canaan, and the possession of our 
inheritance shall be on this side the Iordan. And Moses gave unto 
the children of Gad and of Ruben and unto half the tribe of 
Manasse the son of Ioseph, the kingdom of Sehon king of the 
Amorites, and the kingdom of Og king of Basan, the land that 
longed unto the cities thereof in the coasts of the country round 
about. And the children of Gad built Dibo, ataroth Aroer, Atroth, 
Sophan, Iaeser, Iegabea, Bethnimra and Betharan strong {fenced} 
cities, and they built folds for their sheep. And the children of 
Ruben built Hesebon, Elalea, Kiriathaim, Nebo, Baal Meon and 
turned their names, and Sibama also: and gave names unto the 
cities which they built. And the children of Machir the son of 
Manasse went to Gilead and took it, and put out the Amorites that 
were therein. And Moses gave Gilead unto Machir the son of Manasse 
and he dwelt therein. And Iahir the son of Manasse went and took 
the small towns thereof, and called them the towns of Iair. And 
Nobah went and took kenath with the towns longing thereto, and 
called it Nobah after his own name.

Chapter .xxxiij.

These are the journeys of the children of Israel which went out of 
the land of Egypt with their armies under Moses and Aaron. And 
Moses wrote their going out by their journeys at the commandment 
of the LORD: even these are the journeys of their going out. The 
children of Israel departed from Rameses the fifteenth day of the 
first month, on the morrow after Passover and went out with an 
high hand in the sight of all Egypt, while the Egyptians buried 
all their firstborn which the LORD had smoten among them. And upon 
their gods also the LORD did execution. And the children of Israel 
removed from Rameses and pitched in Sucoth. And they departed from 
Sucoth and pitched their tents in Ethan, which is in the edge of 
the wilderness. And they removed from Ethan and turned unto the 
entering of Hiroth which is before Baal Zephon, and pitched before 
Migdol. And they departed from before Hiroth and went thorow the 
midst of the sea into the wilderness, and went three days journey 
in the wilderness of Ethan, and pitched in Marah. And they removed 
from Marah and went unto Elim where were twelve fountains and 
seventy date {palm} trees and they pitched there. And they removed 
from Elim and lay fast by the red sea. And they removed from the 
red sea and lay in the wilderness of Zin. And they took their 
journey out of the wilderness of Zin, and set up their tents in 
Daphka. And they departed from Daphka, and lay in Alus. And they 
removed from Alus, and lay at Raphedim, where was no water for the 
people to drink. And they departed from Raphedim, and pitched in 
the wilderness of Sinai. And they removed from the desert of 
Sinai, and lodged at the graves of lust. And they departed from 
the sepulchres of lust, and lay at Hazeroth. And they departed 
from Hazeroth, and pitched in Rithma. And departed from Rithma and 
pitched at Rimon Parez. And they departed from Rimon Parez, and 
pitched in Libna. And they removed from Libna, and pitched at 
Rissa. And they journeyed from Rissa and pitched at Kehelatha. And 
they went from Kehelatha, and pitched in mount Sapher. And they 
removed from mount Sapher, and lay in Harada. And they removed 
from Harada, and pitched in Makeheloth. And they removed from 
Makeheloth, and lay at Tahath, and they departed from Tahath and 
pitched at Tharath. And they removed from Tharath, and pitched in 
Mithca. And they went from Mithca, and lodged in Hasmona. And they 
departed from Hasmona, and lay at Moseroth. And they departed from 
Moseroth, and pitched among the children of Iaken. And they 
removed from the children of [Bane] Iaken, and lay at Horgadgad. 
And they went from Horgadgad, and pitched in Iathbatha. And they 
removed from Iathbatha, and lay at Abrona. And they departed from 
Abrona, and lay at Ezeon gaber. And they removed from Ezeon gaber, 
and pitched in the wilderness of Sin, which is Cades. And they 
removed from Cades, and pitched in mount Hor, in the edge of the 
land of Moab. {Edom} And Aaron the priest went up into mount Hor 
at the commandment of the LORD and died there, even in the 
fortieth year, after the children of Israel were come out of the 
land of Egypt, and in the first day of the fifth month. And Aaron 
was an hundred and thirty three years old when he died in mount 
Hor. And king Erad the Cananite which dwelt in the south of the 
land of Canaan, heard that the children of Israel were come. And 
they departed from mount Hor, and pitched in Zalmona. And they 
departed from Zalmona, and pitched in Phimon, and they departed 
from Phimon, and pitched in Oboth. And they departed from Oboth, 
and pitched in Igim Abarim {Iehabarim} in the borders of Moab. And 
they departed from Igim, {Iehabarim}  and pitched in Dibon Gad. 
And they removed from Dibon Gad, and lay in Almon Diblathama. And 
they removed from Almon Diblathama, and pitched in the mountains 
of Abarim before Nibo. And they departed from the mountains of 
Abarim, and pitched in the fields of Moab fast by Iordan nye to 
Iericho. And they pitched upon Iordan, from Beth Haiesmoth unto 
the plain of Sitim {Abelsatim} in the fields of Moab. And the LORD 
spake unto Moses in the fields of Moab by Iordan nye unto Iericho, 
saying: speak unto the children of Israel and say unto them: when 
ye are come over Iordan into the land of Canaan, see that ye drive 
out all the inhabiters of the land before you, and destroy their 
imaginations {chapels} and all their Images of Metal, and pluck 
down all their altars built on hills: And possess the land and 
dwell therein, for I have given you the land to enjoy it. And ye 
shall divide the inheritance of the land by lot among your 
kindreds, and give to the more the more inheritance, and to the 
fewer the less inheritance. And your inheritance shall be in the 
tribes of your fathers, in the place where every man's lot 
falleth. But and if ye will not drive out the inhabiters of the 
land before you, then these {those} which ye let remain of them, 
shall be thorns in your eyes and darts in your sides, and shall 
vex you in the land wherein ye dwell. Moreover it will come to 
pass, that I shall do unto you as I thought to do unto them.

Chapter .xxxiiij.

And the LORD spake unto Moses saying: command the children of 
Israel and say unto them: when ye come into the land of Canaan, 
this is the land that shall fall unto your inheritance, the land 
of Canaan with all her coasts. And your south quarter shall be 
from the wilderness of Zin along by the coast of Edom, so that 
your south quarter shall be from the side of the salt sea 
eastward, and shall fetch a compass from the south up to Acrabim, 
and reach to Zinna. And it shall go out on the south side of Cades 
Bernea, and go out also at Hazar Adar, and go along to Azmon. And 
shall fetch a compass from Azmon unto the river of Egypt, and 
shall go out at the sea. And your west quarter shall be the great 
sea, which coast shall be your west coast. And this shall be your 
north quarter: ye shall compass from the great sea unto mount Hor. 
And from mount Hor, ye shall compass and go unto Hemath, and the 
end of the coast shall be at Zedada, and the coast shall reach out 
to Ziphron and go out at Hazor enan. And this shall be your north 
quarter. And ye shall compass your east quarter from Hazar Enan to 
Sepham. And the coast shall go down from Sepham to Ribla on the 
east side of Ain. And then descend and go out at the side of the 
sea of Cenereth eastward. And then go down along by Iordan, and 
leave at the salt sea. And this shall be your land with all the 
coasts thereof round about. And Moses commanded the children of 
Israel, saying: this is the land which ye shall inherit by lot, 
and which the LORD commanded to give unto nine tribes and an half: 
for the tribe of the children of Ruben, have received, in the 
households of their fathers, and the tribe of the children of Gad 
in their fathers' households, and half the tribe of Manasse, have 
received their inheritance, that is to wete two tribes and a half 
have received their inheritance on the other side of Iordan by 
Iericho eastward, toward the son rising. And the LORD spake to 
Moses saying: These are the names of the men, which shall divide 
you the land to inherit. Eleazer the priest, and Iosua the son of 
Nun. And ye shall take also a lord of every tribe to divide the 
land, whose names are these: in the tribe of Iuda, Caleb the son 
of Iephune. And in the tribe of the children of Simeon, Semuel the 
son of Amiud, and in the tribe of BenIamin, Elidad the son of 
Cislon. And in the tribe of the children of Dan, the lord Bucki 
the son of Iagli. And among the children of Ioseph: in the tribe 
of the children of Manasse, the lord Haniel the son of Ephod. And 
in the tribe of the children of Ephraim, the lord Cemuel the son 
of Siphtan. And in the tribe of the sons of Zabulon, the lord 
Elizaphan the son of Parnac. And in the tribe of the children of 
Isachar, the lord Palthiel the son of Asan. And in the tribe of 
the sons of Aser, the lord Ahihud the son of Selomi. And in the 
tribe of the children of Naphthali, the lord Pada El the son of 
Ammihud. These are they which the LORD commanded to divide the 
inheritance unto the children of Israel, in the land of Canaan.

Chapter .xxxv.

And the LORD spake unto Moses in the fields of Moab by Iordan 
Iericho saying: command the children of Israel, that they give 
unto the Levites of the inheritance of their possession: cities to 
dwell in. And ye shall give also unto the cities of the Levites, 
suburbs round about them. The cities shall be for them to dwell 
in, and the suburbs for their cattle, possession and all manner 
beasts of theirs. And the suburbs of the cities which ye shall 
give unto the Levites, shall reach from the wall of the city 
outward, a thousand cubits round about. And ye shall measure 
without the city, and make the utmost border of the east side: two 
thousand cubits. And the utmost border of the south side: two 
thousand cubits. And the utmost border of the west side: two 
thousand cubits. And the utmost border of the north side: two 
thousand cubits also: and the city shall be in the midst. And 
these shall be the suburbs of their cities. And among the cities 
which ye shall give unto the Levites, there shall be six cities of 
franchise which ye shall give to that intent that he which 
killeth, may fly thither. And to them ye shall add forty two 
cities more: {mo} so that all the cities which ye shall give the 
Levites shall be forty eight with their suburbs. And of the cities 
which ye shall give out of the possessions of the children of 
Israel, ye shall give many out of their possessions that have much 
and few out of their possessions that have little: so that every 
tribe shall give of his cities unto the Levites, according to the 
inheritance which he inheriteth. And the LORD spake unto Moses 
saying: speak unto the children of Israel and say unto them: when 
ye be come over Iordan into the land of Canaan, ye shall build 
cities which shall be privileged towns for you: that he which 
slayeth a man unawares, may fly thither. And the cities shall be 
to flee from the executer of blood, that he which killed die not, 
until he stond before the congregation in judgement. And of these 
six free cities which ye shall give three ye shall give on this 
side Iordan and three in the land of Canaan. And these six free 
cities shall be for the children of Israel and for the stranger 
and for him that dwelleth among you, that all they which kill any 
person unawares, may flee thither. If any man smite another with a 
weapon of iron that he die, then he is a murderer, and shall die 
for it. If he smite him with a throwing stone that he die 
therewith, then he shall die: For he is a murderer and shall be 
slain therefore. If he smite him with a hand weapon of wood that 
he die therewith, then he shall die: for he is a murderer and 
shall be slain therefore. The judge {justice} of blood shall slay 
the murderer, as soon as he findeth him: If he thrust him of hate, 
or hurl at him with laying of wait that he die or smite him with 
his hand of envy that he die, he that smote him shall die, for he 
is a murderer. The justice of blood shall slay him as soon as he 
findeth him. But and if he pushed him by chance and not of hate or 
cast at him with any manner of thing and not of laying of wait: or 
cast any manner of stone at him that he die therewith, and saw him 
not: And he cast it upon him and he died, but was not his enemy, 
neither sought him any harm: Then the congregation shall judge 
between the slayer and the executer of blood in such cases. And 
the congregation shall deliver the slayer out of the hand of the 
judge of blood, and shall restore him again unto the franchised 
city, whither he was fled. And he shall bide there unto the death 
of the high priest which was anointed with holy oil. But and if he 
came without the borders of his privileged city whither he was 
fled, if the blood avenger find him without the borders of his 
free town, he shall slay the murderer and be guiltless, because he 
should have bidden in his free town until the death of the high 
priest, and after the death of the high priest, he shall return 
again unto the land of his possession. And this shall be an 
ordinance and a law unto you, among your children after you in all 
your habitations. Whosoever slayeth, shall be slain at the mouth 
of witnesses. For one witness shall not answer against one person 
to put him to death. Moreover ye shall take none amends for the 
life of the murderer which is worthy to die: But he shall be put 
to death. Also ye shall take none atonement for him that is fled 
to a free city, that he should come again and dwell in the land 
before the death of the high priest. And see that ye pollute not 
the land which ye are in, for blood defileth the land. And the 
land can none otherwise be cleansed of the blood that is shed 
therein, but by the blood of it that shed it. Defile not therefore 
the land which ye inhabit, and in the midst of which I also dwell, 
for I am, the LORD which dwell among the children of Israel.

Chapter .xxxvi.

And the ancient heads of the children of Gilead the son of Machir 
the son of Manasse of the kindred of the children of Ioseph, came 
forth and spake before Moses and the princes which were ancient 
heads among the children of Israel and said: The LORD commanded my 
lord to give the land to inherit by lot to the children of Israel. 
And then my lord commanded in the name of the LORD to give the 
inheritance of Zelaphead our brother unto his daughters. Now when 
any of the sons of the tribes of Israel take them to wives, then 
shall their inheritance be taken from the inheritance of our 
fathers, and shall be put unto the inheritance of the tribe in 
which they are and shall be taken from the lot of our inheritance. 
And when the free year {of jubilee} cometh unto the children of 
Israel, then shall their inheritance be put unto the inheritance 
of the tribe where they are in, and so shall their inheritance be 
taken away from the inheritance of the tribe of our fathers. And 
Moses commanded the children of Israel at the mouth of the LORD 
saying: the tribe of the children of Ioseph have said well. This 
therefore doeth the LORD: command the daughters of Zelaphead 
saying: let them be wives to whom they themself think best, but in 
the kindred of the tribe of their fathers shall they marry, that 
the inheritance of the children of Israel roll not from tribe to 
tribe. But that the children of Israel may abide, every man in the 
inheritance of the tribe of his fathers. And every daughter that 
possesseth any inheritance among the tribes of the children of 
Israel, shall be wife unto one of the kindred of the tribe of her 
father, that the children of Israel may enjoy every man the 
inheritance of his father, and that the inheritance go not from 
one tribe to another: but that the tribes of the children of 
Israel, may abide every man in his own inheritance. And as the 
LORD commanded Moses even so did the daughters of Zelaphead: 
Mahela, Thirza, Hagla, Milcha and Noa, and were married unto their 
fathers' brothers' sons, of the kindred of the children of Manasse 
the son of Ioseph: and so they had their inheritance in the tribe 
of the kindred of their father. These are the commandments and 
laws which the LORD commanded thorow Moses, unto the children of 
Israel in the fields of Moab upon Iordan nye unto Iericho.

The end of the .iiij. book of Moses.


The Fifth Book of Moses, called Deuteronomy

Chapter .j.

These be the words which Moses spake unto all Israel, on the other 
side Iordan in the wilderness and in the fields by the red sea, 
between Pharan and Tophel, Laban, Hazeroth and Disahab twelve days 
journey from Horeb unto Cades barne, by the way that leadeth unto 
mount Seir. And it fortuned the first day of the eleventh month in 
the fortieth year, that Moses spake unto the children of Israel 
according unto all that the LORD had given him in commandment unto 
them, after that he had smote Sehon the king of the Amorites which 
dwelt in Hesbon, and Og king of Basan which dwelt at Astaroth in 
Edrei. On the other side Iordan in the land of Moab, Moses began 
to declare this law saying: the LORD our God spake unto us in 
Horeb saying: Ye have dwelt long enough in this mount: depart 
therefore and take your journey and go unto the hills of the 
Amorites and unto all places nye there unto: both fields, hills 
and dales: and unto the south and unto the sea's side in the land 
of Canaan, and unto Libanon: even unto the great river Euphrates. 
Behold, I have set the land before you: go in therefore and 
possess the land which the LORD sware unto your fathers Abraham, 
Isaac and Iacob, to give unto them and their seed after them. And 
I said unto you the same season: I am not able to bear you myself 
alone. For the LORD your God hath multiplied you: so that ye are 
this day as the stars of heaven in number (the LORD God of your 
fathers make you a thousand times so many more as ye are, and 
bless you as he hath promised you) how (said I) can I myself 
alone, bear the cumbrance, charge and strife that is among you: 
bring therefore men of wisdom and of understanding and expert, 
known among your tribes, that I may make them rulers over you. And 
ye answered me and said: that which thou hast spoken is good to be 
done. And then I took the heads of your tribes, men of wisdom and 
that were expert, and made them rulers over you: captains over 
thousands and over hundreds, over fifty and over ten, and officers 
among your tribes. And I charged your judges the same time saying: 
hear your brethren and judge righteously between every man and his 
brother and the stranger that is with him. See that ye know no man 
in judgement: but hear the small as well as the great and be 
afraid of no man, for the law is God's. {judgment is Gods} And the 
cause that is too hard for you, bring unto me and I will hear it. 
And I commanded you the same season, all the things which ye 
should do. And then we departed from Horeb and walked thorow all 
that great and terrible wilderness as ye have seen along by the 
way that leadeth unto the hills of the Amorites, as the LORD our 
God commanded us, and came to Cades barne. And there I said unto 
you: Ye are come unto the hills of the Amorites, which the LORD 
our God doth give unto us. Behold the LORD thy God hath set the 
land before thee, go up and conquer it, as the LORD God of thy 
fathers sayeth unto thee: fear not, neither be discouraged. And 
then ye came unto me every one and said: Let us send men before 
us, to search us out the land and to bring us word again, both 
what way we shall go up by, and unto what cities we shall come. 
And the saying pleased me well, and I took twelve men of you, of 
every tribe one. And they departed and went up into the high 
country and came unto the river Escol, and searched it out, and 
took of the fruit of the land in their hands and brought it down 
unto us and brought us word again and said: it is a good land 
which the LORD our God doeth give us. Notwithstanding ye would not 
consent to go up, but were disobedient unto the mouth of the LORD 
your God, and murmured in your tents and said: because the LORD 
hateth us, therefore he hath brought us out of the land of Egypt, 
to deliver us into the hands of the Amorites and to destroy us. 
How shall we go up? Our brethren have discouraged our hearts 
saying: the people is greater and taller than we, and the cities 
are great and walled even up to heaven, and moreover we have seen 
the sons of the Enakims there. And I said unto you: dread not nor 
be afraid of them: The LORD your God which goeth before you, he 
shall fight for you, according to all that he did unto you in 
Egypt before your eyes and in the wilderness: as thou hast seen 
how that the LORD thy God bare thee as a man should bear his son, 
thorowout all the way which ye have gone, until ye came unto this 
place. And yet for all this saying ye did not believe the LORD 
your God which goeth the way before you, to search you out a place 
to pitch your tents in, in fire by night, that ye might see what 
way to go and in a cloud by day. And the LORD heard the voice of 
your words and was wroth and swore saying, there shall not one of 
these men of this froward generation see that good land which I 
sware to give unto your fathers, save Caleb the son of Iephune, he 
shall see it, and to him I will give the land which he hath walked 
in and to his children, because he hath continually followed the 
LORD. Likewise the LORD was angry with me for your sakes saying: 
thou also shalt not go in thither. But Iosua the son of Nun which 
stondeth before thee, he shall go in thither. Bold him therefore 
for he shall divide it unto Israel. Moreover your children which 
ye said should be a prey, and your sons which know neither good 
nor bad this day, they shall go in thither and unto them I will 
give it, and they shall enjoy it. But as for you, turn back and 
take your journey into the wilderness: even the way to the red 
sea. Then ye answered and said unto me: We have sinned against the 
LORD: we will go up and fight, according to all that the LORD our 
God commanded us. And when ye had girded on every man his weapons 
of war and were ready to go up into the hills, the LORD said unto 
me: say unto them, see that ye go not up and that ye fight not, 
for I am not among you: lest ye be plagued before your enemies. 
And when I told you ye would not hear: but disobeyed the mouth of 
the LORD, and went presumptuously up into the hills. Then the 
Amorites which dwelt in those hills, came out against you and 
chased you as bees do, and hewed you in Seir, even unto Horma. And 
ye came again and wept before the LORD: but the LORD would not 
hear your voice nor give you audience. And so ye abode in Cades a 
long season, according unto the time that ye there dwelt.

Chapter .ij.

Then we turned and took our journey into the wilderness, even the 
way to the red sea as the LORD commanded me. And we compassed the 
mountains of Seir a long time. Then the LORD spake unto me saying: 
Ye have compassed these mountains long enough, turn you northward. 
And warn the people saying: Ye shall go thorow the coasts of your 
brethren the children of Esau which dwell in Seir, and they shall 
be afraid of you: But take good heed unto your selves that ye 
provoke them not, for I will not give you of their land, no not so 
much as a foot breadth: because I have given mount Seir unto Esau 
to possess. Ye shall buy meat of them for money to eat, and ye 
shall buy water of them for money to drink. For the LORD thy God 
hath blessed thee in all the works of thine hand, and knew thee as 
thou wentest thorow this great wilderness. Moreover the LORD thy 
God hath been with thee this forty years, so that thou hast lacked 
nothing. And when we were departed from our brethren the children 
of Esau which dwelt in Seir by the field way from Elath and Ezion 
Gaber, we turned and went the way to the wilderness of Moab. Then 
the LORD said unto me: see that thou vex not the Moabites, neither 
provoke them to battle for I will not give thee of their land to 
possess: because I have given Ar unto the children of loth to 
possess. The Emims dwelt therein in times past, a people great, 
many and tall, as the Enakims: which also were taken for giants as 
the Enakims: And the Moabites called them Emims. In like manner 
the Horims dwelt in Seir before time which the children of Esau 
cast out, and destroyed them before them and dwelt there in their 
stead: as Israel did in the land of his possession which the LORD 
gave them. Now rise up (said I) and get you over the river Zared: 
and we went over the river Zared. The space in which we came from 
Cades barne until we were come over the river Zared was thirty 
eight years: until all the generation of the men of war were 
wasted out of the host as the LORD sware unto them. For indeed the 
hand of the LORD was against them, to destroy them out of the 
host, till they were consumed. And as soon as all the men of war 
were consumed and dead from among the people, then the LORD spake 
unto me saying: Thou shalt go thorow Ar the coast of Moab this 
day, and shalt come nye unto the children of Ammon: see that thou 
vex them not, nor yet provoke them. For I will not give thee of 
the land of the children of Ammon to possess, because I have given 
it unto the children of Loth to possess. That also was taken for a 
land of giants and giants dwelt therein in old time, and the 
Ammonites called them Zamzumims. A people that was great, many and 
tall, as the Enakims. But the LORD destroyed them before the 
Ammonites, and they cast them out and they dwelt there in their 
stead: as he did for the children of Esau which dwell in Seir: 
even as he destroyed the Horims before them, and they cast them 
out and dwell in their stead unto this day. And the Avims which 
dwelt in Hazarim even unto Aza, the Caphthorims which came out of 
Caphthor destroyed them and dwelt in their rooms. Rise up, take 
your journey and go over the river Arnon. Behold, I have given 
into thy hand Sehon the Amorite king of Hesbon, and his land. Go 
to and conquer and provoke him to battle. This day I will begin to 
send the fear and dread of thee upon all nations that are under 
all ports of heaven: so that when they hear speak of thee, they 
shall tremble and quake for fear of thee. Then I sent messengers 
out of the wilderness of Kedemoth unto Sihon king of Hesbon, with 
words of peace saying: Let me go thorow thy land. I will go always 
along by the high way and will neither turn unto the right hand 
nor to the left. Sell me meat for money for to eat, and give me 
drink for money for to drink: I will go thorow by foot only (as 
the children of Esau did unto me which dwell in Seir and the 
Moabites which dwell in Ar) until I be come over Iordan, into the 
land which the LORD our God giveth us. But Sihon the king of 
Hesbon would not let us pass by him, for the LORD thy God had 
hardened his spirit and made his heart tough because he would 
deliver him into thy hands as it is come to pass this day. And the 
LORD said unto me: behold, I have begun to set Sihon and his land 
before thee: go to and conquer, that thou mayst possess his land. 
Then both Sihon and all his people came out against us unto battle 
at Iahab. And the LORD set him before us, and we smote him and his 
sons and all his people. And we took all his cities the same 
season, and destroyed all the cities with men, women, and children 
and let nothing remain, save the cattle only we caught unto our 
selves and the spoil of the cities which we took, from Aroer upon 
the brink of the river of Arnon, and the city in the river, unto 
Gilead: there was not one city too strong for us. The LORD our God 
delivered all unto us: only unto the land of the children of Ammon 
ye came not, nor {ner} unto all the coast of the river Iabock nor 
{ner} unto the cities in the mountains, nor unto whatsoever the 
LORD our God forbade us.

Chapter .iij.

Then we turned and went up the way to Basan. And Og the king of 
Basan came out against us: both he and all his people to battle at 
Edrei. And the LORD said unto me: fear him not, for I have 
delivered him and all his people and his land into thy hand and 
thou shalt deal with him as thou dealest with Sihon king of the 
Amorites which dwelt at Hesbon. And so the LORD our God delivered 
into our hands, Og also the king of Basan and all his folk. And we 
smote him until nought was left him. And we took all his cities 
the same season (for there was not a city which we took not from 
them) even three score cities, all the region of Argob, the 
kingdom of Og in Basan. All these cities were made strong with 
high walls, gates and bars, beside unwalled towns a great many. 
And we utterly destroyed them, as we played with Sihon king of 
Hesbon: bringing to nought all the cities with men, women and 
children. But all the cattle and the spoil of the cities, we 
caught for ourselves. And thus we took the same season, the land 
out of the hand of two kings of the Amorites on the other side 
Iordan, from the river of Arnon unto mount Hermon (which Hermon 
the Sidons call Sirion, but the Amorites call it Senir) all the 
cities in the plain and all Gilead and all Basan unto Salcha and 
Edrei, cities of the kingdom of Og in Basan. For only Og king of 
Basan remained of the remnant of the giants: behold, his iron bed 
is yet at Rabath among the children of Ammon nine cubits long and, 
four cubits broad, of the cubits of a man. And when we had 
conquered this land the same time, I gave from Aroer which is upon 
the river of Arnon, and half mount Gilead and the cities thereof 
unto the Rubenites, and Gadites. And the rest of Gilead and all 
Basan the kingdom of Og, I gave unto the half tribe of Manasse: 
all the region of Argob with all Basan was called the land of 
giants. Iair the son of Manasse took all the region of Argob unto 
the coasts of Gesuri and Maachati, and called the towns of Basan 
after his own name: the towns of [Havoth] Iair unto this day. And 
I gave half Gilead unto Machir. And unto Ruben and Gad, I gave 
from Gilead unto the river of Arnon and half the valley and the 
coast, even unto the river Iabock which is the border of the 
children of Ammon, and the fields and Iordan with the coast, from 
Cenereth even unto the sea in the field which is the salt sea 
under the springs of Pisga eastward. And I commanded you the same 
time (ye Ruben and Gad) saying: the LORD your God hath given you 
this land to enjoy it: see that ye go harnessed before your 
brethren the children of Israel, all that are men of war among 
you. Your wives only, your children and your cattle (for I wot 
that ye have much cattle) shall abide in your cities which I have 
given you, until the LORD have given rest unto your brethren as 
well as unto you, and until they also have conquered the land 
which the LORD your God hath given them beyond Iordan: and then 
return again every man unto his possession which I have given you. 
And I warned Iosua the same time saying: thine eyes have seen all 
that the LORD your God hath done unto these two kings, even so the 
LORD will do unto all kingdoms whither thou goest. Fear them not, 
for the LORD your God he it is that fighteth for you. And I 
besought the LORD the same time saying: O Lord Iehoua, thou hast 
begun to shew thy servant thy greatness and thy mighty hand, for 
there is no God in heaven nor in earth that can do after thy works 
and after thy power: let me go over and see the good land that is 
beyond Iordan, that goodly high country and Libanon. But the LORD 
was angry with me for your sakes and would not hear me, but said 
unto me, be content, and speak henceforth no more unto me of this 
matter; Get thee up into the top of Pisga and lift up thine eyes 
west, north, south and east, and behold it with thine eyes for 
thou shalt not go over this Iordan. Moreover, charge Iosua and 
courage him and bold him. For he shall go over before his people, 
and he shall divide the land which thou shalt see unto them. And 
so we abode in the valley beside Beth Peor.

Chapter .iiij.

And now hearken Israel unto the ordinances and laws which I teach 
you, for to do them, that ye may live and go and conquer the land 
which the LORD God of your fathers giveth you. Ye shall put 
nothing unto the word which I command you neither do ought 
therefrom, that ye may keep the commandments of the LORD your God 
which I command you. Your eyes have seen what the LORD did unto 
Baal Peor: for all the men that followed Baal Peor, the LORD your 
God hath destroyed from among you. But ye that clave unto the LORD 
your God, are alive every one of you this day. Behold, I have 
taught you ordinances and laws, such as the LORD my God commanded 
me, that ye should do even so in the land whither ye go to possess 
it. Keep them therefore and do them, for that is your wisdom and 
understanding in the sight of the nations: which when they have 
heard all these ordinances, shall say: O what a wise and 
understanding people is this great nation. For what nation is so 
great that hath Gods {Goddes} so nye unto him: as the LORD our God 
is nye unto us, in all things, when we call unto him? Yea, and 
what nation is so great that hath ordinances and laws so 
righteous, as all this law which I set before you this day. Take 
heed to thy self therefore only and keep thy soul diligently, that 
thou forget not the things which thine eyes have seen, and that 
they depart not out of thine heart, all the days of thine life: 
but teach them thy sons, and thy sons son's. The day that I stood 
before the LORD your God in Horeb, when he said unto me, gather me 
the people together, that I may make them hear my words that they 
may learn to fear me as long as they live upon the earth and that 
they may teach their children: ye came and stood also under the 
hill, and the hill burnt with fire: even unto the midst of heaven, 
and there was darkness, clouds and mist. And the LORD spake unto 
you out of the fire and ye heard the voice of the words: But saw 
no image, save heard a voice only. And he declared unto you his 
covenant, which he commanded you to do, even ten verses and wrote 
them in two tables of stone. And the LORD commanded me the same 
season to teach you ordinances and laws, for to do them in the 
land whither ye go to possess it. Take heed unto yourselves 
diligently as pertaining unto your souls, for ye saw no manner of 
image the day when the LORD spake unto you in Horeb out of the 
fire: lest ye mar yourselves and make you graven images after 
whatsoever likeness it be: whether after the likeness of man or 
woman or any manner beast that is on the earth or of any manner 
feathered fowl that flyeth in the air, or of any manner worm that 
creepeth on the earth or of any manner fish that is in the water 
beneath the earth: Yea and lest thou lift up thine eyes unto 
heaven, and when thou seest the son and the moon and the stars and 
whatsoever is contained in heaven, shouldest be deceived and 
shouldest bow thyself unto them and serve the things which the 
LORD thy God hath distributed unto all nations that are under all 
quarters of heaven. For the LORD took you and brought you out of 
the iron furnace of Egypt, to be unto him a people of inheritance, 
as it is come to pass this day. Furthermore, the LORD was angry 
with me for your sakes and sware, that I should not go over Iordan 
and that I should not go unto that good land, which the LORD thy 
God giveth thee to inheritance. For I must die in this land, and 
shall not go over Iordan: But ye shall go over and conquer that 
good land. Take heed unto yourselves therefore, that ye forget not 
the appointment of the LORD your God which he made with you, and 
that ye make you no graven image of whatsoever it be that the LORD 
thy God hath forbidden thee. For the LORD thy God is a consuming 
fire, and a jealous God. If after thou hast gotten children and 
children's children and hast dwelt long in the land, ye shall mar 
yourselves and make graven images after the likeness of whatsoever 
it be, and shall work wickedness in the sight of the LORD thy God, 
to provoke him. I call heaven and earth to record unto you this 
day, that ye shall shortly perish from off the land whither ye go 
over Iordan to possess it: Ye shall not prolong your days therein, 
but shall shortly be destroyed. And the LORD shall scatter you 
among nations, and ye shall be left few in number among the people 
whither the LORD shall bring you: and there ye shall serve gods 
which are the works of man's hand, wood and stone which neither 
see nor hear nor eat nor smell. Neverthelater ye shall seek the 
LORD your God even there, and shalt find him if thou seek him with 
all thine heart and with all thy soul. In thy tribulation and when 
all these things are come upon thee, even in the latter days, thou 
shalt turn unto the LORD thy God, and shalt hearken unto his 
voice. For the LORD thy God is a pitiful God: he will not forsake 
thee neither destroy thee, nor forget the appointment made with 
thy fathers which he sware unto them. For ask I pray thee of the 
days that are past which were before thee, since the day that God 
created man upon the earth and from the one side of heaven unto 
the other, whether anything hath been like unto this great thing 
or whether any such thing hath been heard as it is, that a nation 
hath heard the voice of God speaking out of fire as thou hast 
heard, and yet lived? either whether God assayed to go and take 
him a people from among nations, thorow temptations and signs and 
wonders and thorow war and with a mighty hand and a stretched out 
arm and with mighty terrible sights, according unto all that the 
LORD your God did unto you in Egypt before your eyes. Unto thee it 
was shewed, that thou mightest know, how that the LORD he is God 
and that there is none but he. Out of heaven he made thee hear his 
voice to nurture thee, and upon earth he shewed thee his great 
fire, and thou heardest his words out of the fire. And because he 
loved thy fathers, therefore he chose their seed after them and 
brought thee out with his presence and with his mighty power of 
Egypt: to thrust out nations greater and mightier than thou before 
thee, to bring thee in and to give thee their land to inheritance: 
as it is come to pass this day. Understand therefore this day and 
turn it to thine heart, that the LORD he is God in heaven above 
and upon the earth beneath, there is no more: keep therefore his 
ordinances, and his commandments which I command thee this day, 
that it may go well with thee and with thy children after thee and 
that thou mayst prolong thy days upon the earth which the LORD thy 
God giveth thee for ever. {thy life long.} Then Moses severed 
three cities on the other side Iordan toward the son rising, that 
he should flee thither which had killed his neighbour unwares and 
hated him not in time past, and therefore should flee unto one of 
the same cities and live: Bezer in the wilderness even in the 
plain country among the Rubenites: and Ramoth in Gilead among the 
Gadites and Solan in Basan among the Manassites. This is the law 
which Moses set before the children of Israel, and these are the 
witness, ordinances and statutes which Moses told the children of 
Israel after they came out of Egypt, on the other side Iordan in 
the valley beside Beth Peor in the land of Sehon king of the 
Amorites which dwelt at Hesbon, whom Moses and the children of 
Israel smote after they were come out of Egypt, and conquered his 
land and the land of Og king of Basan two kings of the Amorites on 
the other side Iordan toward the son rising: from Aroer upon the 
bank of the river Arnon, unto mount Sion which is called Hermon 
and all the fields on the other side Iordan eastward: even unto 
the sea in the field under the springs of Pisga.

Chapter .v.

And Moses called unto all Israel and said unto them: Hear Israel 
the ordinances and laws which I speak in thine ears this day, and 
learn them and take heed that ye do them. The LORD {Loode} our God 
made an appointment with us in Horeb. The LORD made not this bond 
with our fathers, but with us: we are they, which are all here 
alive this day. The LORD talked with you face to face in the mount 
out of the fire. And I stood between the LORD and you the same 
time, to shew you the saying of the LORD. For ye were afraid of 
the fire and therefore went not up into the mount and he said. I 
am the LORD thy God which brought thee out of the land of Egypt 
the house of bondage. Thou shalt have therefore none other gods in 
my presence. Thou shalt make thee no graven Image of any manner 
likeness that is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or in 
the water beneath the earth. Thou shalt neither bow thyself unto 
them nor serve them, for I the LORD thy God, am a jealous God, 
visiting the wickedness of the fathers upon the children, even in 
the third and the fourth generation, among them that hate me: and 
shew mercy upon thousands among them that love me and keep my 
commandments. Thou shalt not take the name of the LORD thy God in 
vain: for the LORD will not hold him guiltless, that taketh his 
name in vain. Keep the Sabbath day that thou sanctify it, as the 
LORD thy God hath commanded thee. Six days thou shalt labour and 
do all that thou hast to do, but the seventh day is the Sabbath of 
the LORD thy God: thou shalt do no manner work, neither thou nor 
thy son nor thy daughter nor thy servant nor thy maid nor thine ox 
nor thine ass nor any of thy cattle, nor the stranger that is 
within thy city, that thy servant and thy maid may rest as well as 
thou. And remember that thou wast a servant in the land of Egypt 
and how that the LORD God, brought thee out thence with a mighty 
hand and a stretched out arm. For which cause the LORD thy God 
commandeth thee to keep the Sabbath day. Honour thy father and thy 
mother, as the LORD thy God hath commanded thee: that thou mayst 
prolong thy days, and that it may go well with thee on the land, 
which the LORD thy God giveth thee. Thou shalt not slee. Thou 
shalt not break wedlock. Thou shalt not steal. Thou shalt not bear 
false witness against thy neighbour. Thou shalt not lust after thy 
neighbour's wife: thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's house, 
field, servant, maid, ox, ass nor ought that is thy neighbour's. 
These words the LORD spake unto all your multitude in the mount 
out of the fire, cloud and darkness, with a loud voice, and added 
no more thereto, and wrote them in two tables of stone and 
delivered them unto me. But as soon as ye heard the voice out of 
the darkness and saw the hill burn with fire, ye came unto me all 
the heads of your tribes and your elders: and ye said: behold, the 
LORD our God hath shewed us his glory and his greatness, and we 
have heard his voice out of the fire, and we have seen this day 
that God may talk with a man and he yet live. And now wherefore 
should we die that this great fire should consume us: If we should 
hear the voice of the LORD our God any more, we should die. For 
what is any flesh that he should hear the voice of the living God 
speaking out of the fire as we have done and should yet live: Go 
thou and hear all that the LORD our God sayeth, and tell thou unto 
us all that the LORD our God sayeth unto thee, and we will hear it 
and do it. And the LORD heard the voice of your words when ye 
spake unto me, and he said unto me: I have heard the voice of the 
words of this people which they have spoke unto thee, they have 
well said all that they have said. Oh that they had such an heart 
with them to fear me and keep all my commandments alway, that it 
might go well with them and with their children for ever. Go and 
say unto them: get you into your tents again, but stond thou here 
before me and I will tell thee all the commandments, ordinances 
and laws which thou shalt teach them, that they may do them in the 
land which I give them to possess. Take heed therefore that ye do 
as the LORD your God hath commanded you, and turn not aside: 
either to the right hand or to the left: but walk in all the ways 
which the LORD your God hath commanded you, that ye may live and 
that it may go well with you and that ye may prolong your days in 
the land which ye shall possess.

Chapter .vi.

These are the commandments, ordinances and laws which the LORD 
your God commanded to teach you, that ye might do them in the land 
whither ye go to possess it: that thou mightest fear the LORD thy 
God, to keep all his ordinances and his commandments which I 
command thee, both thou and thy son and thy son's son all days of 
thy life, that thy days may be prolonged. Hear therefore Israel 
and take heed that thou do thereafter, that it may go well with 
thee and that ye may increase mightily: even as the LORD God of 
thy fathers hath promised thee, a land that floweth with milk and 
honey. Hear Israel, the LORD thy God is LORD onely, and thou shalt 
love the LORD thy God with all thine heart, with all thy soul and 
with all thy might. And these words which I command thee this day, 
shall be in thine heart and thou shalt whet them on thy children, 
and shalt talk of them when thou art at home in thine house and as 
thou walkest by the way, and when thou liest down and when thou 
risest up: and thou shalt bind them for a sign upon thine hand. 
And they shall be papers of remembrance between thine eyes, and 
shalt write them upon the posts of thy house and upon thy gates. 
And when the LORD thy God hath brought thee into the land which he 
sware unto thy fathers Abraham, Isaac and Iacob, to give thee with 
great and goodly cities which thou buildest not, and houses full 
of all manner goods which thou filledst not, and wells digged 
which thou diggedst not, and vines and olive trees which thou 
planted not, and when thou hast eaten, and art full: Then beware 
lest thou forget the LORD which brought thee out of the land of 
Egypt the house of bondage. But fear the LORD thy God and serve 
him, and swear by his name, and see that ye walk not after strange 
gods {goddes} off the gods of the nations which are about you. For 
the LORD thy God is a jealous God among you, lest the wrath of the 
LORD thy God wax hot upon thee and destroy thee from the earth. Ye 
shall not tempt the LORD your God as ye did at Masa. But see that 
ye keep the commandments of the LORD your God, his witnesses and 
his ordinances which he hath commanded thee, and see thou do that 
which is right and good in the sight of the LORD: that thou mayst 
prosper and that thou mayst go and conquer that good land which 
the LORD sware unto thy fathers, and that the LORD may cast out 
all thine enemies before thee as he hath said. When thy son asketh 
thee in time to come saying: What meaneth the witnesses, 
ordinances and laws which the LORD our God hath commanded you? 
Then thou shalt say unto thy son: We were bondmen unto Pharao in 
Egypt, but the LORD brought us out of Egypt with a mighty hand. 
And the LORD shewed signs and wonders both great and evil upon 
Egypt, Pharao and upon all his household, before our eyes, and 
brought us from thence: to bring us in and to give us the land 
which he sware unto our fathers. And therefore commanded us to do 
all these ordinances and for to fear the LORD our God, for our 
wealth always and that he might save us, as it is come to pass 
this day. Moreover it shall be righteousness unto us before the 
LORD our God, if we take heed to keep all these commandments as he 
hath commanded us.

Chapter .vij.

When the LORD thy God hath brought thee into the land whither thou 
goest to possess it, and hath cast out many nations before thee: 
the Hethites, the Girgosites, the Amorites, the Cananites, the 
Pheresites, the Hevites and the Iebusites. Seven nations more in 
number and mightier than thou: and when the LORD thy God hath set 
them before thee that thou shouldest smite them, see that thou 
utterly destroy them and make no covenant with them nor have 
compassion on them. Also thou shalt make no marriages with them, 
neither give thy daughter unto his son nor take his daughter unto 
thy son. For they will make your sons depart from me and serve 
strange gods, and then will the wrath of the LORD wax hot upon you 
and destroy you shortly. But thus ye shall deal with them: 
overthrow their altars, break down their pillars, cut down their 
groves and burn their images with fire. For thou art an holy 
nation unto the LORD thy God: the LORD thy God hath chosen thee to 
be a several people unto himself of all nations that are upon the 
earth. It was not because of the multitude of you above all 
nations, that the LORD had lust unto you and chose you. For ye 
were fewest of all nations: But because the LORD loved you and 
because he would keep the oath which he had sworn unto your 
fathers, therefore he brought you out of Egypt with a mighty hand 
and delivered you out of the house of bondage: even from the hand 
of Pharao king of Egypt. Understand therefore, that the LORD thy 
God he is God and that a true God, which keepeth appointment and 
mercy unto them that love him and keep his commandments, even 
thorowout a thousand generations and rewardeth them that hate him 
before his face so that he bringeth them to nought, and will not 
defer the time unto him that hateth him but will reward him before 
his face. Keep therefore the commandments, ordinances and laws 
which I command you this day, that ye do them. If ye shall hearken 
unto these laws and shall observe and do them, then shall the LORD 
thy God keep appointment with thee and the mercy which he sware 
unto thy fathers and will love thee, bless thee and multiply thee: 
he will bless the fruit of thy womb and the fruit of thy field, 
thy corn, thy wine and thy oil, the fruit of thine oxen and the 
flocks of thy sheep in the land which he sware unto thy fathers to 
give thee. Thou shalt be blessed above all nations, there shall be 
neither man nor woman unfruitful among you, nor anything 
unfruitful among your cattle. Moreover the LORD will turn from 
thee all manner infirmities, and will put none of the evil 
diseases of Egypt (which thou knowest) upon thee, but will send 
them upon them that hate thee. Thou shalt bring to nought all 
nations which the LORD thy God delivereth thee, thine eye shall 
have no pity upon them neither shalt thou serve their gods, for 
that shall be thy decay. If thou shalt say in thine heart: these 
nations are more than I, how can I cast them out? Fear them not, 
but remember what the LORD thy God did unto Pharao and unto all 
Egypt, and the great temptations which thine eyes saw, and the 
signs and wonders and mighty hand and stretched out arm wherewith 
the LORD thy God brought thee out: even so shall the LORD thy God 
do unto all the nations of which thou art afraid. Thereto, the 
LORD thy God will send hornets among them until they that are 
left, and hide them selves from thee, be destroyed. See thou fear 
them not for the LORD {lord} thy God is among you a mighty God and 
a terrible. The LORD thy God will put out these nations before 
thee a little and a little: thou mayst not consume them at once 
lest the beasts of the field increase upon thee. And the LORD 
{lorde} thy God shall deliver them unto thee and stir up a mighty 
tempest among them, until they be brought to nought. And he shall 
deliver their kings into thine hand, and thou shalt destroy their 
names from under heaven. There shall no man stond before thee, 
until thou have destroyed them. The images of their gods thou 
shalt burn with fire, and see that thou covet not the silver or 
gold that is on them nor take it unto thee, lest thou be snared 
therewith. For it is an abomination unto the LORD thy God. Bring 
not therefore the Abomination to thine house, lest thou be a 
damned thing as it is: but utterly defy it and abhor it, for it is 
a thing that must be destroyed.

Chapter .viij.

All the commandments which I command thee this day ye shall keep 
for to do them, that ye may live and multiply and go and possess 
the land which the LORD sware unto your fathers. And think on all 
the way which the LORD thy God led thee this forty years in the 
wilderness, for to humble thee and to prove thee, to wete what was 
in thine heart, whether thou wouldest keep his commandments or no. 
He humbled thee and made thee hunger and fed thee with manna which 
neither thou nor thy father knew of, to make thee know that a man 
must not live by bread only: but by all that proceedeth out of the 
mouth of the LORD must a man live. Thy raiment waxed not old upon 
thee, neither did thy feet swell this forty years. Understand 
therefore in thine heart, that as a man nurtureth his son, even so 
the LORD thy God nurtureth thee. Keep therefore the commandments 
of the LORD thy God that thou walk in his ways and that thou fear 
him. For the LORD thy God bringeth thee into a good land, a land 
of rivers of water, of fountains and of springs that spring out 
both in valleys and hills: a land of wheat and of barley, of 
vines, fig trees and pomegranates, a land of olive trees with oil 
and of honey: a land wherein thou shalt not eat bread in 
scarceness, and where thou shalt lack nothing, a land whose stones 
are iron, and out of whose hills thou shalt dig brass. When thou 
hast eaten therefore and filled thyself, then bless the LORD for 
the good land which he hath given thee. But beware that thou 
forget not the LORD thy God, that thou wouldest not keep his 
commandments, laws and ordinances which I command thee this day: 
yea and when thou hast eaten and filled thyself and hast built 
goodly houses and dwelt therein, and when thy beasts and thy sheep 
are waxed many and thy silver and thy gold is multiplied and all 
that thou hast increased, then beware lest thine heart rise and 
thou forget the LORD thy God which brought thee out of the land of 
Egypt the house of bondage, and which led thee in the wilderness 
both great and terrible with fiery serpents and scorpions and 
thirst {drouth} where was no water, which brought the water out of 
the rock of flint: which fed thee in the wilderness with Man 
whereof thy fathers knew not, for to humble thee and to prove 
thee, that he might do thee good at thy latter end. And beware 
that thou say not in thine heart, my power and the might of mine 
own hand hath done me all these acts: But remember the LORD thy 
God, how that it is he which gave thee power to do manfully, for 
to make good the promise which he sware unto thy fathers, as it is 
come to pass this day. For if thou shalt forget the LORD thy God 
and shalt walk after strange gods and serve them and worship them, 
I testify unto you this day, that ye shall surely perish. As the 
nations which the LORD destroyeth before thee, even so ye shall 
perish, because ye would not hearken unto the voice of the LORD 
your God.

Chapter .ix.

Hear Israel, thou goest over Iordan this day, to go and conquer 
nations greater and mightier than thyself: and cities great and 
walled up to heaven, and people great and tall, even the children 
of the Enakims, which thou knowest and of whom thou hast heard say 
who is able to stond before the children of Enack? But understand 
this day that the LORD thy God which goeth over before thee a 
consuming fire, he shall destroy them and he shall subdue them 
before thee. And thou shalt cast them out, and bring them to 
nought quickly as the LORD hath said unto thee. Speak not in thine 
heart, after that the LORD thy God hath cast them out before thee 
saying: for my righteousness the LORD hath brought me into possess 
this land. Nay, but for the wickedness of these nations the LORD 
doth cast them out before thee. It is not for thy righteousness' 
sake and right heart that thou goest to possess their land: But 
partly for the wickedness of these nations, the LORD thy God doth 
cast them out before thee, and partly to perform that which the 
LORD thy God sware unto thy fathers, Abraham, Isaac and Iacob. 
Understand therefore that it is not for thy righteousness' sake, 
that the LORD thy God doth give thee this good land to possess it, 
for thou art a stiffnecked people. Remember and forget not how 
thou provokedest the LORD thy God in the wilderness: for since the 
day that thou camest out of the land of Egypt until ye came unto 
this place, ye have rebelled against the LORD. Also in Horeb ye 
angered the LORD so that the LORD was wroth with you, even to have 
destroyed you, after that I was gone up into the mount, to fetch 
the tables of stone, the tables of appointment which the LORD made 
with you. And I abode in the hill forty days and forty nights and 
neither ate bread nor drank water. And the LORD delivered me two 
tables of stone written with the finger of God, and in them was 
according to all the words which the LORD said unto you in the 
mount out of the fire in the day when the people were gathered 
together. And when the forty days and forty nights were ended, the 
LORD gave me the two tables of stone, the tables of the testament, 
and said unto me: Up, and get thee down quickly from hence, for 
thy people which thou hast brought out of Egypt, have marred them 
selves. They are turned at once out of the way, which I commanded 
them, and have made them a god of metal. Furthermore the LORD 
spake unto me saying: I see this people how that it is a 
stiffnecked people, let me alone that I may destroy them and put 
out the name of them from under heaven, and I will make of thee a 
nation both greater and more than they. And I turned away and came 
down from the hill (and the hill burnt with fire) and had the two 
tables of the appointment in my hands. And when I looked and saw 
that ye had sinned against the LORD your God and had made you a 
calf of metal and had turned at once out of the way which the LORD 
had commanded you. Then I took the two tables and cast them out of 
my two hands, and brake them before your eyes. And I fell before 
the LORD: even as at the first time forty days and nights, and 
neither ate bread nor drank water, over all your sins which ye had 
sinned in doing wickedly in the sight of the LORD and in provoking 
him. For I was afraid of the wrath and fierceness wherewith the 
LORD was angry with you, even for to have destroyed you; But the 
LORD heard my petition at that time also. The LORD was very angry 
with Aaron also, even for to have destroyed him: But I made 
intercession for Aaron also the same time. And I took your sin, 
the calf which ye had made and burnt him with fire and stamped him 
and ground him a good, even unto small dust. And I cast the dust 
thereof into the brook that descended out of the mount. Also at 
Thabeera and at Masa and at the sepulchres of lust ye angered the 
LORD, yea and when the LORD sent you from Cades Barnea saying: go 
up and conquer the land which I have given you, ye disobeyed the 
mouth of the LORD your God, and neither believed him nor hearkened 
unto his voice. Thus ye have been disobedient unto the LORD, since 
the day that I knew you. And I fell before the LORD forty days and 
forty nights which I lay there, for the LORD was minded to have 
destroyed you. But I made intercession unto the LORD {Lorde} and 
said: O Lord Iehoua, destroy not thy people and thine inheritance 
which thou hast delivered thorow thy greatness and which thou hast 
brought out of Egypt with a mighty hand. Remember thy servants 
Abraham, Isaac and Iacob and look not unto the stubbornness of 
this people nor unto their wickedness and sin: lest the land 
whence thou broughtest them say: Because the LORD was not able to 
bring them into the land which he promised them and because he 
hated them, therefore he carried them out to destroy them in the 
wilderness. Moreover they are thy people and thine inheritance, 
which thou broughtest out with thy mighty power and with thy 
stretched out arm.

Chapter .x.

In the same season the LORD said unto me: hew thee two tables of 
stone like unto the first and come up unto me into the mount and 
make thee an Ark of wood, and I will write in the table, the words 
that were in the first tables which thou brakest, and thou shalt 
put them in the ark. And I made an ark of sethim wood and hewed 
two tables of stone like unto the first, and went up into the 
mountain and the two tables in mine hand. And he wrote in the 
tables, according to the first writing (the ten verses which the 
LORD spake unto you in the mount out of the fire in the day when 
the people were gathered) {[together]} and gave them unto me. And 
I departed and came down from the hill and put the tables in the 
ark which I had made: and there they remained, as the LORD 
commanded me. And the children of Israel took their journey from 
Beroth Ben {of the children of} Iaken to Mosera, where Aaron died 
and where he was buried, and Eleazer his son became priest in his 
stead. And from thence they departed unto Gudgod: and from Gudgod 
to Iathbath, a land of rivers of water. And the same season the 
LORD separated the tribe of Levi to bear the ark of the 
appointment of the LORD and to stond before the LORD, and to 
minister unto him and to bless in his name unto this day. 
Wherefore the Levites have no part nor inheritance with their 
brethren. The LORD he is their inheritance, as the LORD thy God 
hath promised them. And I tarried in the mount, even as at the 
first time forty days and forty nights, and the LORD hearkened 
unto me at that time also, so that the LORD would not destroy 
thee. And the LORD said unto me: up and go forth in the journey 
before the people and let them go in and conquer the land which I 
sware unto their fathers to give unto them. And now Israel what is 
it that the LORD thy God requireth of thee, but to fear the LORD 
thy God and to walk in all his ways and to love him and to serve 
the LORD thy God with all thine heart and with all thy soul, that 
thou keep the commandments of the LORD and his ordinances which I 
command thee this day, for thy wealth. Behold, heaven and the 
heaven of heavens is the LORD's thy God, and the earth with all 
that therein is: only the LORD had a lust unto thy fathers to love 
them, and therefore chose you their seed after them of all 
nations, as it is come to pass this day Circumcise therefore the 
foreskin of your hearts, and be no longer stiffnecked. For the 
LORD your God, he is God of gods {God of goddes} and Lord of 
lords, {lorde of lordes} a great God, a mighty and a terrible 
which regardeth no man's person nor taketh gifts: but doeth right 
unto the fatherless and widow and loveth the stranger, to give him 
food and raiment. Love therefore the stranger, for ye were 
strangers your selves in the land of Egypt. Thou shalt fear the 
LORD thy God and serve him and cleave unto him and swear by his 
name, for he is thy praise and he is thy God that hath done these 
great and terrible things for thee, which thine eyes have seen. 
Thy fathers went down into Egypt with seventy souls, and now the 
LORD thy God hath made thee as the stars of heaven in multitude.

Chapter .xi.

Love the LORD thy God and keep his observances, his ordinances, 
his laws and his commandments alway. And call to mind this day 
that which your children have neither known nor seen: even the 
nurture of the LORD your God, his greatness, his mighty hand and 
his stretched out arm: his miracles and his acts which he did 
among the Egyptians, even unto Pharao the king of Egypt and unto 
all his land: and what he did unto the host of the Egyptians, unto 
their horses and chariots, how he brought the water of the red sea 
upon them as they chased you, and how the LORD hath brought them 
to nought unto this day: and what he did unto you in the 
wilderness, until ye came unto this place: and what he did unto 
Dathan and Abiram the sons of Eliab the son of Ruben, how the 
earth opened her mouth and swallowed them with their households 
and their tents, and all their substance that was in their 
possession, in the midst of Israel. For your eyes have seen all 
the great deeds of the LORD which he did. Keep therefore all the 
commandments which I command thee this day that ye may be strong 
and go and conquer the land whither ye go to possess it, and that 
ye may prolong your days in the land which the LORD sware unto 
your fathers to give unto them and to their seed, a land that 
floweth with milk and honey. For the land whither thou goest to 
possess it, is not as the land of Egypt whence thou camest out, 
where thou sowedest thy seed and wateredest it with thy labour as 
a garden of herbs: but the land whither ye go over to possess it, 
is a land of hills and valleys and drinketh water of the rain of 
heaven, and a land which the LORD thy God careth for. The eyes of 
the LORD thy God are always upon it, from the beginning of the 
year unto the latter end of the year. If thou shalt hearken 
therefore unto my commandments which I command you this day, that 
ye love the LORD your God and serve him with all your hearts and 
with all your souls: then he will give rain unto your land in due 
season, both the first rain and the latter, and thou shalt gather 
in thy corn, thy wine and thine oil. And he will send grass in thy 
fields for thy cattle: and thou shalt eat and fill thyself. But 
beware that your hearts deceive {disceave} you not that ye turn 
aside and serve strange gods and worship them, and then the wrath 
of the LORD wax hot upon you and shut up the heaven that there be 
no rain and that your land yield not her fruit, and that ye perish 
quickly from off the good land which the LORD giveth you. Put up 
therefore these my words in your hearts and in your souls, and 
bind them for a sign unto your hands, and let them be as papers of 
remembrance between your eyes, and teach them your children: so 
that thou talk of them when thou sittest in thine house, and when 
thou walkest by the way, and when thou liest down and when thou 
risest up: yea and write them upon the doorposts of thine house 
and upon thy gates, that your days may be multiplied and the days 
of your children upon the earth which the LORD sware unto your 
fathers to give them, as long as the days of heaven last upon the 
earth. For if ye shall keep all these commandments which I command 
you, so that ye do them and love the LORD your God and walk in all 
his ways and cleave unto him. Then will the LORD cast out all 
these nations {[and ye shall conquer them which are]} both greater 
and mightier than your selves. All the places whereon the soles of 
your feet shall tread, shall be yours: even from the wilderness 
and from Libanon and from the river Euphrates, even unto the 
uttermost sea shall your coasts be. There shall no man be able to 
stond before you: the LORD your God shall cast the fear and dread 
of you upon all lands whither ye shall come, as he hath said unto 
you. Behold, I set before you this day, a blessing and a curse: a 
blessing: if ye hearken unto the commandments of the LORD your God 
which I command you this day: And a curse: if ye will not hearken 
unto the commandments of the LORD your God: but turn out of the 
way which I command you this day to go after strange gods which ye 
have not known. When the LORD thy God hath brought thee into the 
land whither thou goest to possess it, then put the blessing upon 
mount Garizim and the curse upon mount Ebal, which are on the 
other side Iordan on the back side of the way toward the going 
down of the son in the land of the Cananites which dwell in the 
fields over against Gilgal beside Moreh grove. For ye shall go 
over to go and possess the land which the LORD your God giveth 
you, and shall conquer it and dwell therein. Take heed therefore 
that ye do all the commandments and laws, which I set before you 
this day.

Chapter .xij.

These are the ordinances and laws which ye shall observe to do in 
the land which the LORD God of thy fathers giveth thee to possess 
it, as long as ye live upon the earth. See that ye destroy all 
places where the nations which ye conquer serve their gods, upon 
high mountains and on high {an hye} hills and under every green 
tree. Overthrow their altars and break their pillars and burn 
their groves with fire and hew down the images of their gods, and 
bring the names of them to nought out of that place. See ye do not 
so unto the LORD your God but ye shall enquire the place which the 
LORD your God shall have chosen out of all your tribes to put his 
name there and there to dwell. And thither thou shalt come, and 
thither ye shall bring your burnt sacrifices and your offerings, 
your tithes and heave offerings of your hands, your vows and free 
will offerings and thy first born of your oxen and of your sheep. 
And there ye shall eat before the LORD your God, and ye shall 
rejoice in all that ye lay your hands on, both ye and your 
households, because the LORD thy God hath blessed thee. Ye shall 
do after nothing that we do here this day, every man what seemeth 
him good in his own eyes. For ye are not yet come to rest nor unto 
the inheritance which the LORD your God giveth you. But ye shall 
go over Iordan and dwell in the land which the LORD your God 
giveth you to inherit, and he shall give you rest from all your 
enemies round about: and ye shall dwell in safety. Therefore when 
the LORD your God hath chosen a place to make his name dwell 
there, thither ye shall bring all that I command you, your 
burntsacrifices and your offerings, your tithes and the 
heaveofferings of your hands and all your godly vows which ye vow 
unto the LORD. And ye shall rejoice before the LORD your God, both 
ye, your sons and your daughters, your servants and your maids and 
the Levite that is within your gates for he hath neither part nor 
inheritance with you. Take heed that thou offer not thy 
burntofferings in whatsoever place thou seest: but in the place 
which the LORD shall have chosen among one of thy tribes, there 
thou shalt offer thy burnt offerings and there thou shalt do all 
that I command thee. Notwithstanding thou mayst kill and eat flesh 
in all thy cities, whatsoever thy soul lusteth after according to 
the blessing of the LORD thy God which he hath given thee both the 
unclean and the clean mayst thou eat, even as the roe and the 
hart: only eat not the blood, but pour it upon the earth as water. 
Thou mayst not eat within thy gates the tithe of thy corn, of thy 
wine and of thy oil, either the firstborn of thine oxen or of thy 
sheep, neither any of thy vows which thou vowest, nor thy 
freewillofferings or heave offerings of thine hands: but thou must 
eat them before the LORD thy God, in the place which the LORD thy 
God hath chosen: both thou thy son and thy daughter, thy servant 
and thy maid and the Levite that is within thy gates: and thou 
shalt rejoice before the LORD thy God, in all that thou puttest 
thine hand to. And beware that thou forsake not the Levite as long 
as thou livest upon the earth. If (when the LORD thy God hath 
enlarged thy coasts as he hath promised thee) thou say: I will eat 
flesh, because thy soul longeth to eat flesh: then thou shalt eat 
flesh, whatsoever thy soul lusteth. If the place which the LORD 
thy God hath chosen to put his name there be too far from thee, 
then thou mayst kill of thy oxen and of thy sheep which the LORD 
hath given thee as I have commanded thee, and thou mayst eat in 
thine own city whatsoever thy soul lusteth. Neverthelater, as the 
roe and the hart is eaten, even so thou shalt eat it: the unclean 
and the clean indifferently thou shalt eat. But be strong that 
thou eat not the blood. For the blood, that is the life: and thou 
mayst not eat the life with the flesh: thou mayst not eat it: but 
must pour it upon the earth as water. See thou eat it not 
therefore that it may go well with thee and with thy children 
after thee, when thou shalt have done that which is right in the 
sight of the LORD. But thy holy things which thou hast and thy 
vows, thou shalt take and go unto the place which the LORD hath 
chosen, and thou shalt offer thy burnt offerings, both flesh and 
blood upon the altar of the LORD thy God, and the blood of thine 
offerings thou shalt pour out upon the altar of the LORD thy God, 
and shalt eat the flesh. Take heed and hear all these words which 
I command thee that it may go well with thee and with thy children 
after thee for ever, when thou doest that which is good and right 
in the sight of the LORD thy God. When the LORD thy God hath 
destroyed the nations before thee, whither thou goest to conquer 
them, and when thou hast conquered them, and dwelt in their lands: 
Beware that thou be not taken in a snare after them, after that 
they be destroyed before thee, and that thou ask not after their 
gods saying: how did these nations serve their gods, that I may do 
so likewise? Nay, thou shalt not do so unto the LORD thy God: for 
all abominations which the LORD hated did they unto their gods. 
For they burnt both their sons and their daughters with fire unto 
their gods. But whatsoever I command you that take heed ye do: and 
put nought thereto, nor take ought there from.

Chapter .xiij.

If there arise among you a prophet or a dreamer of dreams and give 
thee a sign or a wonder, and that sign or wonder which he hath 
said come to pass, and then say: let us go after strange gods 
which thou hast not known, and let us serve them: hearken not unto 
the words of that prophet or dreamer of dreams. For the LORD thy 
God tempteth you, to wete whether ye love the LORD your God with 
all your hearts and with all your souls. For ye must walk after 
the LORD your God and fear him and keep his commandments and 
hearken unto his voice and serve him and cleave unto him. And that 
prophet or dreamer of dreams shall die for it, because he hath 
spoken to turn you away from the LORD your God which brought you 
out of the land of Egypt and delivered you out of the house of 
bondage, to thrust thee out of the way which the LORD thy God 
commanded thee to walk in: and so thou shalt put evil away from 
thee. If thy brother the son of thy mother or thine own son or thy 
daughter or the wife that lieth in thy bosom or thy friend which 
is as thine own soul unto thee, entice thee secretly saying: let 
us go and serve strange gods which thou hast not known nor yet thy 
fathers, of the gods of the people which are round about thee, 
whether they be nye unto thee or far off from thee, from the one 
end of the land unto the other. See thou consent not unto him nor 
hearken unto him: no, let not thine eye pity him nor have 
compassion on him, nor keep him secret, but cause him to be slain: 
Thine hand shall be first upon him to kill him: and then the hands 
of all the people. And thou shalt stone him with stones that he 
die, because he hath gone about to thrust thee away from the LORD 
thy God which brought thee out of Egypt the house of bondage. And 
all Israel shall hear and fear and shall do no more and such 
wickedness as this is, among them. If thou shalt hear say of one 
of thy cities which the LORD thy God hath given thee to dwell in, 
that certain being the children of Belial are gone out from among 
you and have moved the inhabiters of their city saying: let us go 
and serve strange gods which ye have not known. Then seek and make 
search and enquire diligently. If it be true and the thing of a 
surety that such abomination is wrought among you: then thou shalt 
smite the dwellers of that city with the edge of the sword, and 
destroy it merciless and all that is therein, and even the very 
cattle thereof with the edge of the sword. And gather all the 
spoil of it into the midst of the streets thereof, and burn with 
fire: both the city and all the spoil thereof every whit unto the 
LORD thy God. And it shall be an heap for ever and shall not be 
built again. And see that there cleave nought of the damned thing 
in thine hand, that the LORD may turn from his fierce wrath and 
shew thee mercy and have compassion on thee and multiply thee, as 
he hath sworn unto thy fathers: when thou hast hearkened unto the 
voice of the LORD thy God, to keep all his commandments which I 
command thee this day so that thou do that which is right in the 
eyes of the LORD thy God.

Chapter .xiiij.

Ye are the children of the LORD your God, cut not your selves nor 
make you any baldness between the eyes for any man's death. For 
thou art an holy people unto the LORD thy God, and the LORD hath 
chosen thee to be a several people unto himself, of all the 
nations that are upon the earth. Ye shall eat no manner of 
abomination. These are the beasts which ye shall eat of: oxen, 
sheep and goats, hart, roe and bugle, hart {wild} goat, unicorn, 
origen and Camelion. And all beasts that cleave the hoof, and slit 
it into two claws and chew the cud, them ye shall eat. 
Nevertheless, these ye shall not eat of them that chew cud and of 
them that divide and cleave the hoof: the camel, the hare and the 
coney. For they chew cud, but divide not the hoof: and therefore 
are unclean unto you: and also the swine, for though he divide the 
hoof, yet he cheweth not cud, and therefore is unclean unto you: 
Ye shall not eat of the flesh of them nor touch the dead carcasses 
of them. These ye shall eat of all that are in the waters: All 
that have fins and scales. And whatsoever hath not fins and 
scales, of that ye may not eat, for that is unclean unto you. Of 
all clean birds ye shall eat, but these are they of which ye may 
not eat: the eagle, the goshawk, the cormorant, the ixion, the 
vultur, the kite and her kind, and all kind of ravens, the 
Ostrich, the nightcrow, the cuckoo, the sparrowhawk and all her 
kind, the little owl, the great owl, the back, the bittern, the 
pye, the stork, the heron, the Iay in his kind, the lapwing, the 
swallow. And all creeping fowls are unclean unto you and may not 
be eaten of: but of all clean fowls ye may well eat. Ye shall eat 
of nothing that dieth alone: But thou mayest give it unto the 
stranger that is in thy city that he eat it, or mayst sell it unto 
an Alien. For thou art an holy people unto the LORD thy God. Thou 
shalt not seethe a kid in his mother's milk. Thou shalt tithe all 
the increase of thy seed that cometh out of the field year by 
year. And thou shalt eat before the LORD thy God in the place, 
which he hath chosen to make his name dwell there the tithe of thy 
corn, of thy wine and of thine oil, and the firstborn of thine 
oxen and of thy flock that thou mayst learn to fear the LORD thy 
God alway. If the way be too long for thee, so that thou art not 
able to carry it, because the place is too far from the which the 
LORD thy God hath chosen to set his name there (for the LORD thy 
God hath blessed thee) then make it in money and take the money in 
thine hand, and go unto the place which the LORD thy God hath 
chosen, and bestow that money on whatsoever thy soul lusteth 
after: on oxen, sheep, wine and good drink, and on whatsoever thy 
soul desireth, and eat there before the LORD thy God and be merry: 
both thou and thine household and the Levite that is in thy city. 
See thou forsake not the Levite, for he hath neither part nor 
inheritance with thee. At the end of three years, thou shalt bring 
forth all the tithes of thine increase the same year and lay it up 
within thine own city, and the Levite shall come because he hath 
neither part nor inheritance with thee, and the stranger and the 
fatherless and the widow which are whithin thy city and shall eat 
and fill them selves: that the LORD thy God may bless thee in all 
the works of thine hand which thou doest.

Chapter .xv.

At the end of seven years thou shalt make a free year. And this is 
the manner of the free year, whosoever lendeth ought with his hand 
unto his neighbour, may not ask again that which he hath lent, of 
his neighbour or of his brother: because it is called the LORD's 
{lordes} free year, yet of a stranger thou mayst call it home 
again. But that which thou hast with thy brother thine hand shall 
remit, and that in any wise, that there be no beggar among you. 
For the LORD shall bless the land which the LORD thy God giveth 
thee, an heritance to possess it: so that thou hearken unto the 
voice of the LORD thy God, to observe and do all these 
commandments which I command you this day: yea and then the LORD 
thy God shall bless thee as he hath promised thee, and thou shalt 
lend unto many nations, and shalt borrow of no man, and shalt 
reign over many nations, but none shall reign over thee. When one 
of thy brethren among you is waxed poor in any of thy cities 
within thy land which the LORD thy God giveth thee, see that thou 
harden not thine heart nor shut to thine hand from thy poor 
brother: But open thine hand unto him and lend him sufficient for 
his need which he hath. And beware that there be not a point of 
Belial in thine heart, that thou wouldest say: The seventh year, 
the year of freedom is at hand, and therefore it grieve thee to 
look on thy poor brother and givest him nought and he then cry 
unto the LORD against thee and it be sin unto thee: But give him, 
and let it not grieve thine heart to give. Because that for that 
thing, the LORD thy God shall bless thee in all thy works and in 
all that thou puttest thine hand to. For the land shall never be 
without poor. Wherefore I command thee saying: open thine hand 
unto thy brother that is needy and poor in thy land. If thy 
brother an Hebrew sell himself to thee, or an Hebrewess, he shall 
serve thee six years and the seventh year thou shalt let him go 
free from thee. And when thou sendest him out free from thee, thou 
shalt not let him go away empty: but shalt give him of thy sheep 
and of thy corn and of thy wine, and give him of that wherewith 
the LORD thy God hath blessed thee. And remember that thou wast a 
servant in the land of Egypt, and the LORD thy God delivered thee 
thence: wherefore I command thee this thing today. But and if he 
say unto thee, I will not go away from thee, because he loveth 
thee and thine house and is well at ease with thee. Then take an 
awl and nail his ear to the door therewith and let him be thy 
servant forever, and unto thy maidservant thou shalt do likewise. 
And let it not grieve thine eyes to let him go out from thee, for 
he hath been worth a double hired servant to thee in his service 
six years. And the LORD thy God shall bless thee in all that thou 
doest. All the firstborn that come of thine oxen and of thy sheep 
that are males, thou shalt hallow unto the LORD thy God. Thou 
shalt do no service with the firstborn of thy sheep: but shalt eat 
them before the LORD thy God year by year in the place which the 
LORD hath chosen both thou and thine household. If there be any 
deformity therein, whether it be lame or blind or whatsoever evil 
favouredness it hath, thou shalt not offer it unto the LORD thy 
God: But shalt eat it in thine own city, the unclean and the clean 
indifferently, as the roe and the hart. Only eat not the blood 
thereof, but pour it upon the ground as water.

Chapter .xvi.

Observe the month of Abib, and offer passover unto the LORD thy 
God. For in the month of Abib, the LORD thy God brought thee out 
of Egypt by night: Thou shalt therefore offer passover unto the 
LORD thy God, and sheep and oxen in the place which the LORD shall 
choose to make his name dwell there. Thou shalt eat no leavened 
bread therewith: but shalt eat therewith the bread of tribulation 
seven days long. For thou camest out of the land of Egypt in 
haste, that thou mayst remember the day when thou camest out of 
the land of Egypt, all days of thy life. And see that there be no 
leavened bread seen in all thy coasts seven days long, and that 
there remain nothing of the flesh which thou hast offered the 
first day at evening, until the morning. Thou mayst not offer 
passover in any of thy cities which the LORD thy God giveth thee: 
But in the place which the LORD thy God shall choose to make his 
name dwell in, there thou shalt offer Passover at evening about 
the going down of the son, even in the season that thou camest out 
of Egypt. And thou shalt seethe and eat {[it]} in the place which 
the LORD thy God hath chosen, and depart on the morrow and get 
thee unto thy tent. Six days thou shalt eat sweet bread, and the 
seventh day is for the people to come together to the LORD thy 
God, that thou mayst do no work. Then reckon the seven weeks, and 
begin to reckon the seven weeks when the sicle beginneth in the 
corn, and keep the feast of weeks unto the LORD thy God, that thou 
give a freewilloffering of thine hand unto the LORD thy God 
according as the LORD thy God hath blessed thee. And rejoice 
before the LORD thy God both thou, thy son, thy daughter, thy 
servant and thy maid, and the Levite that is within thy gates, and 
the stranger, the fatherless and the widow that are among you, in 
the place which the LORD thy God hath chosen to make his name 
dwell there. And remember that thou was a servant in Egypt, that 
thou observe and do these ordinances. Thou shalt observe the feast 
of tabernacles seven days long, after that thou hast gathered in 
thy corn and thy wine. And thou shalt rejoice in that thy feast, 
both thou and thy son, thy daughter, thy servant, thy maid, the 
Levite, the stranger, the fatherless and the widow that are in thy 
cities. Seven days thou shalt keep holy day unto the LORD thy God, 
in the place which the LORD shall choose: for the LORD thy God 
shall bless thee in all thy fruits and in all the works of thine 
hands, and thou shalt be all together gladness. Three times in the 
year shall all your males appear before the LORD thy God in the 
place which he shall choose: In the feast of sweet bread, in the 
feast of weeks and in the booth feast. {feast of the tabernacles.} 
And they shall not appear before the LORD empty: but every man 
with the gift of his hand, according to the blessing of the LORD 
thy God, which he hath given thee. Iudges and officers thou shalt 
make thee in all thy cities {gates} which the LORD thy God giveth 
thee thorowout thy tribes: And let them judge the people 
righteously. Wrest not the law nor know any person neither take 
any reward: for gifts blind the wise and pervert the words of the 
righteous. But in all things follow righteousness, that thou mayst 
live and enjoy the land which the LORD thy God giveth thee. Thou 
shalt plant no grove of whatsoever trees it be, nye unto the altar 
of the LORD thy God which thou shalt make thee. Thou shalt set 
thee up no pillar, which the LORD thy God hateth.

Chapter .xvij.

Thou shalt offer unto the LORD thy God no ox or sheep wherein is 
any deformity, whatsoever evil favouredness it be: for that is an 
abomination unto the LORD thy God. If there be found among you in 
any of thy cities which the LORD thy God giveth thee man or woman 
that hath wrought wickedness in the sight of the LORD thy God, 
that they have gone beyond his appointment, so that they have gone 
and served strange gods and worshipped them, whether it be the son 
or moon or anything contained in heaven which I forbade, and it 
was told thee and thou hast heard of it: Then thou shalt enqui:re 
diligently. And if it be true and the thing of a surety that such 
abomination is wrought in Israel, then thou shalt bring forth that 
man or that woman which have committed that wicked thing, unto thy 
gates and shalt stone them with stones and they shall die. At the 
mouth of two or three witnesses shall he that is worthy of death, 
die: but at the mouth of one witness he shall not die. And the 
hands of the witnesses shall be first upon him to kill him, and 
afterward the hands of all the people: so shalt thou put 
wickedness away from thee. If a matter be too hard for thee in 
judgement between blood and blood, plea and plea, plage and plage 
in matters of strife within thy cities: Then arise and get thee up 
unto the place which the LORD thy God hath chosen, and go unto the 
priests the Levites, and unto the judge that shall be in those 
days, and ask, and they shall shew thee how to judge. And see that 
thou do according to that which they of that place(which the LORD 
hath chosen shew thee, and see that thou observe to do according 
to all that they inform thee. According to the law which they 
teach thee and manner of judgement which they tell thee, see that 
thou do and that thou bow not from that which they shew thee, 
neither to the right hand nor to the left. And that man that will 
do presumptuously, so that he will not hearken unto the priest 
that stondeth there to minister unto the LORD thy God or unto the 
judge, shall die: and so thou shalt put away evil from Israel. And 
all the people shall hear and shall fear, and shall do no more 
presumptuously. When thou art come unto the land which the LORD 
thy God giveth thee and enjoyest it and dwellest therein: If thou 
shalt say, I will set a king over me, like unto all the nations 
that are about me: Then thou shalt make him king over thee, whom 
the LORD thy God shall choose. One of thy brethren must thou make 
king over thee, and mayst not set a stranger over thee which is 
not of thy brethren. But in any wise let him not hold too many 
horses, that he bring not the people again to Egypt thorow the 
multitude of horses, forasmuch as the LORD hath said unto you: ye 
shall henceforth go no more again that way. Also he shall not have 
too many wives, lest his heart turn away, neither shall he gather 
him silver and gold too much. And when he is sitten upon the seat 
of his kingdom, he shall write him out this second law in a book 
taking a copy of the priests' the Levites'. And it shall be with 
him and he shall read there in all days of his life that he may 
learn to fear the LORD his God for to keep all the words of this 
law and these ordinances for to do them: that his heart arise not 
above his brethren and that he turn not from the commandment: 
either to the right hand or to the left: that both he and his 
children may prolong their days in his kingdom in Israel.

Chapter .xviij.

The priests the Levites, all the tribe of Levi shall have no part 
nor inheritance with Israel. The offerings of the LORD and his 
inheritance they shall eat, but shall have no inheritance among 
their brethren: the LORD he is their inheritance, as he hath said 
unto them. And this is the duty of the priests, of the people and 
of them that offer, whether it be ox or sheep: They must give unto 
the priest, the shoulder and the two cheeks and the maw, the first 
fruits of thy corn, wine and oil, and the first of thy sheep 
shearing must thou give him. For the LORD thy God hath chosen him 
out of all thy tribes to stond and to minister in the name of the 
LORD: both him and his sons for ever. If a Levite come out of any 
of thy cities or any place of Israel, where he is a sojourner, and 
come with all the lust of his heart unto the place which the LORD 
hath chosen: he shall there minister in the name of the LORD his 
God as all his brethren the Levites do which stond there before 
the LORD. And they shall have like portions to eat, beside that 
which cometh to him of the patrimony of his elders. When thou art 
come into the land which the LORD thy God giveth thee, see that 
thou learn not to do after the abominations of these nations. Let 
there not be found among you that maketh his son or his daughter 
go thorow fire, either a bruterar or a maker of dismal days or 
that useth witchcraft {or that useth withcraft, or a chooser out 
of days or that regardeth the flyeng of souls} or a sorcerer, or a 
charmer, or that speaketh {counseleth} with a spirit, or a 
soothsayer or that talketh with them that are dead. {prophesiar or 
that asketh the advise of the dead.} For all that do such things 
are abomination unto the LORD: and because of these abominations 
the LORD thy God doeth cast them out before thee, be pure 
therefore with the LORD thy God. For these nations which thou 
shalt conquer, hearken unto makers {choosers out} of dismal days 
and bruterars. {prophesyars, or profit-seers} But the LORD thy God 
permitteth not that to thee. The LORD thy God will stir up a 
Prophet among you: even of thy brethren like unto me: and unto him 
ye shall hearken according to all that thou desiredest of the LORD 
thy God in Horeb in the day when the people were gathered saying: 
Let me hear the voice of my LORD God no more, nor see this great 
fire any more, that I die not. And the LORD said unto me: they 
have well spoken, I will raise them up a prophet from among their 
brethren like unto thee and will put my words into his mouth and 
he shall speak unto them all that I shall command him. And 
whosoever will not hearken unto the words which he shall speak in 
my name, I will require it of him. But the prophet which shall 
presume to speak ought in my name which I commanded him not to 
speak, and he that speaketh in the name of strange gods, the same 
prophet shall die. And if thou say in thine heart, how shall I 
know that which the LORD hath not spoken? When a prophet speaketh 
in the name of the LORD, if the thing follow not nor come to pass, 
that is the thing which the LORD hath not spoken. But the prophet 
hath spoken it presumptuously: be not afeared therefore of him.

Chapter .xix.

When the LORD thy God hath destroyed the nations whose land the 
LORD thy God giveth thee, and thou hast conquered them and 
dwellest in their cities and in their houses: thou shalt appoint 
three cities in the land which the LORD thy God giveth thee to 
possess it: thou shalt prepare the way and divide the coasts of 
thy land which the LORD thy God giveth thee to possess it: thou 
shalt prepare the way and divide the coasts of thy land which the 
LORD thy God giveth thee to inherit, into three parts that 
whosoever committeth murder may flee thither. And this is the 
cause of the slayer that shall flee thither and be saved: If he 
smite his neighbour ignorantly and hated him not in time past: As 
when a man goeth unto the wood with his neighbour to hew wood, and 
as his hand fetcheth a stroke with the axe, the head slippeth from 
the helve and smiteth his neighbour that he die: the same shall 
flee unto one of the same cities and be saved. Lest the executer 
of blood follow after the slayer while his heart is hot and 
overtake him, because the way is long, and slay him, and yet there 
is no cause worthy of death in him, inasmuch as he hated not his 
neighbour in time past. Wherefore I command thee saying: see that 
thou appoint out three cities. And if the LORD thy God enlarge thy 
coasts as he hath sworn unto thy fathers and give thee all the 
land which he said he would give unto thy fathers (so that thou 
keep all these commandments to do them, which I command thee this 
day, that thou love the LORD thy God and walk in his ways ever) 
then thou shalt add three cities more unto those three, that 
innocent blood be not shed in thy land which the LORD thy God 
giveth thee to inherit, and so blood come upon thee. But and if 
there be any man that hateth his neighbour and layeth await for 
him and riseth against him and smiteth him that he die, and fleeth 
unto any of these cities. Then let the elders of his city send and 
fetch him thence and deliver him into the hands of the justice of 
blood, and he shall die. Let thine eye have no pity on him, and so 
thou shalt put away innocent blood from Israel, and happy art 
thou. Thou shalt not remove thy neighbour's mark which they of old 
time have set in thine inheritance that thou inheritest in the 
land which the LORD thy God giveth thee to enjoy it. One witness 
shall not rise against a man in any manner trespass or sin, 
whatsoever sin a man sinneth: But at the mouth of two witnesses or 
of three witnesses shall all matters be tried. If an unrighteous 
witness rise up against a man to accuse him of trespass: then let 
both the men which strive together stond before the LORD, before 
the priests and the judges which shall be in those days, and let 
the judges enquire a good. And if the witness be found false and 
that he hath given false witness against his brother then shall ye 
do unto him as he had thought to do unto his brother, and so thou 
shalt put evil away from thee. And other shall hear and fear and 
shall henceforth commit no more any such wickedness among you. And 
let thine eye have no compassion, but life for life, eye for eye, 
tooth for tooth, hand for hand, and foot for foot.

Chapter .xx.

When thou goest out to battle against thine enemies, and seest 
horses and chariots and people more than thou, be not afeared of 
them, for the LORD thy God is with thee which brought thee out of 
the land of Egypt. And when ye are come nye unto battle, let the 
priest come forth and speak unto the people and say unto them: 
Hear Israel, ye are come unto battle against your enemies, let not 
your hearts faint, neither fear nor be amazed nor a dread of them. 
For the LORD thy God goeth with you to fight for you against your 
enemies and to save you. And let the officers speak unto the 
people saying: If any man have built a new house and have not 
dedicate it, let him go and return to his house lest he die in the 
battle, and another dedicate it. And if any man have planted a 
vineyard and have not made it common, let him go and return again 
unto his house, lest he die in the battle and another make it 
common. And if any man be betrothed unto a wife and have not taken 
her, let him go and return again unto his house, lest he die in 
the battle and another take her. And let the officers speak 
further unto the people and say. If any man fear and be 
fainthearted, let him go and return unto his house, lest his 
brother's heart be made faint as well as his. And when the 
officers have made an end of speaking unto the people, let them 
make captains of war over them. When thou comest nye unto a city 
to fight against it, offer them peace. And if they answer thee 
again peaceably, and open unto thee, then let all the people that 
is found therein be tributaries unto thee and serve thee. But and 
if they will make no peace with thee, then make war against the 
city and besiege it. And when the LORD thy God hath delivered it 
into thine hands, smite all the males thereof with the edge of the 
sword, save the women and the children and the cattle and all that 
is in the city and all the spoil thereof take unto thyself and eat 
the spoil of thine enemies which the LORD thy God giveth thee. 
Thus thou shalt do unto all the cities which are a great way off 
from thee and not of the cities of these nations. But in the 
cities of these nations which the LORD thy God giveth thee to 
inherit, thou shalt save alive nothing that breatheth. But shalt 
destroy them without redemption, both the Hethites, the Amorites, 
the Cananites, the Pherezites, the Hevites and the Iebusites, as 
the LORD thy God hath commanded thee, that they teach you not to 
do after all their abominations which they do unto their gods, and 
so should sin against the LORD your God. When thou hast besieged a 
city long time in making war against it to take it, destroy not 
the trees thereof, that thou wouldest thrust an axe unto them. For 
thou mayst eat of them, and therefore destroy them not. For the 
trees of the fields are no men that they might come against thee 
to besiege thee. Neverthelater those trees which thou knowest that 
men eat not of them, thou mayst destroy and cut them down and make 
bulwarks against the city that maketh war with thee, until it be 
overthrown.

Chapter .xxj.

If one be found slain in the land which the LORD thy God giveth 
thee to possess it, and lieth in the fields, and not known who 
hath slain him: Then let thine elders and thy judges come forth 
and meet unto the cities that are round about the slain. And let 
the elders of that city which is next unto the slain man, take an 
heifer that is not laboured with nor hath drawn in the yoke, and 
let them bring her unto a valley where is neither earing nor 
sowing, and strike off her head there in the valley. Then let the 
priests the sons of Levi come forth (for the LORD thy God hath 
chosen them to minister and to bless in the name of the LORD and 
therefore at their mouth shall all strife and plague be tried.) 
And all the elders of the city that is next to the slain man shall 
wash their hands over the heifer that is beheaded in the plain, 
and shall answer and say: our hands have not shed this blood 
neither have our eyes seen it. Be merciful LORD unto thy people 
Israel which thou hast delivered and put not innocent blood unto 
thy people Israel: and the blood shall be forgiven them. And so 
shalt thou put innocent blood from thee, when thou shalt have done 
that which is right in the sight of the LORD. When thou goest to 
war against thine enemies and the LORD thy God hath delivered them 
into thine hands and thou hast take them captive, and seest among 
the captives a beautiful woman and hast a fantasy unto her that 
thou wouldest have her to thy wife. Then bring her home to thine 
house and let her shave her head and pare her nails and put her 
raiment that she was taken in from her, and let her remain in 
thine house and beweep her father and her mother a month long and 
after that go in unto her and marry her and let her be thy wife. 
And if thou have no favour unto her, then let her go whither she 
lusteth: for thou mayst not sell her for money nor make chevisance 
of her, because thou hast humbled her. If a man have two wives, 
one loved and another hated, and they have borne him children, 
both the loved and also the hated. If the firstborn be the son of 
the hated: then when he dealeth his goods among his children, he 
may not make the son of the beloved firstborn before the son of 
the hated which is indeed the firstborn: But he shall know the son 
of the hated for his firstborn, that he give him double of all 
that he hath. For he is the first of his strength, and to him 
belongeth the right of the firstbornship. If any man have a son 
that is stubborn, and disobedient, that he will not hearken unto 
the voice of his father and voice of his mother, and they have 
taught him nurture, but he would not hearken unto them: Then let 
his father and his mother take him and bring him out unto the 
elders of that city and unto the gate of that same place, and say 
unto the elders of the city. This our son is stubborn and 
disobedient and will not hearken unto our voice, he is a rioter 
and a drunkard. Then let all the men of that city stone him with 
stones unto death. And so thou shalt put evil away from thee, and 
all Israel shall hear and fear. If a man have committed a trespass 
worthy of death and is put to death for it and hanged on tree: let 
not his body remain all night upon the tree, but bury him the same 
day. For the curse of God is on him that is hanged. Defile not thy 
land therefore, which the LORD thy God giveth thee to inherit.

Chapter .xxij.

If thou see thy brother's ox or sheep go astray, thou shalt not 
withdraw thyself from them: But shalt bring them home again unto 
thy brother. If thy brother be not nye unto thee or if thou know 
him not, then bring them unto thine own house and let them be with 
thee, until thy brother ask after them, and then deliver him them 
again. In like manner shalt thou do with his ass, with his raiment 
and with all lost things of thy brother which he hath lost and 
thou hast found, and thou mayst not withdraw thyself. If thou see 
that thy brother's ass or ox is fallen down by the way, thou shalt 
not withdraw thyself from them: but shalt help him to heave them 
up again. The woman shall not wear that which pertaineth unto the 
man, neither shall a man put on woman's raiment. For all that do 
so, are abomination unto the LORD thy God. If thou chance upon a 
bird's nest by the way, in whatsoever tree it be or on the ground, 
whether they be young or eggs, and the dam sitting upon the young 
or upon the eggs: thou shalt not take the mother with the young. 
But shalt in any wise let the dam go and take the young, that thou 
mayst prosper and prolong thy days. When thou buildest a new 
house, thou shalt make a battlement unto the roof, that thou lade 
not blood upon thine house, if any man fall thereof. Thou shalt 
not sow thy vineyard with divers seed: lest thou hallow the seed 
which thou hast sown with the fruit of thy vineyard. Thou shalt 
not plough with an ox and an ass together. Thou shalt not wear a 
garment made of wool and flax together. Thou shalt put ribbons 
upon the four quarters of thy vesture wherewith thou coverest 
thyself. If a man take a wife and when he hath lien with her hate 
her and lay shameful things unto her charge and bring up an evil 
name upon her and say: I took this wife, and when I came to her, I 
found her not a maid: Then let the father of the damsel and the 
mother bring forth the tokens of the damsel's virginity, unto the 
elders of the city, even unto the gate. And let the damsel's 
father say unto the elders, I gave my daughter unto this man to 
wife and he hateth her: and lo, he layeth shameful things unto her 
charge saying, I found not thy daughter a maid. And yet these are 
the tokens of my daughter's virginity. And let them spread the 
vesture before the elders of the city. Then let the elders of that 
city take that man and chastise him and merce him in an hundred 
sicles of silver and give them unto the father of the damsel, 
because he hath brought up an evil name upon a maid in Israel. And 
she shall be his wife, and he may not put her away all his days. 
But and if the thing be of a surety that the damsel be not found a 
virgin, let them bring her unto the door of her father's house, 
and let the men of that city stone her with stones to death, 
because she hath wrought folly in Israel, to play the whore in her 
father's house. And so thou shalt put evil away from thee. If a 
man be found lying with a woman, that hath a wedded husband, then 
let them die either other of them: both the man that lie with the 
wife and also the wife: so shalt thou put away evil from Israel. 
If a maid be handfasted unto an husband, and then a man find her 
in the town and lay with her, then ye shall bring them both out 
unto the gates of that same city and shall stone them with stones 
to death: The damsel because she cried not being in the city: And 
the man, because he hath humbled his neighbour's wife, and thou 
shalt put away evil from thee. But if a man find a betrothed 
damsel in the field and force her and lie with her: Then the man 
that lay with her shall die alone, and unto the damsel thou shalt 
do no harm: because there is in the damsel no cause of death. For 
as when a man riseth against his neighbour and slayeth him, even 
so is this matter. For he found her in the fields and the 
betrothed damsel cried: but there was no man to succour her. If a 
man find a maid that is not betrothed and take her and lie with 
her and be found: Then the man that lay with her shall give unto 
the damsel's father fifty sicles of silver. And she shall be his 
wife, because he hath humbled her, and he may not put her away all 
his days. No man shall take his father's wife, nor unhele his 
father's covering.

Chapter .xxiij.

None that is gelded or hath his privy members cut off, shall come 
into the congregation of the LORD. And he that is born of a common 
woman shall not come in the congregation of the LORD, no in the 
tenth generation he shall not enter into the congregation of the 
LORD. The Ammonites and the Moabites shall not come into the 
congregation of the LORD, no not in the tenth generation, no they 
shall never come in to the congregation of the LORD, because they 
met you not with bread and water in the way when ye came out of 
Egypt, and because they hired against thee Balaam the son of Beor 
the interpreter of Mesopotamia, to curse thee. Nevertheless the 
LORD thy God would not hearken unto Balam, but turned the curse to 
a blessing unto thee, because the LORD thy God loved thee. Thou 
shalt never therefore seek that which is prosperous or good for 
them all thy days for ever. Thou shalt not abhor an Edomite, for 
he is thy brother: neither shalt thou abhor an Egyptian, because 
thou wast a stranger in his land. The children that are begotten 
of them shall come into the congregation of the LORD in the third 
generation. When thou goest out with the host against thine 
enemies, keep thee from all wickedness for the LORD is among you. 
If there be any man that is unclean by the reason of uncleanness 
that chanceth him by night, let him go out of the host and not 
come in again until he have washed himself with water before the 
evening: and then when the son is down, let him come into the host 
again. Thou shalt have a place without the host whither thou shalt 
resort to and thou shalt have a sharp point at the end of thy 
weapon: and when thou wilt ease thyself, dig therewith and turn 
and cover that which is departed from thee. For the LORD thy God 
walketh in thine host, to rid thee and to set thine enemies before 
thee. Let thine host be pure that he see no unclean thing among 
you and turn from you. Thou shalt not deliver unto his master the 
servant which is escaped from his master unto thee. Let him dwell 
with thee, even among you in what place he himself liketh best, in 
one of thy cities where it is good for him, and vex him not. There 
shall be no whore of the daughters of Israel, nor whorekeeper of 
the sons of Israel. Thou shalt neither bring the hire of an whore 
nor the price of a dog into the house of the LORD thy God, in no 
manner of vow: for even both of them are abomination unto the LORD 
thy God. Thou shalt be no usurer unto thy brother, neither in 
money nor in food, nor in any manner thing that is lent upon 
usury. Unto a stranger thou mayst lend upon usury, but not unto 
thy brother, that the LORD thy God may bless thee in all that thou 
settest thine hand to in the land whither thou goest to conquer 
it. When thou hast vowed a vow unto the LORD thy God, see thou be 
not slack to pay it. For he will surely require it of thee, and it 
shall be sin unto thee. If thou shalt leave vowing, it shall be no 
sin unto thee: but that which is once gone out of thy lips, thou 
must keep and do, according as thou hast vowed unto the LORD thy 
God a freewill offering which thou hast spoken with thy mouth. 
When thou comest into thy neighbour's vineyard, thou mayst eat 
grapes thy bellyful at thine own pleasure: but thou shalt put none 
in thy bag. When thou goest into thy neighbour's corn, thou mayst 
pluck the ears with thine hand, but thou mayst not move a sicle 
unto thy neighbour's corn.

Chapter .xxiiij.

When a man hath taken a wife and married her, if she find no 
favour in his eyes, because he hath spied some uncleanness in her: 
Then let him write her a bill of divorcement and put it in her 
hand and send her out of his house. If when she is departed out of 
his house, she go and be another man's wife and the second husband 
hate her and write her a letter of divorcement and put it in her 
hand and send her out of his house, or if the second man die which 
took her to wife; Her first man which sent her away may not take 
her again to be his wife, inasmuch as she is defiled. For that is 
abomination in the sight of the LORD: that thou defile not the 
land with sin, which the LORD thy God giveth thee to inherit. When 
a man taketh a new wife, he shall not go a warfare neither shall 
be charged with any business: but shall be free at home one year 
and rejoice with his wife which he hath taken. No man shall take 
the nether or the upper millstone to pledge, for then he taketh a 
man's life to pledge. If any man be found stealing any of his 
brethren the children of Israel, and maketh chevisance of him or 
selleth him, the thief shall die. And thou shalt put evil away 
from thee. Take heed to thyself as concerning the plague of 
leprosy, that thou observe diligently to do according to all that 
the priests the Levites shall teach thee, as I commanded them so 
ye shall observe to do. Remember what the LORD thy God did unto 
Miriam by the way, after that ye were come out of Egypt. If thou 
lend thy brother any manner succour, thou shalt not go into his 
house to fetch a pledge: but shalt stond without and the man to 
whom thou lendest, shall bring thee the pledge out at the door. 
Furthermore if it be a poor body, go not to sleep with his pledge: 
but deliver him the pledge again by that the son go down, and let 
him sleep in his own raiment and bless thee. And it shall be 
righteousness unto thee, before the LORD thy God. Thou shalt not 
defraud an hired servant that is needy and poor, whether he be of 
thy brethren or a stranger that is in thy land within thy cities. 
Give him his hire the same day, and let not the son go down 
thereon. For he is needy and therewith sustaineth his life, lest 
he cry against thee unto the LORD and it be sin unto thee. The 
fathers shall not die for the children nor the children for the 
fathers: but every man shall die for his own sin. Hinder not the 
right of the stranger nor of the fatherless, nor take widow's 
raiment to pledge. But remember that thou wast a servant in Egypt, 
and how the LORD thy God delivered thee thence. Wherefore I 
command thee to do this thing. When thou cuttest down thine 
harvest in the field and hast forgotten a sheaf in the field, thou 
shalt not go again and fetch it: But it shall be for the stranger, 
the fatherless and the widow, that the LORD thy God may bless thee 
in all the work of thine hand. When thou beatest down thine olive 
trees thou shalt not make clean riddance after thee: but it shall 
be for the stranger, the fatherless and the widow. And when thou 
gatherest thy vineyard, thou shalt not gather clean after thee: 
but it shall be for the stranger, the fatherless and the widow. 
And remember that thou wast a servant in the land of Egypt: 
wherefore I command thee to do this thing.

Chapter .xxv.

When {If} there is strife between men, let them come unto the law, 
and let the judges justify the righteous and condemn the 
trespasser. And if the trespasser be worthy of stripes, then let 
the judge cause to take him down and to beat him before his face 
according to his trespass, unto a certain number. Forty stripes he 
shall give him and not pass: lest if he should exceed and beat him 
above that with many stripes, thy brother should appear ungodly 
before thine eyes. Thou shalt not muzzle {mosell} the ox that 
treadeth out the corn. When brethren dwell together and one of 
them die and have no child, the wife of the dead shall not be 
given out unto a stranger: but her brotherinlaw shall go in unto 
her and take her to wife and marry her. And the eldest son which 
she beareth, shall stond up in the name of his brother which is 
dead, that his name be not put out in Israel. But and if the man 
will not take his sisterinlaw, then let her go to the gate unto 
the elders and say: My brotherinlaw refuseth to stir up unto his 
brother a name in Israel, he will not marry me. Then let the 
elders of his city call unto him and commune with him. If he stond 
and say: I will not take her, then let his sister-in-law go unto 
him in the presence of the elders and loose his shoe off his foot 
and spit in his face and answer and say: So shall it be done unto 
that man that will not build his brother's house. And his name 
shall be called in Israel, the unshoed house. If when men strive 
together, one with another, the wife of the one run to, for to rid 
her husband out of the hands of him that smiteth him and put forth 
her hand and take him by the secrets: cut off her hand, and let 
not thine eye pity her. Thou shalt not have in thy bag two manner 
weights, a great and a small: neither shalt thou have in thine 
house divers measures, a great and a small. But thou shalt have a 
perfect and a just measure: that thy days may be lengthened in the 
land which the LORD thy God giveth thee. For all that do such 
things and all that do unright, are abomination unto the LORD thy 
God. Remember what Amalech did unto thee by the way after thou 
camest out of Egypt, he met thee by the way and smote the hindmost 
of you, all that were over laboured and dragged behind, when thou 
wast fainted and weary, and he feared not God. Therefore when the 
LORD thy God hath given thee rest from all thine enemies round 
about, in the land which the LORD thy God giveth thee to inherit 
and possess: see that thou put out the name of Amalech from under 
heaven, and forget not.

Chapter .xxvi.

When thou art come into the land which the LORD thy God giveth 
thee to inherit and hast enjoyed it and dwellest therein: take of 
the first of all the fruit of the earth, which thou hast brought 
in out of the land that the LORD thy God giveth thee and put it in 
a maund and go unto the place which the LORD thy God shall choose 
to make his name dwell there. And thou shalt come unto the priest 
that shall be in those days and say unto him: I knowledge this day 
unto the LORD thy God, that I am come unto the country which the 
LORD sware unto our fathers for to give us. And the priest shall 
take the maund out of thine hand, and set it down before the altar 
of the LORD thy God. And thou shalt answer and say before the LORD 
thy God: The Sirians would have destroyed my father, and he went 
down into Egypt and sojourned there with a few folk and grew there 
unto a nation great, mighty and full of people. And the Egyptians 
vexed us and troubled us, and laded us with cruel bondage. And we 
cried unto the LORD God of our fathers, and the LORD heard our 
voice and looked on our adversity, labour and oppression. And the 
LORD brought us out of Egypt with a mighty hand and a stretched 
out arm and with great terribleness and with signs and wonders. 
And he hath brought us into this place and hath given us this land 
that floweth with milk and honey. And now lo, I have brought the 
first fruits of the land which the LORD hath given me. And set it 
before the LORD thy God and worship before the LORD thy God and 
rejoice over all the good thing which the LORD thy God hath given 
unto thee and unto thine house, both thou the Levite and the 
stranger that is among you. When thou hast made an end of tithing 
all the tithes of thine increase the third year, the year of 
tithing: and hast given it unto the Levite, the stranger, the 
fatherless and the widow, and they have eaten in thy gates and 
filled them selves. Then say before the LORD thy God: I have 
brought thee hallowed things out of mine house: and have given 
them unto the Levite, the stranger, the fatherless and the widow 
according to all the commandments which thou commandest me: I have 
not overskipped thy commandments, nor forgotten them. I have not 
eaten thereof in my mourning nor taken away thereof unto any 
uncleanness, nor spent thereof about any dead corpse: but have 
hearkened unto the voice of the LORD my God, and have done after 
all that he commanded me, look down from thy holy habitation 
heaven and bless thy people Israel and the land which thou hast 
given us (as thou swearest unto our fathers) a land that floweth 
with milk and honey. This day the LORD thy God hath commanded thee 
to do these ordinances and laws. Keep them therefore and do them 
with all thine heart and all thy soul. Thou hast set up the LORD 
this day to be thy God and to walk in his ways and to keep his 
ordinances, his commandments and his laws, and to hearken unto his 
voice. And the LORD hath set thee up this day, to be a several 
people unto him (as he hath promised thee) and that thou keep his 
commandments, and to make thee high above all nations which he 
hath made, in praise, in name and honour: that thou mayst be an 
holy people unto the LORD thy God, as he hath said.

Chapter .xxvij.

And Moses with the elders of Israel commanded the people saying: 
keep all the commandments which I command you this day. And when 
ye be come over Iordan unto the land which the LORD thy God giveth 
thee, set up great stones and plaster them with plaster, and write 
upon them all the words of this law, when thou art come over: that 
thou mayst come into the land which the LORD thy God giveth thee: 
a land that floweth with milk and honey, as the LORD God of thy 
fathers hath promised thee. When ye be come over Iordan, see that 
ye set up these stones which I command you this day in mount Ebal, 
and plaster them with plaster. And there build unto the LORD thy 
God, an altar of stones and see thou lift up no iron upon them: 
But thou shalt make the altar of the LORD thy God of rough stones 
and offer burntofferings thereon unto the LORD thy God. And thou 
shalt offer peaceofferings and shalt eat there and rejoice before 
the LORD thy God. And thou shalt write upon the stones all the 
words of this law, manifestly and well. And Moses with the priests 
the Levites spake unto all Israel saying: take heed and hear 
Israel, this day thou art become the people of the LORD thy God. 
Hearken therefore unto the voice of the LORD thy God and do his 
commandments and his ordinances which I command you this day. And 
Moses charged the people the same day saying: These shall stond 
upon mount Grisim to bless the people, when ye are come over 
Iordan: Simeon, Levi, Iuda, Isachar, Ioseph and BenIamin. And 
these shall stond upon mount Ebal to curse: Ruben, Gad, Asser, 
Zabulon, Dan and Nephthali. And the Levites shall begin and say 
unto all the men of Israel with a loud voice: Cursed be he that 
maketh any carved image or image of metal (an abomination unto the 
LORD, the work of the hands of the craftsman) and putteth it in a 
secret place: And all the people shall answer and say Amen. Cursed 
be he that curseth his father or his mother, and all the people 
shall say Amen. Cursed be he that removeth his neighbour's mark, 
and all the people shall say Amen. Cursed be he that maketh the 
blind go out of his way, and all the people shall say Amen. Cursed 
be he that hindreth the right of the stranger, fatherless and 
widow, and all the people shall say Amen. Cursed be he that lieth 
with his father's wife because he hath opened his father's 
covering, and all the people shall say Amen. Cursed be he that 
lieth with any manner beast, and all the people shall say Amen. 
Cursed be he that lieth with his sister whether she be the 
daughter of his father or of his mother, and all the people shall 
say Amen. Cursed be he that lieth with his mother-in-law, and all 
the people shall say Amen. Cursed be he that smiteth his neighbour 
secretly, and all the people shall say Amen. Cursed be he that 
taketh a reward to slay innocent blood, and all the people shall 
say Amen. Cursed be he that maintaineth not all the words of this 
law to do them, and all the people shall say Amen.

Chapter .xxviij.

If thou shalt hearken diligently unto the voice of the LORD thy 
God, to observe and to do all his commandments which I command 
thee this day. The LORD will set thee on high {an hye} above all 
nations of the earth. And all these blessings shall come on thee 
and over take thee, if thou shalt hearken unto the voice of the 
LORD thy God. Blessed shalt thou be in the town and blessed in the 
fields, blessed shall be the fruit of thy body, the fruit of thy 
ground and the fruit of thy cattle, the fruit of thine oxen, and 
thy flocks of sheep, blessed shall thine almery be and thy store. 
Blessed shalt thou be, both when thou goest out, and blessed when 
thou comest in. The LORD shall smite thine enemies that rise 
against thee before thy face. They shall come out against thee one 
way, and flee before thee seven ways. The LORD shall command the 
blessing to be with thee in thy store houses and in all that thou 
settest thine hand to, and will bless the in the land which the 
LORD thy God giveth thee. The LORD shall make thee an holy people 
unto himself, as he hath sworn unto thee: if thou shalt keep the 
commandments of the LORD thy God and walk in his ways. And all 
nations of the earth shall see that thou art called after the name 
of the LORD, and they shall be afeared of thee. And the LORD shall 
make thee plenteous in goods, in the fruit of thy body, in the 
fruit of thy cattle and in the fruit of thy ground, in the land 
which the LORD sware unto thy fathers to give thee. The LORD shall 
open unto thee his good treasure, even the heaven, to give rain 
unto thy land in due season and to bless all the labours of thine 
hand. And thou shalt lend unto many nations, but shalt not need to 
borrow thyself. And the LORD shall set thee before and not behind, 
and thou shalt be above only and not beneath: if that thou hearken 
unto the commandments of the LORD thy God which I command thee 
this day to keep and to do them. And see that thou bow not from 
any of these words which I command thee this day either to the 
right hand or to the left, that thou wouldest go after strange 
gods to serve them. But and if thou wilt not hearken unto the 
voice of the LORD thy God to keep and to do all his commandments 
and ordinances which I command thee this day: then all these 
curses shall come upon thee and overtake thee: Cursed shalt thou 
be in the town, and cursed in the field, cursed shall thine almery 
be and thy store. Cursed shall be the fruit of thy body and the 
fruit of thy land be and the fruit of thine oxen and the flocks of 
thy sheep. And cursed shalt thou be when thou goest in, and when 
thou goest out. And the LORD shall send upon thee cursing, going 
to nought and complaining in all that thou settest thine hand to, 
whatsoever thou doest: until thou be destroyed and brought to 
nought quickly, because of the wickedness of thine inventions in 
that thou hast forsaken the LORD. And the LORD shall make the 
pestilence cleave unto thee, until he have consumed thee from the 
land whither thou goest to enjoy it. And the LORD shall smite thee 
with swelling, with fevers, heat, burning, weathering, with 
smiting and blasting. And they shall follow thee, until thou 
perish. And the heaven that is over thy head shall be brass, and 
the earth that is under thee, iron. And the LORD shall turn the 
rain of the land unto powder and dust: even from heaven they shall 
come down upon thee, until thou be brought to nought. And the LORD 
shall plague thee before thine enemies: Thou shalt come out one 
way against them, and flee seven ways before them, and shalt be 
scattered among all the kingdoms of the earth. And thy carcass 
shall be meat unto all manner fowls of the air and unto the beasts 
of the earth, and no man shall fray them away. And the LORD will 
smite thee with the botches of Egypt and the emerods, scall and 
manginess, that thou shalt not be healed thereof. And the LORD 
shall smite thee with madness, blindness and dazing of heart. And 
thou shalt grope at noonday as the blind gropeth in darkness, and 
shalt not come to the right way. And thou shalt suffer wrong only 
and be polled evermore, and no man shall succour thee: thou shalt 
be betrothed unto a wife, and another shall lie with her. Thou 
shalt build an house and another shall dwell therein. Thou shalt 
plant a vineyard, and shalt not make it common. Thine ox shall be 
slain before thine eyes, and thou shalt not eat thereof. Thine ass 
shall be violently taken away even before thy face, and shall not 
be restored thee again. Thy sheep shall be given unto thine 
enemies, and no man shall help thee. Thy sons and thy daughters 
shall be given unto another nation, and thine eyes shall see and 
daze upon them all day long, but shalt have no might in thine 
hand. The fruit of thy land and all thy labours shall a nation 
which thou knowest not, eat, and thou shalt but suffer violence 
only and be oppressed alway: that thou shalt be clean beside 
thyself for the sight of thine eyes which thou shalt see. The LORD 
shall smite thee with a mischievous botch in the knees and legs, 
so that thou canst not be healed: even from the sole of the foot 
unto the top of the head. The LORD shall bring both thee and thy 
king which thou hast set over thee, unto a nation which neither 
thou nor thy fathers have known, and there thou shalt serve 
strange gods: even wood and stone. And thou shalt go to waste and 
be made an example and a jesting stock unto all nations whither 
the LORD shall carry thee. Thou shalt carry much seed out into the 
field, and shalt gather but little in: for the locusts 
{grasshoppers} shall destroy it. Thou shalt plant a vineyard and 
dress it, but shalt neither drink of the wine neither gather of 
the grapes, for the worms shall eat it. Thou shalt have olive 
trees in all thy coasts, but shalt not be anointed with the oil, 
for thine olive trees shall be rooted out. Thou shalt get sons and 
daughters, but shalt not have them: for they shall be carried away 
captive. All thy trees and fruit of thy land shall be marred with 
blasting. The strangers that are among you shall climb above thee 
up on high, {an hye} and thou shalt come down beneath alow. He 
shall lend thee and thou shalt not lend him, he shall be before 
and thou behind. Moreover all these curses shall come upon thee 
and shall follow thee and overtake thee, till thou be destroyed: 
because thou hearkenedest not unto the voice of the LORD thy God, 
to keep his commandments and ordinances which he commanded thee, 
and they shall be upon thee as miracles and wonders and upon thy 
seed for ever. And because thou servedest not the LORD thy God 
with joyfulness and with a good heart for the abundance of all 
things, therefore thou shalt serve thine enemy which the LORD 
shall send upon thee: in hunger and thirst, in nakedness and in 
need of all things: and he shall put a yoke of iron upon thine 
neck, until he have brought thee to nought. And the LORD shall 
bring a nation upon thee from afar, even from the end of the 
world, as swift as an eagle fleeth: {flyeth} a nation whose tongue 
thou shalt not understand: a hard favoured nation which shall not 
regard the person of the old nor have compassion on the young. And 
he shall eat the fruit of thy land and the fruit of thy cattle 
until he have destroyed thee: so that he shall leave thee neither 
corn, wine, nor oil, neither the increase of thine oxen nor the 
flocks of thy sheep: until he have brought thee to nought. And he 
shall keep thee in all thy cities, until thy high and strong walls 
be come down wherein thou trustedest, thorow all thy land. And he 
shall besiege thee in all thy cities thorowout all thy land which 
the LORD thy God hath given thee. And thou shalt eat the fruit of 
thine own body: the flesh of thy sons and of thy daughters which 
the LORD thy God hath given thee, in that straitness and siege 
wherewith thine enemy shall besiege thee: so that it shall grieve 
the man that is tender and exceeding delicate among you, to look 
on his brother and upon his wife that lieth in his bosom and on 
the remnant of his children, which he hath yet left, for fear of 
giving unto any of them of the flesh of his children, which he 
eateth, because he hath nought left him in that straitness and 
siege wherewith thine enemy shall besiege thee in all thy cities. 
Yea and the woman that is so tender and delicate among you that 
she dare not adventure to set the sole of her foot upon the ground 
for softness and tenderness, shall be grieved to look on the 
husband that lieth in her bosom and on her son and on her 
daughter: even because of the afterbirth, that is come out from 
between her legs, and because of her children which she hath 
borne, because she would eat them for need of all things secretly, 
in the straitness and siege wherewith thine enemy shall besiege 
thee in thy cities. If thou wilt not be diligent to do all the 
words of this law that are written in this book, for to fear this 
glorious and fearful name of the LORD thy God: the LORD will smite 
both thee and thy seed with wonderful plagues and with great 
plagues and of long continuance, and with evil sicknesses and of 
long durance. Moreover he will bring upon thee all the diseases of 
Egypt which thou wast afraid of, and they shall cleave unto thee. 
Thereto all manner sicknesses and all manner plagues which are not 
written in the book of this law, will the LORD bring upon thee 
until thou be come to nought. And ye shall be left few in number, 
wheretofore ye were as the stars of heaven in multitude: because 
thou wouldest not hearken unto the voice of the LORD thy God. And 
as the LORD rejoiced over you to do you good and to multiply you: 
even so he will rejoice over you, to destroy you and to bring you 
to nought. And ye shall be wasted from off the land whither thou 
goest to enjoy it. And the LORD shall scatter thee among all 
nations from the one end of the world unto the other, and there 
thou shalt serve strange gods, which neither thou nor thy fathers 
have known: even wood and stone. And among these nations thou 
shalt be no small season, and yet shalt have no rest for the sole 
of thy foot. For the LORD shall give thee there a trembling heart 
and dazing eyes and sorrow of mind. And thy life shall hang before 
thee, and thou shalt fear both day and night and shalt have no 
trust in thy life. In the morning thou shalt say, would God it 
were night. And at night thou shalt say, would God it were 
morning. For fear of thine heart which thou shalt fear, and for 
the sight of thine eyes which thou shalt see. And the LORD shall 
bring thee into Egypt again with ships, by the way which I bade 
thee that thou shouldst see it no more. And there ye shall be sold 
unto your enemies, for bondmen and bondwomen: and yet no man shall 
buy you.

Chapter .xxix.

These are the words of the appointment which the LORD commanded 
Moses to make with the children of Israel in the land of Moab, 
beside the appointment which he made with them in Horeb. And Moses 
called unto all Israel and said unto them: Ye have seen all, that 
the LORD did before your eyes in the land of Egypt, unto Pharao 
and unto all his servants, and unto all his land, and the great 
temptations which thine eyes have seen and those great miracles 
and wonders: And yet the LORD hath not given you an heart to 
perceive, nor eyes to see, nor ears to hear unto this day. And I 
have led you forty years in the wilderness: and your clothes are 
not waxed old upon you, nor are thy shoes waxed old upon thy feet. 
Ye have eaten no bread nor drunk wine or strong drink: that ye 
might know, how that he is the LORD your God. And at the last ye 
came unto this place, and Sihon the king of Hesbon and Og king of 
Basan came out against you unto battle, and we smote them and took 
their land and gave it an heritance unto the Rubenites and Gadites 
and to the half tribe of Manasse. Keep therefore the word of this 
appointment and do them, that ye may understand all that ye ought 
to do. Ye stond here this day every one of you before the LORD 
your God: both the heads of your tribes, your elders, your 
officers and all the men of Israel: your children, your wives and 
the strangers that are in thine host, from the hewer of thy wood 
unto the drawer of thy water: that thou shouldst come under the 
appointment of the LORD thy God, and under his oath which the LORD 
thy God maketh with thee this day. For to make thee a people unto 
himself, and that he may be unto thee a God, as he hath said unto 
thee and as he hath sworn unto thy fathers Abraham, Isaac and 
Iacob. Also I make not this bond and this oath with you only: but 
both with him that stoodeth here with us this day before the LORD 
our God, and also with him that is not here with us this day. For 
ye know how we have dwelt in the land of Egypt, and how we came 
thorow the midst of the nations which we passed by. And ye have 
seen their abominations and their idols: wood, stone, silver, 
gold, which they had. Lest there be among you man or woman kindred 
or tribe that turneth away in his heart this day from the LORD our 
God, to go and serve the gods of these nations: and lest there be 
among you some root {|rote|} that beareth gall and wormwood, so 
that when he heareth the words of this curse, he bless himself in 
his heart saying: I fear it not, {shall have peace} I will 
therefore walk {work} after the lust of mine own heart, that the 
drunken destroy {may perish with} the thirsty. And so the LORD 
will not be merciful unto him, but then the wrath of the LORD and 
his jealousy, smoke against that man, and all the curses that are 
written in this book light upon him, and the LORD do out his name 
from under heaven, and separate him unto evil out of all the 
tribes of Israel according unto all the curses of the appointment 
that is written in the book of this law. So that the generation to 
come of your children that shall rise up after you and the 
stranger that shall come from a far land, say when they see the 
plagues of that land, and the diseases wherewith the LORD hath 
smitten it, how all the land is burnt up with brimstone and salt, 
that it is neither sown nor beareth, nor any grass groweth 
therein, after the overthrowing of Sodom, Gomor, Adama and Zeboim: 
which the LORD overthrew in his wrath and anger. And then all 
nations also say: wherefore hath the LORD done of this fashion 
unto this land? O how fierce is this great wrath? And men shall 
say: because they left the testament of the LORD God of their 
fathers which he made with them, when he brought them out of the 
land of Egypt. And they went and served strange gods and 
worshipped them: gods which they knew not and which had given them 
nought. And therefore the wrath of the LORD waxed hot upon that 
land to bring upon it all the curses that are written in this 
book. And the LORD cast them out of their land in anger, wrath and 
great furiousness, and cast them into a strange land, as it is 
come to pass this day. The secrets pertain unto the LORD our God 
and the things that are opened pertain unto us and our children 
for ever, that we do all the words of this law.

Chapter .xxx.

When all these words are come upon thee, whether it be the 
blessing or the curse which I have set before thee, yet if thou 
turn unto thine heart among all the nations whither the LORD thy 
God hath thrust thee, and come again unto the LORD thy God and 
hearken unto his voice according to all that I command thee this 
day: both thou and thy children with all thine heart and all thy 
soul: Then the LORD thy God will turn thy captivity and have 
compassion upon thee and go and fetch thee again from all the 
nations, among which the LORD thy God shall have scattered thee. 
Though thou wast cast unto the extreme parts of heaven: even from 
thence will the LORD thy God gather thee and from thence fetch 
thee and bring thee into the land which thy fathers possessed, and 
thou shalt enjoy it. And he will shew thee kindness and multiply 
thee above thy fathers. And the LORD thy God will circumcise thine 
heart and the heart of thy seed for to love the LORD thy God with 
all thine heart and all thy soul, that thou mayst live. And the 
LORD thy God will put all these curses upon thine enemies and on 
them that hate thee and persecute thee. But thou shalt turn and 
hearken unto the voice of the LORD and do all his commandments 
which I command thee this day. And the LORD thy God will make thee 
plenteous in all the works of thine hand and in the fruit of thy 
body, in the fruit of thy cattle and fruit of thy land and in 
riches. For the LORD will turn again and rejoice over thee to do 
thee good, as he rejoiced over thy fathers: If thou hearken unto 
the voice of the LORD thy God, to keep his commandments and 
ordinances which are written in the book of this law, if thou turn 
unto the LORD thy God with all thine heart and all thy soul. For 
the commandment which I command thee this day, is not separated 
from thee neither far off. It is not in heaven, that thou needest 
to say: who shall go up for us into heaven, and fetch it us, that 
we may hear it and do it: Neither is it beyond the sea, that thou 
shouldest say: who shall go over sea for us and fetch it us that 
we may hear it and do it. But the word is very nye unto thee: even 
in thy mouth and in thine heart, that thou do it. Behold I have 
set before you this day life and good, death and evil: in that I 
command thee this day to love the LORD thy God and to walk in his 
ways and to keep his commandments, his ordinances and his laws: 
that thou mayst live and multiply, and that the LORD thy God may 
bless thee in the land whither thou goest to possess it. But and 
if thine heart turn away, so that thou wilt not hear: but shalt go 
astray and worship strange gods and serve them, I pronounce unto 
you this day, that ye shall surely perish and that ye shall not 
prolong your days upon the land whither thou passest over Iordan 
to go and possess it. I call to record this day unto you, heaven 
and earth, that I have set before you life and death, blessing and 
cursing: but choose life, that thou and thy seed may live, in that 
thou lovest the LORD thy God, hearkenest unto his voice and 
cleavest unto him. For he is thy life and the length of thy days, 
that thou mayst dwell upon the earth which the LORD sware unto thy 
fathers: Abraham, Isaac and Iacob to give them.

Chapter .xxxj.

And Moses went and spake these words unto all Israel and said unto 
them: I am an hundred and twenty years old this day, and can no 
more go out and in. Also the LORD hath said unto me, thou shalt 
not go over this Iordan. The LORD your God he will go over before 
thee and he will destroy these nations before thee, and thou shalt 
conquer them. And Iosua he shall go over before thee, as the LORD 
hath said. And the LORD shall do {go} unto them, as he did to 
Sehon and Og kings of the Amorites and unto their lands which 
kings he destroyed. And when the LORD hath delivered them to thee, 
see that ye do unto them according unto all the commandments which 
I have commanded you. Pluck up your hearts and be strong, dread 
not nor be afeared of them: for the LORD thy God himself will go 
with thee, and will neither let thee go nor forsake thee. And 
Moses called unto Iosua and said unto him in the sight of all 
Israel. Be strong and bold, for thou must go with this people unto 
the land which the LORD hath sworn unto their fathers to give 
them, and thou shalt give it them to inherit. And the LORD he 
shall go before thee and he shall be with thee, and will not let 
thee go nor forsake thee, fear not therefore nor be discomforted. 
And Moses wrote this law and delivered it unto the priests the 
sons of Levi which bare the ark of the testament of the LORD, and 
unto all the elders of Israel, and commanded them saying: At the 
end of seven years, in the time of the free year, in the feast of 
the tabernacles, when all Israel is come to appear before the LORD 
thy God, in the place which he hath chosen: see that thou read 
this law before all Israel in their ears. Gather the people 
together: both men, women and children and the strangers that are 
in thy cities, that they may hear, learn and fear the LORD your 
God, and be diligent to keep all the words of this law, and that 
their children which know nothing may hear and learn to fear the 
LORD your God, as long as ye live in the land whither ye go over 
Iordan to possess it. And the LORD said unto Moses: Behold thy 
days are come, that thou must die. Call Iosua and come and stond 
in the tabernacle of witness, that I may give him a charge. And 
Moses and Iosua went and stood in the tabernacle of witness. And 
the LORD appeared in the tabernacle: even in the pillar of the 
cloud. And the pillar of the cloud stood over the door of the 
tabernacle. And the LORD said unto Moses: behold, thou must sleep 
with thy fathers, and this people will go a whoring after strange 
gods of the land whither they go and will forsake me and break the 
appointment which I have made with them. And then my wrath will 
wax hot against them, and I will forsake them and will hide my 
face from them, and they shall be consumed. And when much 
adversity and tribulation is come upon them, then they will say: 
because our God is not among us, these tribulations are come upon 
us. But I will hide my face that same time for all the evil's sake 
which they shall have wrought, in that they are turned unto 
strange gods. Now therefore write ye this song, and teach it the 
children of Israel and put it in their mouths that this song may 
be my witness unto the children of Israel. For when I have brought 
them into the land which I sware unto their fathers that runneth 
with milk and honey, then they will eat and fill them selves and 
wax fat and turn unto strange gods and serve them and rail on me 
and break my testament. And then when much mischief and 
tribulation is come upon them, this song shall answer before them, 
and be a witness. It shall not be forgotten out of the mouths of 
their seed: for I know their imagination which they go about even 
now before I have brought them into the land which I sware. And 
Moses wrote this song the same season, and taught it the children 
of Israel. And the Lord {|LORDE|} gave Iosua the son of Nun a 
charge and said: be bold and strong for thou shalt bring the 
children of Israel into the land which I sware unto them, and I 
will be with thee. When Moses had made an end of writing out the 
words of this law in a book unto the end of them he commanded the 
Levites which bare the ark of the testament of the LORD saying: 
take the book of this law and put it by the side of the ark of the 
testament of the LORD your God, and let it be there for a witness 
unto thee. For I know thy stubbornness and thy stiff neck: behold, 
while I am yet alive with you this day, ye have been disobedient 
unto the LORD: and how much more after my death. Gather unto me 
all the elders of your tribes, and your officers, that I may speak 
these words in their ears and call heaven and earth to record 
against them. For I am sure that after my death, they will utterly 
mar them selves and turn from the way which I commanded you, and 
tribulation will come upon you in the latter days, when ye have 
wrought wickedness in the sight of the LORD to provoke him with 
the works of your hands. And Moses spake in the ears of all the 
congregation of Israel the words of this song, unto the end of 
them.

Chapter .xxxij.

Hear o heaven, what I shall speak and hear o earth the words of my 
mouth. My doctrine drop as doeth the rain, and my speech flow as 
doeth the dew, as the mizzling upon the herbs, and as the drops 
upon the grass. For I will call on the name of the LORD: Magnify 
the might of our God. He is a Rocke and perfect are his deeds, for 
all his ways are with discretion. God is faithful and without 
wickedness, both righteous and just is he. The froward and 
overthwart generation hath marred them selves to himward, and are 
not his sons for their deformities' sake. Dost thou so reward the 
LORD? O foolish nation and unwise. Is not he thy father and thine 
owner? hath he not made thee and ordained thee? Remember the days 
that are past: consider the years from time to time. Ask thy 
father and he will shew thee, thine elders and they will tell 
thee. When the most highest gave the nations an inheritance, and 
divided the sons of Adam, he put the borders of the nations, fast 
by the multitude of the children of Israel. For the LORD's part is 
his folk, and Israel is the portion of his inheritance. He found 
him in a desert land, in a void ground and a roaring wilderness. 
He led him about and gave him understanding, and kept him as the 
apple of his eye. As an eagle that stirreth up her nest and 
fluttereth over her young, he stretched out his wings and took him 
up and bare him on his shoulders. The LORD alone was his guide, 
and there was no strange god with him. He set him up upon an high 
land, and he ate the increase of the fields. And he gave him honey 
to suck out of the rock, and oil out of the hard stone. With 
butter of the kine and milk of the sheep, with fat of the lambs 
and fat rams and he goats with fat kidneys and with wheat. And of 
the blood of grapes thou drunkest wine. And Israel waxed fat and 
kicked. Thou wast fat, thick and smooth. And he let God go that 
made him and despised the rock that saved him. They angered him 
with strange gods and with abominations provoked him. They offered 
unto field devils and not to God, and to gods which they knew not 
and to new gods that came newly up which their fathers feared not. 
Of the rock that begat thee thou art unmindful and hast forgot God 
that made thee. And when the LORD saw it, he was angry because of 
the provoking of his sons and daughters. And he said: I will hide 
my face from them and will see what their end shall be. For they 
are a froward generation and children in whom is no faith. They 
have angered me with that which is no god, and provoked me with 
their vanities; And I again will anger them with them which are no 
people, and will provoke them with a foolish nation. For fire is 
kindled in my wrath, and shall burn unto the bottom of hell. And 
shall consume the earth with her increase, and set afire the 
bottoms of the mountains. I will heap mischiefs upon thee and will 
spend all mine arrows at them. Burnt with hunger and consumed with 
heat and with bitter pestilence. I will also send the teeth of 
beasts upon them and poison serpents. Without forth, the sword 
shall rob them of their children: and within in the chamber, fear: 
both young men and young women and the sucklings with the men of 
gray heads. I have determined to scatter them thorowout the world, 
and to make away the remembrance of them from among men. Were it 
not that I feared the railing of their enemies, lest their 
adversaries would be proud and say: our high hand hath done all 
these works and not the LORD. For it is a nation that hath an 
unhappy forecast, and hath no understanding in them: I would they 
were wise and understood this and would consider their latter end. 
How it cometh that one shall chase a thousand, and two put ten 
thousand of them to flight?: except their rock had sold them, and 
because the LORD had delivered them. For our rock is not as their 
rock, no though our enemies be judge. But their vines are of the 
vines of Sodom, and of the fields of Gomorra. Their grapes are 
grapes of gall, and their clusters be bitter. Their wine is the 
poison of dragons, and the cruel gall of asps. Are not such things 
laid in store with me, and sealed up among my treasures? Vengeance 
is mine and I will reward: their feet shall slide, when the time 
cometh. For the time of their destruction is at hand, and the time 
that shall come upon them maketh haste. For the LORD will do 
justice unto his people, and have compassion on his servants. For 
it shall be seen that their power shall fail, and at the last they 
shall be prisoned and forsaken. And it shall be said: where are 
their gods and their rock wherein they trusted? The fat of whose 
sacrifices they ate, and drank the wine of their drinkofferings, 
let them rise up and help you and be your protection. See now how 
that I, I am he, and that there is no God but I. I can kill and 
make alive, and what I have smitten that I can heal: neither is 
there that can deliver any man out of my hand. For I will lift up 
my hand to heaven, and will say: I live ever. If I whet the 
lightning of my sword, and mine hand take in hand to do justice, I 
will shew vengeance on mine enemies and will reward them that hate 
me. I will make mine arrows drunken with blood, and my sword shall 
eat flesh of the blood of the slain and of the captive and of the 
bare head of the enemy. Rejoice {Praise ye} heathen with his 
people, for he will avenge the blood of his servants, and will 
avenge him of his adversaries, and will be merciful unto the land 
of his people. And Moses went and spake all the words of this song 
in the ears of the people, both he and Iosua the son of Nun. And 
when Moses had spoken all these words unto the end to all Israel, 
then he said unto them. Set your hearts unto all the words which I 
testify unto you this day: that ye command them unto your 
children, to observe and do all the words of this law. For it is 
not a vain word unto you: but it is your life, and thorow this 
word ye shall prolong your days in the land whither ye go over 
Iordan to conquer it. And the LORD spake unto Moses the self same 
day saying: get thee up into this mountain Abarim unto mount Nebo, 
which is in the land of Moab over against Iericho. And behold the 
land of Canaan which I give unto the children of Israel to 
possess. And die in the mount which thou goest upon, and be 
gathered unto thy people: As Aaron thy brother died in mount Hor 
and was gathered unto his people. For ye trespassed against me 
among the children of Israel at the waters of strife, at Cades in 
the wilderness of Zin: because ye sanctified me not among the 
children of Israel. Thou shalt see the land before thee, but shall 
not go thither unto the land which I give the children of Israel.

Chapter .xxxiij.

This is the blessing wherewith Moses God's {gods} man blessed the 
children of Israel before his death saying: The LORD came from 
Sinai and shewed his beams from Seir unto them, and appeared 
gloriously from mount Pharan, and he came with thousands of 
saints, and in his right hand a law of fire for them. How loved he 
the people? All his saints are in his hand. They joined them 
selves unto thy foot and received thy words. Moses gave us a law 
which is the inheritance of the congregation of Iacob. And he was 
in Israel king when he gathered the heads of the people and the 
tribes of Israel together. Ruben shall live and shall not die: but 
his people shall be few in number. This is the blessing of Iuda. 
And he said: hear LORD the voice of Iuda and bring him unto his 
people: let his hands fight for him: but be thou his help against 
his enemies. And unto Levi he said: thy perfectness and thy light 
be after thy merciful man whom thou temptest at Masa and with whom 
thou strivedest at the waters of strife. He that sayeth unto his 
father and mother: I saw him not, and unto his brethren I knew 
not, and to his son I wot not: for they have observed thy words 
and kept thy testament. They shall teach Iacob thy judgements and 
Israel thy laws. They shall put cense before thy nose and whole 
sacrifices upon thine altar. Bless LORD their power and accept the 
works of their hands: smite the backs of them that rise against 
them and of them that hate them: that they rise not again. Unto 
Ben Iamin he said: The LORD's darling shall dwell in safety by him 
and keep himself in the haven by him continually, and shall dwell 
between his shoulders. And unto Ioseph he said: blessed of the 
LORD is his land with the goodly fruits of heaven, with dew and 
with springs that lie beneath: and with fruits of the increase of 
the son and with ripe fruit of the months, and with the tops of 
mountains that were from the beginning and with the dainties of 
hills that last ever, and with goodly fruit of the earth and of 
the fulness thereof. And the goodwill of him that dwelleth in the 
bush shall come upon the head of Ioseph and upon the top of the 
head of him that was separated from among his brethren, his beauty 
is as a firstborn ox and his horns as the horns of an unicorn. And 
with them he shall push the nations together, even unto the ends 
of the world. These are the many thousands of Ephraim and the 
thousands of Manasse. And unto Zabulon he said: Rejoice Zabulon in 
thy going out, and thou Isachar in thy tents. They shall call the 
people unto the hill, and there they shall offer offerings of 
righteousness. For they shall suck of the abundance of the sea and 
of treasure hid in the sand. And unto Gad he said: blessed is the 
rowmmaker Gad. He dwelleth as a lion and caught the arm and also 
the top of the head. He saw his beginning, that a part of the 
teachers were {teacher was} hid there and come with the heads of 
the people, and executed the righteousness of the LORD and his 
judgements with Israel. And unto Dan he said: Dan is a lion's 
whelp, he shall flow from Basan. And unto Nephthali, he said: 
Nephthali he shall have abundance of pleasure and shall be filled 
with the blessing of the LORD and shall have his possessions in 
the southwest. And of Asser he said: Asser shall be blessed with 
children: he shall be acceptable unto his brethren and shall dip 
his foot in oil: Iron and brass shall hang on thy shoes and thine 
age shall be as thy youth. There is none like unto the God of thee 
of Israel: he that sitteth upon heaven shall be thine help, whose 
glory is in the clouds, that is the dwelling place of God from the 
beginning and from under the arms of the world: he hath cast out 
thine enemies before thee and said: destroy. And Israel shall 
dwell in safety alone. And the eyes of Iacob shall look upon a 
land of corn and wine, moreover his heaven shall drop with dew. 
Happy art thou Israel, who is like unto thee? A people that art 
saved by the LORD thy shield and helper and sword of thy glory. 
And thine enemies shall hide them selves from thee, and thou shalt 
walk upon their high hills.

Chapter .xxxiiij.

And Moses went from the fields of Moab up into mount Nebo which is 
the top of Pisga, that is over against Iericho. And the LORD 
shewed him all the land of Gilead even unto Dan, and all Naphthali 
and the land of Ephraim and Manasse, and all the land of Iuda: 
even unto the utmost sea, and the south and the region of the 
plain of Iericho the city of datetrees {palm trees} even unto 
Zoar. And the LORD said unto him. This is the land which I sware 
unto Abraham, Isaac and Iacob saying: I will give it unto thy 
seed. I have shewed it thee before thine eyes: but thou shalt not 
go over thither. So Moses the servant of the LORD died there in 
the land of Moab at the commandment of the LORD. And he buried him 
in a valley in the land of Moab beside Beth Peor: but no man wist 
of his sepulchre unto this day. And Moses was an hundred and 
twenty years old when he died, and yet his eyes were not dim nor 
his cheeks abated. And the children of Israel wept for Moses in 
the fields of Moab thirty days. And the days of weeping and 
mourning for Moses were ended. And Iosua the son of Nun was full 
of the spirit of wisdom: for Moses had put his hand upon him. And 
all the children of Israel hearkened unto him and did as the LORD 
commanded Moses. But there arose not a prophet since in Israel 
like unto Moses, whom the LORD knew face to face, in all the 
miracles and wonders which the LORD sent him to do in the land of 
Egypt, unto Pharao and all his servants and unto all his land: and 
in all the mighty deeds and great terrible things which Moses did 
in the sight of all Israel.

The end of the fifth book of Moses.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

The New Testament first translated into English from the original
tongue
by William Tyndale: printed partially in 1525, and completly in 1526.

The text of Matthew is from the Cologne quarto (1525) fragment; til
Chapter 22:
"The king came in, to visit the guests, and spied there a man which
had not on a wedding garment, and said unto him: friend, how camest
thou in hither, and"

The rest of the New Testament is from the Worms octavo edition of
1526; Also with some few variants [in] {brackets} from W.T. 1534
edition.

� FaithofGod.net (2003) The New Testament first translated in English
from the original tongue by William Tyndale 1525-6; and brought online
to current 'go spelling'.  May be quoted and used freely to profit you
with health in all non-lucre, non-commercial Scripture distribution
endeavors provided the content is not altered.

If you find any transcription error please contact :
valente@faithofgod.net

{Editor's notes at bottom.}

----------------------------------------------------------------------

(Proloque from the Cologne quarto 1525.)

The Prologue.

    I have here translated (brethren and sisters most dear and
tenderly beloved in Christ) the new Testament for your spiritual
edifying, consolation and solace: Exhorting instantly and beseeching
those that are better seen in the tongues than I, and that have
higher gifts of grace to interpret the sense of the Scripture, and
meaning of the Spirit, than I, to consider and ponder my labor, and
that with the spirit of meekness. And if they perceive in any places
that I have not attained the very sense of the tongue, or meaning of
the Scripture, or have not given the right English word, that they
put to their hands to amend it, remembering that so is their duty to
do. For we have not received the gifts of God for ourselves only, or
for to hide them; but for to bestow them unto the honoring of God and
Christ, and edifying of the congregation, which is the body of Christ.

    The causes that moved me to translate, I thought better that
others should imagine, then that I should rehearse them.  Moreover I
supposed it superfluous, for who is so blind tare why light should be
shewed to them that walk in darkness, where they cannot but stumble,
and where to stumble is the danger of eternal damnation, other so
despiteful that he would envy any man (I speak not his brother) so
necessary a thing, or so bedlam made to affirm that good is the
natural cause of blindness, and deafness to proceed out of sight, and
that lying should be grounded in troth and verity, and not rather
seen contrary, that light destroyeth darkness, and verity reproveth
all manner saying.
   After it had pleased God to put in my mind, and also to give me
grace to translate this fore rehearsed new testament into our English
tongue, howsoever we have done it. I supposed it very necessary to
put you in remembrance of certain points, which are: that ye well
understand what these words mean:
    The old testament.
    The new testament.
    The law.
    The gospell.
    Moses.
    Christ.
    Nature.
    Grace.
    Worshipping and believing.
    Deeds and faith;
Lest we ascribe, to the one that which belongeth to the other, and
make of Christ Moses, of the gospell the Law, despise grace and rob
faith: and fall from meek learning unto idle despicions, brawling
and scolding about words.
          ((The old testament.))
    The old testament is a base, where in is written the law and
commandments of God, and the deeds of them which fulfill them, and of
them also which fulfilleth them not.
          ((The new testament))
    The new testament is a base where in are contained the promises
of God, and the deeds of them which believe them or believe them not.
          ((The gospell or evangelion))
    Evangelion (that we call the gospell) is a Greek word; and
signifieth good, merry, glad and joyful tidings, that maketh a man's
heart glad, and maketh him sing, dance, and leap for joy. As when
David had killed Goliah the giant, came glad tidings unto the jewes,
that their fearful and cruel enemy was slain, and they delivered out
of all danger: for gladness whereof, they sung, danced, and were
joyful. In like manner is the Evangelion of God (which we call
Gospel; and the New Testament) joyful tidings; and as some say, a
good hearing published by the apostles throughout all the world, of
Christ the right David how that he hath fought with sin, with death,
and the devil, and overcome them. Whereby all men that were in
bondage to sin, wounded with death, overcome of the devil, are with
out their own merits or deservings, loosed, justified, restored to
life, and saved, brought to liberty, and reconciled unto the favour
of God, and set at one with him again: which tidings as many as
believe, laud praise and thank God; are glad, sing and dance for joy.
          ((with evangelion is called a testament))
    This evangelion or gospell (that is to say, such joyful tidings)
is called the new testament. Because that as a man when he shall die
appointeth his goods to be dealt and distributed after his death
among them which he nameth to be his heirs. Even so Christ before his
death commanded and appointed that such evangelion, gospell, or
tidings should be declared through out all the world, and there with
to give unto all that believe all his goods, that is to say, his
life, where with he swallowed and devoured up death: his
righteousness, where with he banished sin: his salvation, where with
he overcame eternal damnation.  Now can the wretched man (that is
wrapped in sin, and is in danger to death and hell) hear no more
joyous a thing, then such glad and comfortable tidings, of Christ.
So that he cannot but be glad and laugh from the low bottom of his
heart, if he believe that the tidings are true.
    To strength such faith with all, God promised this his evaglion
in the old testament by the prophets (as Paul sayth in the first
chapter unto the romans). How that he was chosen out to preach God's
evangelion, which he before had promised by the prophets in the holy
scriptures that treat of his son which was born of the seed of David.
 In the third chapter of Genesis, God saith to the serpent: I will
put hatred between thee and the woman, between thy seed and her seed,
that self seed shall tread thy head under foot. Christ is this
woman's seed, he it is that hath trodden under foot the devil's seed,
that is to say sin, death, hell, and all his power. For with out this
seed can no man avoid sin, death, hell and everlasting damnation.
    Again Gen. xxij. God promised Abraham saying: by thy seed shall
all the generations of the earth be blessed. Christ is that seed of
Abraham sayth saint Paul in the third to the Galathyans: He hast
blessed all the world through the gospell.  For where Christ is not,
there remaineth the curse that fell on Adam as soon as he had sinned;
So that they are in bondage under the domination of sin, death, and
hell.  Against this curse blesseth now the gospell all the world, in
as much as it crieth openly, who so ever believeth on the seed of
Abraham shall be blessed, that is, he shall be delivered from sin,
death and hell, and shall hence forth continue righteous, living, and
saved for ever, as Christ him self saith (in the xj. of Ihon) He that
believeth on me shall never more die.
    The law (saith the gospell of Ihon in the first chapter) was
given by Moses: but grace and verity by Iesus Christ. The law (whose
mnistrer is Moses) was given to bring us unto the knowledge of our
selves, that we might there by feel and perceive what we are of
nature. The law condemneth us and all our deeds, and is called of
Paul (in the third chap. Of the second pistel unto the Corrinthians)
the ministration of death. For it killeth our consciences and driveth
us to desperation, in as much as it requireth of us that which is
unpossible for us to do. It requireth of us the death of an whole,
man.  It requireth perfect love from the low bottom and ground of the
heart, as well in all things which we suffer, as in those things
which we do. But saith Ihon (in the same place) grace and verity is
given us in Christ. So that when the law hath passed upon us, and
condemned us to death (which is his nature to do) then have we in
Christ grace, that is to say favour, promises of life, of mercy, of
pardon freely by the merits of Christ, and in Christ have we verity
and troth, in that God fulfilleth all his promises to them that
believe. Therefore is the gospell the ministration of life. Paul
calleth it, in the fore rehearsed place of the second chap. To the
Cor. The ministration of the spirit, and of righteousness. In the
gospell when we believe the promises, we receive the spirit of life,
and are justified in the blood of Christ from all things where of the
law condemned us. Of Christ it is written in the fore rehearsed first
chapter of Ihon: This is he of whose abundance, or fullness, all we
have received, grace for grace, or favour for favour. That is to say,
for the favour that God hath to his son Christ, he giveth unto us his
favour, and good will, as a father to his sons. As affirmeth Paul
saying: which loved us in his beloved before the creation of the
world. For the love that God hath to Christ, he loveth us, and not
for our own faith. Christ is made lord over all, and is called in
scripture God's mercy  foretold whosoever flyeth to Christ, can
neither bear nor receive of God any other thing save mercy.
    In the old testament are many promises, which are nothing else
but the evangelion or gospell, to save those that believed them, from
the vengeance of the law. And in the new testament is oft made
mention of the law, to condemn them, which believe not the promises.
Moreover the law and gospell may never be separate: for the gospell
and promises serve but for troubled consciences which are brought to
desperation and feel the pains of hell and death under the law, and
are in captivity and bondage under the law. In all my deeds I must
have the law before me to condemn mine unperfections. For all that I
do (be I never so perfect) is yet damnable sin, when it is compared
to the law, which requireth the ground and bottom of mine heart. I
must therefore have always the law in my sight, that I may be meek in
the spirit, and give God all the laud and praise, ascribing to him
all righteousness, and to my self all unrigteousness and sin. I must
also have the promises before mine eyes, that I despair not, in which
promises I see the mercy, favour, and good will of God upon me in the
blood of his son Christ, which hath made satisfaction for mine
unperfections, and fulfilled from me, that which I could not do.
    Here may ye perceive that two manner of people are sore deceived.
First they which justify them self with outward deeds, in that they
abstain outwardly from that which the law forbiddeth, and do
outwardly that which the law commandeth. They compare them selves to
open sinners and in respect of them justify them selves condemning
the open sinners. They see not how the law requireth love from the
bottom of the heart. If they did they would not condemn their
neighbours. Love hideth the multitude of sins, saith Saynct Peter in
his first pistel. For whom I love from the deep bottom and ground of
mine heart, him condemn I not, neither reckon his sins, but suffer
his weakness and infirmity, as a mother the weakness of her son,
until he grow up in to a perfect man.
    Those also are deceived which with out all fear of God give them
selves unto all manner vices with full consent, and full delectation,
having no respect to the law of God (under whose vengeance they are
locked up in captivity) but say: god is merciful and christ died for
us, supposing that such dreaming and imagination is that faith which
is so greatly commended in holy scripture. Nay that is not faith, but
rather a foolish opinion springing of their own nature, and is not
given them of the spirit of God. True faith is (as saith the apostle
Paul) the gift of God and is given to sinners after the law hath
passed upon them and hath brought their consciences unto the brim of
desperation, and sorrows of hell.
    They that have this right faith, consent to the law that it is
righteous and good, and justify God which made the law, and have
delectation in the law (not with stonding that they can not fulfill
it, for their weakness) and they abhor what soever the law
forbiddeth, though they cannot avoid it. And their great sorrow is,
because they cannot fulfill the will of God in the law, and the
spirit that is in them crieth to God night and day for strength and
help with tears (as sayth Paul) that cannot be expressed with tongue.
          ((A justiciary))
    The first, that is to say a justiciary, which justifieth him self
with his outward deeds, cosenteth not to the law in ward, neither
hath delectation therein, yee, he would rather that no such law were.
So justifieth he not God, but hateth him as a tyrant, neither careth
he for the promises, but will with his own strength be favour of him
self: no wise glorifieth he God, though he seem outward to do.
          ((A sensual man))
    The second, that is to say the sensual person, as a voluptuous
swine, neither feareth God in his law, neither is thankful to him for
his promises and mercy, which is set forth in Christ to all them that
believe.
          ((A Christen man.))
    The right Christen man consenteth to the law that it is
righteous, and justifieth God in the law, for he affirmeth that God
is righteous and just, which is author of the law, he believeth the
promises of God, and so justifieth God, judging him true and
believing that he will fulfill his promises. With the law he
condemneth him self and all his deeds, and giveth all the praise to
God. He believeth the promises, and ascribeth all troth to god, thus
every where justifieth he God, and praiseth God.
          ((Nature.))
    By nature through the fall of Adam, are we the children of wrath,
heirs of the vengeance of God by birth, yee and from our conception,
we have our fellowship with the damned devils under the power of
darkness and rule of satan, while we are yet in our mother's wombs,
though we shew not forth the fruits of sin, yet are we full of the
natural poison where of all sinful deeds spring, and cannot but sin
outwards (be we never so young) if occasion be given, for our nature
is to do sin, as is the nature of a serpent to sting. And as a
serpent yet young, or yet un-brought forth is full of poison, and
cannot afterward (when the time is come and occasion given) but bring
forth the fruits there of. And as an edder, a toad, or a snake is
hated of man, (not for the evil that it hath done, but for the poison
that is in it and hurt which it cannot but do) So are we hated of God
for that natural poison which is conceived and born with us, before
we do any outward evil. And as the evil, which a venomous worm doeth,
maketh it not a serpent: but be cause it is a venomous worm.
Therefore doeth it evil and poisoneth. And as the fruit maketh not
the tree evil: but because it is an evil tree, therefore bringeth it
forth evil furit, when the season of fruit is. Even so do not our
evil deeds make us evil: but because that of nature we are evil,
therefore we both think and do evil, and are under vengeance, under
the law, convicted to eternal damnation by the law, and are contrary
to the will of God in all our will, and in all things consent to the
will of the land.
    By grace (that is to say by favour) we are plucked out of Adam
the ground of all evil, and grafted in Christ the root of all
goodness. In Christ God loved us his elect and chosen, before the
world began, and referred us unto the knowledge of his son and of his
holy gospell, and when the gospell is preached to us he openeth our
hearts, and giveth us grace to believe and putteth the spirit of
Christ in us, and we know him as our father most merciful, and
consent to the law, and love it inwardly in our heart, and desire to
fulfill it, and sorrow because we cannot, which will (sin we of
frailty never so much) is sufficient till more strength be given us,
the blood of Christ hath made satisfaction for the rest: the blood of
Christ hath obtained all things for us of God. Christ is our
satisfaction, redeemer, deliverer, saviour from vengeance and wrath.
Observe and mark in the pistels of Paul, and Peter, and the gospell
and pistels of Ihon what Christ is unto us.
          ((faith, love, works))
    By faith are we never with out love and good works, yet is our
saving imputed neither to love nor unto good works, but unto faith
only. For love and works are under the law which requireth
perfection, and the ground and fountain of the heart, and damneth all
imperfections. Now is faith under the promises, which damn not: but
give all grace, mercy and favour, and whatsoever is contained in the
promises.
          ((Righteousness other wise justifying or justice))
    Righteousness is divers; Blind reason imagineth many matter of
righteousnesses. As the just ministration of all manner of laws, and
the observing of them, and moral virtues were in philosophers put
their felicity and blessedness, which all are nothing in the sight of
God. There is in like manner the justifying of ceremonies, some
imagine them their own selves, some counterfeit other, saying in
their blind reason: such holy persons did thus and thus, and they
were holy men, therefore if I do so like wise I shall please God: but
they have none answer of God, that that pleaseth. The jewes seek
righteousness in their ceremonies which God gave unto them, not for
to justify: but to describe and paint Christ unto them, of which
jewes testifieth Paul saying how that they have affection to God: but
not after knowledge, for they go about to stablish their own justice,
and are not obedient to the justice or righteousness that cometh of
God. The cause is verily, that except a man cast away his own
imagination and reason, he cannot perceive God, and understand the
virtue and power of the blood of Christ. There is the righteousness
of works (as I said before) when the heart is away, they feel not how
the law is spiritual and cannot be fulfilled, but from the bottom of
the heart. There is a full righteousness, when the law is fulfilled
from the ground of the heart. This had neither Peter nor Paul in this
life perfectly: but sighed after it. They were so far forth blessed
in Christ, that they hungered and thirsted after it. Paul had this
thirst, he consented to the law of God, that it ought so to be, but
he found an other lust in his members contrary to the lust and desire
of his mind, and therefore cried out saying: Oh wretched man that I
am: who shall deliver me from this body of death, thanks be to God
thorow Iesus Christ. The righteousness that before God is of value,
is to believe the promises of God, after the law hath confounded the
conscience. As when the temporal law oft times condemneth the thief
or murderer and bringeth him to execution, so that he saith nothing
before him but present death, and then cometh good tidings, a charter
from the King and delivereth him. Likewise when God's law hath
brought the sinner into knowledge of him self, and hath confounded
his conscience, and opened unto him the wrath and vengeance of God,
then cometh good tidings, the Evangelion sheweth unto him the
promises of God in Christ, and how that Christ hath purchased pardon
for him hath satisfied the law for him, and appeased the wrath of
God, and the poor sinner believeth, laudeth and thanketh God, thorow
Christ, and breaketh out into exceeding inward joy and gladness, for
that he hath escaped so great wrath, so heavy vengeance, so fearful
and so everlasting a death, and he hence forth is an hungered, and at
thirst after more righteousness, that he might fulfill the law, and
mourneth continually commending his weakness unto God in the blood of
our saviour Christ Iesus.
        Here shall ye see compendiously and plainly set out
        the order and practice of every thing afore rehearsed.
              (Adam bringeth us to bondage.)
    The fall of Adam hath made us heirs of the vengeance and wrath of
God, and heirs of eternal damnation; And hath brought us into
captivity and bondage under the devil; And the devil is our lord, and
our ruler, our head, our governor, our prince, yee and our god. And
our will is locked and knit faster unto the will of the devils, then
cond an hundred thousand chains bind a man unto a post. Unto the
devils' will consent we, with all our hearts, with all our minds,
with all our might, power, strength, will and lust. With what
poisoned, deadly, and venomous hate, hateth a man his enemy; With how
great malice of mind inwardly do we slay and murder; With what
violence and rage, ye and with how fervent lust commit we advoutry,
fornication, and such like uncleanness: with what pleasure and
delectation inwardly serveth a glutton his belly; With what diligence
deceive we; How busily seek we things of the world; Whatsoever we do,
think, or imagine, is abominable in the sight of God. And we are as
it were asleep in so deep blindness, that we can neither see, nor
feel in what misery, thralldom, and wretchedness we are in, till
Moses come and wake us, and publish he the law. When we hear the law
truly preached, how that we ought to love and honour God with all our
strength and might, from the low bottom of the heart: and our
neighbours (yee our enemies.) as our selves inwardly from the ground
of the heart, and to do whatsoever God biddeth, and abstain from
whatsoever God forbiddeth, with all love and meekness, with a fervent
and a burning lust, from the center of the heart, then beginneth the
conscience to rage against the law, and against God; No less (be it
never so great a tempest) is so unquiet. It is not possible for a
natural man to consent to the law, that it should be good, or that
God should be righteous, which maketh the law. Man's wit, reason, and
will, are so fast glued, yee nailed and chained unto the will of the
devil. Neither can any creature lowse the bonds, save the blood of
Christ.
              (( Christ letteth us at liberty ))
    This is the captivity and bondage whence Christ delivered us,
redeemed, and lowsed us. His blood, his death, his patience, in
suffering rebukes and wrongs, his prayers and fastings, his meekness
and fulfilling of the utmost point of the law, appeased the wrath of
God, brought the favor of God to us again, obtained that God should
love us first, and be our father, and that a merciful father, that
will consider our infirmities and weakness, and will give us his
spirit again (which was taken away in the fall of Adam) to rule
govern and strength us, and to break the bonds of Satan, where in we
were so strait bound.
              ((The evangleion bringeth faith, faith bringeth love:
love worketh))
When Christis thus wise preached, and the promises rehearsed, which
are contained in the prophets, in the psalms, and in divers places of
the five books of Moses: then the hearts of them which are elect and
chosen, begin to meek soft, and to melt at the bounteous mercy of
God, and kindness shewed of Christ. For when the evangelion is
preached, the spirit of God entereth in to them which God hath
ordained and appointed unto eternal life, and openeth there inward
eyes, and worketh such belief in them.
When the wofull consciences feel and taste how sweet a thing the
bitter death of Christ is, and how merciful and loving God is through
Christ's purchasing and merits; They begin to love again, and to
consent to the law of God, how that it is good, and ought so to be,
and that God is righteous which made it; And desire to fulfill the
law, even as a sick man desireth to be whole, and are anhungered, and
athirst after more righteousness, and after more strength, to fulfill
the law more perfectly. And in all that they do, or omit and leave
undone, they seek God's honour, and his will with meekness, ever
condemning the unperfectness of their deeds by the law.
          ((Christ bringeth all goodness freely,
          and giveth an ensample how to be stow in godly.))
    Now Christ stondeth us in double sted, and serveth us two manner
ways. First he is our redeemer, deliverer, reconciler, mediator,
intercessor, advocate, attorney, solicitor, our hope, comfort,
shield, protection, defender, strength, health, satisfaction, and
salvation. His blood, his death, all that he ever did, is ours. And
Christ him self, with all that he is or can do, is ours. His blood
sheding and all that he did, doeth me as good service, as though I my
self had done it. And God (as great as he is) is mine with all that
he hath, thorow Christ and his purchasing.
    Secondarily after that we be overcome with love and kindness, and
now seek to do the will of God (which is a christen man's nature)
Then have we Christe an ensample to counterfeit, as saith Christ him
self in Ihon: I have given you an ensample. And in an other
evangelist, he saith; He that will be great among you shall be your
servant and minister, as the son of man came to minister and not to
be ministered onto.
          ((Faith receiveth of God, and love bestoweth the same on
his neighbour.))
And Paul saith: Counterfeit Christ. And Peter saith: Christ died for
you, and left you an ensample to follow his steps. Whatsoever
therefore faith hath received of God thorow Christ's blood and
deserving, that same must love shed out everywhere, and bestow it on
our neighbours unto their profit, yee and that though they be our
enemies. By faith we receive of God, and by love we shed out again.
And that must we do freely after the ensample of Christ with out any
other respect, save our neighbour's wealth only, and neither look for
reward in earth, nor yet in heaven for our deeds: but of pure love
must we bestow ourselves, all that we have, and all that we are able
to do, even on our enemies to bring them to God, considering nothing
but their wealth, as Christ did ours.
     ((A true christyn man believeth that heaven is his already by
Christ's purchasing,
  And therefore loveth, and worketh, to honour God only, and to draw
all things to God.))
Christ did not his deeds to obtain heaven thereby (that had been a
madness) heaven was his already, he was heir thereof, it was his by
inheritance: but did them freely for our sakes, considering no thing
but our wealth, and to bring the favour of God to us again, and us to
God. As no natural son that is his father's heir, doeth his father's
will because he would be heir, that he is already by birth: his
father gave him that yer he was born, and is lothther that he should
go with out it, then he himself hath wit to be: but of pure love
doeth he that he doeth. And ask him why he doeth any thing that he
doeth, he answereth: my father bade, it is my father's will, it
pleaseth my father. Bond servants work for hire, Children for love.
For their father with all he hath, is theirs already. So doeth a
christen man freely all that he doeth, considereth nothing but the
will of God, and his neighbour's wealth only. If I live chaste, I do
it not to obtain heaven thereby. For then should I do wrong to the
blood of Christ: Christ's blood hath obtained me that, Christ's
merits have made me heir thereof. He is both door and way thither
wards. Neither that I look for an heir room in heaven, then they
shall have which live in wedlock, other then a hoar of the stews (if
she repent) for that were the pride of lucifer: But freely to wait on
the evangelion, and to serve my brother with all, even as one hand
helpeth another, or one member another, because one feeleth another's
grief, and the pain of the one is the pain of the other. Whatsoever
is done to the least of us (whether it be good or bad) it is done to
Christ. And whatsoever is done to my brother (if I be a christen man)
that same is done to me: neither doeth my brother's pain grieve me
less then mine own. If it were not so: how saith Paul: let him that
rejoiceth, rejoice in the Lord: that is to say Christ, which is lord
over all creatures. If my merits obtained me heaven, or an higher
room there, then had I where in I might rejoice besides the Lord.
          ((To bynd and lowse.))
    Here see ye the nature of the law, and the nature of the
evangelion. How the Law bindeth and damneth all men, and the
Evangelion lowseth them again. The law goeth before, and the
evangelion followeth. When a preacher preacheth the Law, he bindeth
all consciences, and when he preacheth the Gospell, he loveth them
again. These two salves (I mean the Law and the Gospell) useth God
and his preacher to heal and cure sinners withall. The law driveth
out the disease, and maketh it appear, and is a sharp salve, and a
fretting coursey, and killeth the deed fleshly, and lowseth and
draweth the sores out by the roots, and all corruption. It pulleth
from a man the trust and confidence that he hath in him self, and in
his own works, merits, deservings and ceremonies. It killeth him,
sendeth him down to hell, and bringeth him to utter desperation, and
prepareth the way of the lord, as it is written of Ihon the Baptist:
for it is not possible that Christ should come to a man, as long as
he trusteth in him self, or in any worldly thing. Then cometh the
Evengelion, a more gentle plaster, which sowpleth, and swageth the
wounds of the conscience, and bringeth health. It bringeth the spirit
of God, which lowseth the honds of satan, and coupleth us to God and
his will thorow strong faith and fervent love, with bonds too strong
for the devil, the world, or any creature to lowse them.
        ((A christen man feeleth the working of the holy ghost in his
soul:
        and in all tribulations and adversities fealeth God a
merciful father and a loving.))
And the poor and wretched sinner feeleth so great mercy, love, and
kindness in God, that he is sure in him self how that it is not
possible that God should forsake him, or withdraw his mercy and love
from him. And boldly crieth out with Paul saying: Who shall separate
us from the love that God loveth us withall? That is to say: what
shall make me believe that God loveth me not? Shall tribulation?
Anguish? Persecution? Shall hunger? Nakedness? Shall a sword? Nay, I
am sure that neither death, nor life, neither angel, neither rule,
nor power, neither present things, nor things to come, neither high
nor low, neither any creature able to separate us from the love of
God which is in Christ Iesu our lord. In all such tribulations a
Christen man perceiveth that God is his father, and loveth him, even
as he loved Christ when he shed his blood on the cross. Finally, as
before, when I was bond to the devil and his will, I wrought all
manner evil and wickedness, not for hell's sake which is there ward
of sin, but be cause I was heir of hell by birth and bondage to the
devil, did I evil. For I would none other ways do; to do sin was my
nature. Even so now since I am coupled to God by Christ's blood, do I
well, not for heaven's sake: but be cause I am heir of Heaven by
grace and Christ's purchasing, and have the spirit of God, I do good
freely, for so is my nature. As a good tree bringeth forth good
fruit, and an evil tree evil fruit. By the fruits shall ye know what
the tree is: a man's deeds declare what he is within but make him
neither good nor bad &c. We must be first evil yer we do evil, as a
serpent is first poisoned yer he poison. We must be also good yer we
do good yer we do good, as the fire must be first hot yer it warm any
thing. Take an ensample. As those blind which are cured in the
evangelion, could not see till Christ had given them sight; And deaf
could not hear, till Christ had given them hearing; And those sick
could not do the deeds of an whole man, till Christ had given them
health: So can no man do good in his soul, till Christ have lowsed
him out of the bonds of satan, and have given him where with to do
good, yee and first have poured into him that self good thing which
he sheddeth forth afterward on other. Whatsoever is our own is sin.
Whatsoever is above that, is Christ's gift, purchase, doing, and
working. He bought it of his father derely with his blood, yee with
his most bitter death and gave his life for it. Whatsoever good thing
is in us, that is given us freely with out our deserving or merits
for Christ's blood's sake. That we desire to follow the will of God,
it is the gift of Christ's blood. That we now hate the devil's will
(where unto we were so fast locked, and could not but love it) is
also the gift of Christ's blood, unto whom belongeth the praise and
honour of our good deeds, and not unto us.

----------------------------------------------------------------------


(Preface of the Worms octavo edition of 1526.)

To the Reader.

    Give diligence, reader (I exhort thee) that thou come with a pure
mind, and, as the Scripture saith, with a single eye, unto the words
of health and of eternal life, by the which (if we repent and believe
them) we are born anew, created afresh, and enjoy the fruits of the
blood of Christ. Which blood crieth not for vengeance, as the blood
of Abel, but hath purchased life, love, favor, grace, blessing, and
whatsoever is promised in the Scriptures, to them that believe and
obey God, and standeth between us and wrath, vengeance, curse, and
whatsoever the Scripture threateneth against the unbelievers and
disobedient, which resist, and consent not in their hearts to the law
of God, that it is right, holy, just, and ought so to be.
    Mark the plain and manifest places of the Scriptures, and in
doubtful places see thou add no interpretation contrary to them; but
(as Paul saith) let all be conformable and agreeing to the faith.
    Note the difference of the Law and of the Gospell. The one asketh
and requireth, the other pardoneth and forgiveth. The one
threateneth, the other promiseth all good things to them that set
their trust in Christ only. The gospel signifieth glad tidings, and
is nothing but the promises of good things. All is not gospel that is
written in the gospel book: for if the law were away, thou couldest
not know what the gospel meant, even as thou couldest not see pardon,
favor, and grace except the law rebuked thee, and declared unto thee
thy sin, misdeed, and trespass.
    Repent and believe the gospel, as saith Christ in the first of
Mark. Apply alway the Law to thy deeds, whether thou find lust (1) in
the bottom of thine heart to the law-ward, and so shalt thou no doubt
repent, and feel in thyself a certain sorrow, pain, and grief to
thine heart, because thou canst not with full lust do the deeds of
the law. Apply the gospel that is to say the promises unto the
deserving of Christ, and to the mercy of God and his truth, and so
shalt thou not despair, but shall feel God as a kind and a merciful
father. And his spirit shall dwell in thee, and shall be strong in
thee, and the promises shall be given thee at the last (though not by
and by, lest thou shouldest forget thyself, and be negligent) and all
threatenings shall be forgiven thee for Christ's blood's sake to whom
commit thyself altogether without respect either of thy good deeds or
of thy bad.
    Them that are learned Christianly I beseech forasmuch as I am
sure, and my conscience beareth me record, that of a pure intent,
singly and faithfully I have interpreted it, as far forth as God gave
me the gift of knowledge and understanding that the rudeness of the
work now at the first time offend them not, but that they consider
how that I had no man to counterfeit, neither was helped with English
of any that had interpreted the same or such like things in the
Scripture beforetime. Moreover, even very necessity and cumbrance
(God is record) above strength which I will not rehearse, lest we
should seem to boast ourselves caused that many things are lacking
which necessarily are required. Count it as a thing not having his
full shape, but as it were born before his time, even as a thing
begun rather than finished. In time to come (if God have appointed us
thereunto) we will give it his full shape, and put out if aught be
added superfluously, and add to if aught be overseen through
negligence, and will enforce to bring to compendiousness that which
is now translated at the length, and to give light where it is
required, and to seek in certain places more proper English, and with
a table to expound the words which are not commonly used and shew how
the Scripture useth many words which are otherwise understood of the
common people, and to help with a declaration where one tongue taketh
not another; and will endeavor ourselves, as it were, to seeth (2) it
better, and to make it more apt for the weak stomachs; desiring them
that are learned and able, to remember their duty, and to help
thereunto, and to bestow unto the edifying of Christ's body (which is
the congregation of them that believe) those gifts which they have
received of God for the same purpose. The grace that cometh of Christ
be with them that love him. Pray for us.

(1) "Lust" here is used in a good sense: eagerness to obey.
(2) "Seeth" means "boil, cook."

----------------------------------------------------------------------


THE NEW TESTAMENT

as it was written, and
caused to be written,
by them which he-
ard it. To whom
also our sa-
viour
Christ Iesus
commanded that
they should pre-
ach it unto all
creatures.

----------------------------------------------------------------------


The Books Contained in
the new Testament

i     The gospell of Saynct Mathew
ij    The gospell of S. Marke
iij   The gospell of S. Luke
iiij  The gospell of S. Ihon
iv    The acts of the apostles written by S. Luke
vj    The epistel of S. Paul to the Romans
vij   The first epistel of S. Paul to the Corrinthians
viij  The second epistel of S. Paul to the Corrinthians
ix    The pistel of S. Paul to the Galathians.
x     The pistel of S. Paul to the Ephesians.
xj    The pistel of S. Paul to the Philippians
xij   The pistel of S. Paul to the Collossians
xiij  The first pistel of S. Paul to the Tessalonians
xiiij The second pistel of S. Paul to the Tessalonians
xv    The first pistel of S. Paul to Timothe.
xvj   The second pistel of S. Paul to Timothe.
xvij  The pistel of S. Paul to Titus
xviij The pistel of S. Paul unto Philemon
xix   The first pistel of S. Peter
xx    The second pistel of S. Peter
xxj   The first pistel of S. Ihon
xxij  The second pistel of S. Ihon
xxiij The third pistel of S. Ihon

         The pistel unto the Ebrues
         The pistle of S. Iames
         The pistle of Iude
         The revelation of Ihon.

----------------------------------------------------------------------


The gospell of Saynct Mathew

The first Chapter.

    This is the book of the generation of Iesus Christ the son of
David, the son also of Abraham.
    Abraham begat Isaac:
Isaac begat Iacob:
Iacob begat Iudas and his brethren:
Iudas begat Phares: and Zaram of Thamar:
Phares begat Esrom:
Esrom begat Aram:
Aram begat Aminadab:
Aminadab begat Naasson:
Naasson begat Salmon:
Salmon begat Boos of Rahab:
Boos begat Obed of Ruth:
Obed begat Iesse:
Iesse begat David the king:
     David the king begat Solomon, of her that was the wife of Ury:
Solomon begat Roboam:
Roboam begat Abia:
Abia begat Asa:
Asa begat Iosaphat:
Iosaphat begat Ioram:
Ioram begat Osias:
Osias begat Ioatham:
Ioatham begat Athas:
Athas begat Ezechias:
Ezechias begat Manasses:
Manasses begat Amon:
Amon begat Iosias:
Iosias begat Iechonias and his brethren about the time of the
captivity of Babylon.
    After they were led captive to Babylon, Iechonias begat
Salathiel:
Salathiel begat Zorobabel:
Zorobabel begat Abiud:
Abiud begat Eliachim:
Eliachim begat Azor:
Azor begat Sadoc:
Sadoc begat Achin:
Achin begat Eliud:
Eliud begat Eleasar:
Eleasar begat Matthan:
Matthan begat Iacob:
Iacob begat Ioseph the husband of Mary, of whom was born that Iesus
which is called Christ.
    All the generations from Abraham to David are fourteen
generations. And from David unto the captivity of Babylon, are
fourteen generations. And from the captivity of Babylon unto Christ,
are also fourteen generations.
    The birth of Christ was on this wise, when his mother Mary was
married unto Ioseph, before they came to dwell together, she was
found with child by the holy ghost. Then her husband Ioseph being a
perfect man, and loth to defame her, was minded to put her away
secretly. While he thus thought, behold, the angel of the lord
appeared unto him in sleep saying: Ioseph the son of David, fear not
to take unto thee, Mary thy wife. For that which is conceived in her,
is of the holy ghost. She shall bring forth a son, and thou shalt
call his name Iesus. For he shall save his people from their sins.
    All this was done to fulfil that which was spoken of the lord, by
the prophet saying: Behold a maid shall be with child, and shall
bring forth a son, and they shalt call his name Emanuel, which is as
much to say, by interpretation, as God with us.
    Ioseph as soon as he awoke out of sleep, did as the angel of the
lord bade him, and took his wife unto him, and knew her not, till she
had brought forth her first son, and called his name Iesus.

The Second Chapter.

    When Iesus was born in Bethlehem a town of Iury, in the time of
king Herod, behold, there came wise men from the east to Ierusalem
saying: Where is he that is born king of the jewes? We have seen his
star in the east, and are come to worship him.
    Herod the king, after he had heard this, was troubled, and all
Ierusalem with him, and he sent for all the chief priests and scribes
of the people, and demanded of them where Christ should be born. They
said unto him: in Bethlehem a town of Iury. For thus it is written by
the prophet: And thou Bethlehem in the land of Iury, shalt not be the
least as pertaining to the princes of Iuda. For out of thee shall
come a captain, which shall govern my people Israhel.
    Then Herod privily called the wise men, and diligently enquired
of them, the time of the star that appeared. And sent them to
Bethlehem saying: when ye be come thither search diligently for the
child. And when ye have found him bring me word, that I may come and
worship him also. When they had heard the king, they departed, and lo
the star which they saw in the east went before them, until it came
and stood over the place where the child was. When they saw the star,
they were marvellously glad. And entered into the house, and found
the child with Mary his mother, and kneeled down and worshipped him,
and opened their treasures, and offered unto him gifts, gold,
frankincense, and myrrh. And after they were warned in their sleep,
that they should not go again to Herod, they returned into their own
country another way.
    After that they were departed, lo the angel of the lord appeared
to Ioseph in his sleep saying: arise and take the child and his
mother, and fly into Egypt, and abide there till I bring thee word.
For Herod will seek the child to destroy him. Then he arose, and took
the child and his mother by night, and departed into Egypt, and was
there unto the death of Herod, to fulfil that which was spoken of the
lord, by the prophet, which saith: out of Egypt have I called my son.
    Then Herod perceiving that he was mocked of the wise men, was
exceeding wroth, and sent forth and slew all the children that were
in Bethlehem, and in all the coasts thereof, as many as were two year
old and under, according to the time which he had diligently searched
out of the wise men.
    Then was fulfilled, that which was spoken by the prophet Ieremy,
saying: On the hills was a voice heard, mourning, weeping, and great
lamentation. Rachel weeping for her children, and would not be
comforted, because they were not.
    When Herod was dead, lo an angel of the lord appeared unto Ioseph
in Egypt saying: arise and take the child and his mother, and go into
the land of Israhel. For they are dead, which sought the child's
death. Then he arose up, and took the child and his mother, and came
into the land of Israhel. But when he heard that Archelaus did reign
in Iury, in the room of his father Herod, he was afraid to go
thither. Notwithstanding after he was warned in his sleep, he turned
aside into the parts of Galilee, and went and dwelt in a city called
Nazareth, to fulfil, that which was spoken by the prophets: He shall
be called of Nazareth.

The third Chapter.

    In those days Ihon the Baptizer, came and preached in the
wilderness of Iury saying: repent, the kingdom of heaven is at hand.
This is he of whom it is spoken by the prophet Isay, which saith: The
voice of a crier in wilderness, prepare the lorde's way, and make his
paths straight.
    This Ihon had his garment of camel's hair, and a girdle of a skin
about his loins. His meat was locusts and wild honey. Then went out
to him Ierusalem, and all Ieury, and all the region round about
Iordan, and were baptised of him in Iordan, knowledging their sins.
    When he saw many of the pharisees and of the Saduces come to his
baptism, he said unto them: O generation of vipers, who hath taught
you to flee from the vengeance to come? bring forth therefore the
fruits belonging to repentance. And see that ye once think not to say
in yourselves, we have Abraham to our father. For I say unto you,
that God is able of these stones, to raise up children unto Abraham.
Even now is the axe put unto the root of the trees: so that every
tree which bringeth not forth, good fruit, shall be hewn down, and
cast into the fire.
    I baptise you in water, in token of repentance, but he that
cometh after me, is mightier than I: whose shoes I am not worthy to
bear. He shall baptise you with the holy ghost, and with fire, which
hath also his fan in his hand, and will purge his flour, and gather
the wheat into his garner, and will burn the chaff with everlasting
fire.
    Then came Iesus from Galilee into Iordan to Ihon, for to be
baptised of him. But Ihon forbade him saying: I ought to be baptised
of thee: and comest thou too me? Iesus answered and said to him, let
it be so now. For thus it becometh us, to fulfil all righteousness.
Then he suffered him. And Iesus as soon as he was baptised, came
straight out of the water: And lo heaven was open unto him: and he
saw the spirit of God descend like a dove, and light upon him. And lo
there came a voice from heaven saying: this is that my dear son, in
whom is my delight.

The fourth Chapter.

    Then was Iesus led away of the spirit in to a desert, to be
tempted of the devil. And when he had fasted forty days and forty
nights, at the last he was an hungered. Then came until him the
tempter, and said: if thou be the son of God, command that these
stones be made bread. He answered and said: it is written, man shall
not live only by bread, But by every word that proceedeth out of the
mought of God.
    Then the devil took him up into the holy city, and set him on a
pinnacle of the temple, and said unto him: if thou be the son of God,
cast thyself down. For it is written, he shall give his angels charge
over thee, and with their hands they shall stey thee up, that thou
dash not thy foot against a stone. Iesus said to him, it is written
also: thou shalt not tempt thy lord God.
    The devil took him up again and led him into an exceeding high
mountain, and shewed him all the kingdoms of the world, and the
beauty of them, and said unto him: all these will I give thee, if
thou wilt fall down and worship me. Then said Iesus unto him, avoid
Satan. For it is written, thou shalt worship thy lord God, and him
only, shalt thou serve.
    Then the devil left him, and lo the angels came and ministered
unto him.
    When Iesus had heard that Ihon was taken, he departed into
Galilee, and left Nazareth, and went and dwelt in Capernaum, which is
a city upon the sea, in the coasts of Zabulon and Nephthalim, to
fulfil that which was spoken by Isay the prophet, saying: Behold the
land of Zabulon and Nephthalim, the way of the sea beyond Iordan,
Galilee of the Gentiles, the people which sat in darkness, saw great
light. And to them which sat in the region and shadow of death, light
is sprong.
    From that time Iesus began to preach, and to say: Repent, for the
kingdom of heaven is at hand.
    As Iesus walked by the sea of Galilee, he saw two brethren: Simon
which was called Peter, and Andrew his brother, casting a net into
the sea (for they were fishers) and he said unto them, follow me, and
I will make you fishers of men. And they straightway left their nets,
and followed him.
    And he went forth from thence, and saw other two brethren, Iames
the son of Zebedee, and Ihon his brother in the ship, with Zebedee
their father, mending their nets, and called them. And they without
tarrying left the ship and their father and followed him.
    And Iesus went about all Galilee, teaching in their synagogues,
and preaching the gospel of the kingdom, and healing all manner of
sickness, and all manner diseases among the people. And his fame
spread abroad throughout all Syria. And they brought unto him all
sick people, that were taken with divers diseases and gripings, and
them that were possessed with devils, and those which were lunatic,
and those that had the palsy. And he healed them. And there followed
him a great number of people, from Galilee, and from the ten cities,
and from Ierusalem, and from Iury, and from the regions that lie
beyond Iordan.

The fifth Chapter.

    When he saw the people he went up into a mountain, and when he
was set, his disciples came to him, and he opened his mouth, and
taught them saying: Blessed are the poor in spirit: for theirs is the
kingdom of heaven. Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall be
comforted. Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the earth.
Blessed are they which hunger and thirst for righteousness: for they
shall be filled. Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain
mercy. Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God. Blessed
are the maintainers of peace: for they shall be called the children
of God. Blessed are they which suffer persecution for righteousness'
sake: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are ye when men
shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall falsely say all manner
of evil sayings against you for my sake. Rejoice, and be glad, for
great is your reward in heaven. For so persecuted they the prophets
which were before your days.
    Ye are the salt of the earth: but and if the salt be once
unsavory, what can be salted there with? It is thence forth good for
nothing, but to be cast out at the doors, and that men tread it under
feet. Ye are the light of the world. A city that is set on an hill,
cannot be hid, neither do men light a candle and put it under a
bushel, but on a candlestick, and it lighteth all them which are in
the house. See that your light so shine before men, that they may see
your good works, and glorify your father which is in heaven.
    Ye shall not think, that I am come to disannul the law, other the
prophets: no I am not come to disannul them, but to fulfil them. For
truly I say unto you, till heaven and earth perish, one iott, or one
tytle of the law shall not scape, till all be fulfilled.
    Whosoever breaketh one of these least commandments, and teacheth
men so, he shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven. But
whosoever shall observe and teach them, that person shall be called
great in the kingdom of heaven.
    For I say unto you except your righteousness exceed the
righteousness of the scribes and pharisees, ye cannot enter into the
kingdom of heaven.
    Ye have heard how it was said unto them of the old time: Thou
shalt not kill. Whosoever shall kill, shall be in danger of
judgement. But I say unto you, whosoever is angry with his brother,
shall be in danger of judgement. Whosoever shall say unto his brother
raca, shall be in danger of a council. But whosoever say unto his
brother thou fool, shall be in danger of hell fire. Therefore when
thou offerest thy gift at the altar, and there rememberest that thy
brother hath anything against thee: leave there thine offering before
the altar, and go thy way first and reconcile thyself to thy brother,
and then come and offer thy gift.
    Agree with thine adversary at once, whiles thou art in the way
with him, lest thine adversary deliver thee to the judge, and the
judge deliver thee to the minister, and then thou be cast into
prison. I say unto thee verily: thou shalt not come out thence till
thou have paid the utmost farthing.
    Ye have heard how it was said to them of old time, thou shalt not
commit advoutry. But I say unto you, that whosoever eyeth a wife,
lusting after her, hath committed advoutry with her already in his
heart.
    Wherefore if thy right eye offend thee, pluck him out, and cast
him from thee. Better it is for thee that one of thy members perish
than that thy whole body should be cast into hell. Also if thy right
hand offend thee, cut him off and cast him from thee. Better it is
that one of thy members perish, than that all thy body should, be
cast into hell.
    It is said, whosoever put away his wife, let him give her a
testimonial of her divorcement. But I say unto you: whosoever put
away his wife, (except it be for fornication) causeth her to break
matrimony. And whosoever marrieth her that is divorced, breaketh
wedlock.
    Again ye have heard, how it was said to them of old time, thou
shalt not forswear thyself, but shalt perform thine oath to God. But
I say unto you swear not at all: neither by heaven, for it is God's
seat: nor yet by the earth, for it is his footstool: Neither by
Ierusalem, for it is the city of that great king: neither shalt thou
swear by thy head, because thou canst not make one white hair, or
black: But your communication shall be, yea, yea: nay, nay. For
whatsoever is more than that, cometh of evil.
    Ye have heard how it is said, an eye for an eye: a tooth for a
tooth. But I say to you, that ye withstand not wrong: But if a man
give thee a blow on thy right cheek, turn to him the other. And if
any man will sue thee at the law, and take thy coat from thee, let
him have thy cloak also. And whosoever will compel thee to go a mile,
go with him twain. Give to him that asketh: and from him that would
borrow turn not away.
    Ye have heard how it is said: thou shalt love thine neighbor, and
hate thine enemy. But I say unto you, love your enemies. Bless them
that curse you. Do good to them that hate you. Pray for them which do
you wrong, and persecute you, that ye may be the children of your
heavenly father: for he maketh his sun to arise, on the evil, and on
the good, and sendeth his rain on the just and unjust. For if ye
shall love them, which love you: what reward shall ye have? Do not
the publicans even so? And if ye be friendly to your brethren only:
what singular thing do ye? Do not the publicans likewise? Ye shall
therefore be perfect, even as your heavenly father is perfect.

The sixth Chapter.

    Take heed to your alms. That ye give it not in the sight of men,
to the intent that ye would be seen of them. Or else ye get no reward
of your father in heaven. Whensoever therefore thou givest thine
alms, thou shalt not make a trumpet to be blown before thee, as the
hypocrites do in the synagogues, and in the streets, for to be
praised of men. Verily I say unto you, they have their reward. But
when thou doest thine alms, let not thy left hand know, what thy
right hand doth, that thine alms may be secret, and thy father which
seeth in secret, shall reward thee openly.
    And when thou prayest, thou shalt not be as the hypocrites are.
For they love to stand and pray in the synagogues, and in the corners
of the streets, because they would be seen of men. Verily I say unto
you, they have their reward. But when thou prayest, enter into thy
chamber, and shut thy door to thee, and pray to thy father which is
in secret: and thy father which seeth in secret, shall reward thee
openly.
    But when ye pray, babble not much, as the gentiles do: for they
think that they shall be heard, for their much babbling's sake. Be ye
not like them therefore. For your father knoweth whereof ye have
need, before ye ask of him. After this manner therefore pray ye.
    O our father, which art in heaven hallowed be thy name. Let thy
kingdom come. Thy will be fulfilled, as well in earth, as it is in
heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And forgive us our
trespasses, even as we forgive them which trespass us. Lead us not in
to temptation: but deliver us from evil, [For thine is the kingdom
and the power, and the glory for ever.] Amen. For and if ye shall
forgive other men their trespasses, your father in heaven shall also
forgive you. But and ye will not forgive men their trespasses, no
more shall, your father forgive your trespasses.
    Moreover when ye fast, be not sad as the hypocrites are. For they
disfigure their faces, that it might appear unto men that they fast.
Verily I say unto you, they have their reward. But thou when thou
fastest, anoint thine head, and wash thy face, that it appear not
unto men how that thou fastest: but unto thy father which is in
secret: and thy father which seeth in secret, shall reward thee
openly.
    Gather not treasure together on earth, where rust and moths
corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal. But gather ye
treasures together in heaven, where neither rust, nor yet moths
corrupt: and where thieves neither break up, nor yet steal. For
wheresoever your treasure is, there are your hearts also.
    The light of the body is thine eye. Wherefore if thine eye be
single, all thy body is full of light. But and if thine eye be
wicked, then is all thy body full of darkness. Wherefore if the light
that is in thee, be darkness: how great is that darkness?
    No man can serve two masters. For either he shall hate the one,
and love the other: or else he shall lean to the one, and despise
that other. Ye cannot serve God and mammon. Therefore I say unto you,
be not careful for your life what ye shall eat, or what ye shall
drink, nor yet for your body, what raiment ye shall wear. Is not the
life more worth then meat? and the body more of value then raiment?
Behold the fowls of the air: for they sow not, neither reap, nor yet
carry into the barns, and yet your heavenly father feedeth them. Are
ye not better than they?
    Which of you (though he took thought therefore) could put one
cubit unto his stature? And why care ye then for raiment? Behold the
lilies of the field, how they grow. They labor not, neither spin. And
yet for all that I say unto you, that even Solomon in all his
royalty, was not arrayed like unto one of these. Wherefore if God so
clothe the grass, which is today in the field, and tomorrow shall be
cast into the furnace: shall he not much more do the same unto you, o
ye of little faith?
    Therefore take no thought saying: what shall we eat, or what
shall we drink, or wherewith shall we be clothed? (After all these
things seek the gentiles) For your heavenly father knoweth that ye
have need of all these things. But rather seek ye first the kingdom
of heaven, and the righteousness thereof, and all these things shall
be ministered unto you. Care not therefore for the day folowing. For
the day folowing shall care for itself. Each days trouble is
sufficient for the sameself day.

The .vij. Chapter.

    Judge not lest ye be judged. For as ye judge, so shall ye be
judged. And with what measure ye mete, with the same shall it be
measured to you again. Why seest thou a mote in thy brother's eye,
and perceivest not the beam that is in thine own eye? Or why sayest
thou to thy brother: suffer me to pluck out a mote out of thine eye,
and behold a beam is in thine own eye. Hypocrite, first cast out the
beam out of thine own eye, and then shalt thou see clearly to pluck
out the mote out of thy brother's eye.
    Give not that which is holy to dogs, neither cast ye your pearls
before swine, lest they tread them under their feet, and the other
turn again and all to rent you.
    Ask and it shall be given you: Seek and ye shall find, knock and
it shall be opened unto you. For whosoever asketh receiveth, and he
that seeketh findeth, and to him that knocketh, it shall be opened.
Is there any man among you which would proffer his son a stone if he
asked him bread? Or if he asked fish, would he proffer him a serpent?
If ye then which are evil, can give to your children good gifts: how
much more shall your father, which is in heaven, give good things, to
them that ask of him?
    Therefore whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, even so
do ye to them. This is the law and the prophets.
    Enter in at the strait gate: for wide is the gate, and broad is
the way that leadeth to destruction: and many there be, which go in
thereat. For strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, which leadeth
unto life: and few there be, that find it.
    Beware of false prophets, which come to you, in sheep's clothing,
but inwardly they are ravening wolves. Ye shall know them by their
fruits. Do men gather grapes of thorns? Or figs of briars? Even so
every good tree, bringeth forth good fruit. But a corrupt tree,
bringeth forth evil fruit. A good tree cannot bring forth bad fruite:
nor yet a bad tree can bring forth good fruit. Every tree, that
bringeth not forth good fruit, shall be hewn down, and cast into the
fire. Wherefore by their fruits ye shall know them. Not all they that
say unto me, master, master, shall enter in to the kingdom of heaven:
But he that fulfilleth my father's will which is in heaven. Many will
say to me in that day, master, master, have we not in thy name
prophesied? and in thy name have we not cast out devils? and in thy
name have we not done many miracles. And then will I knowledge unto
them, that I never knew them. Depart from me, ye workers of iniquity.
    Whosoever heareth of me these sayings, and doeth the same, I will
liken him unto a wise man, which built his house on a rock: and
abundance of rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew,
and beat upon that same house, and it was not overthrown because it
was grounded on the rock. And whosoever heareth of me these sayings,
and doth not the same, shall be likened unto a foolish man, which
built his house upon the sand, and abundance of rain descended, and
the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house, and it
was overthrown, and great was the fall of it.
    And it came to pass, that when Iesus had ended these sayings, the
people were astonied at his doctrine. For he taught them as one
having power, and not as the scribes.

The .viij. Chapter.

    When Iesus was come down from the mountain, much people followed
him. And lo, there came a leper, and worshipped him saying: master,
if thou wilt, thou canst make me clean. He put forth his hand and
touched him saying: I will, be clean, and immediately his leprosy was
cleansed. And Iesus said unto him. See thou tell no man, but go and
shew thyself to the priest and offer the gift, that Moses commanded
to be offered in witness to them.
    When Iesus was entered into Capernaum, there came unto him a
certain Centurion, beseching him, and saying: master, my servant
lieth sick at home of the palsy, and is grievously pained. And Iesus
said unto him: I will come and cure him. The Centurion answered and
said: Sir, I am not worthy that thou shouldest come under the roof of
my house, but speak the word only, and my servant shall be healed.
For I also myself am a man under power, and have soldiers under me,
and I say to one, go, and he goeth: and to another, come, and he
cometh: and to my servant, do this, and he doeth it. When Iesus heard
these sayings: he marvelled, and said to them that followed him:
Verily I say unto you, I have not found so great faith: no, not in
Israell. I say therefore unto you, that many shall come from the east
and west, and shall rest with Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, in the
kingdom of heaven: and the children of the kingdom shall be cast out
into the utmost darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth. Then Iesus said unto the Centurion, go thy way, and as thou
believed so be it unto thee. And his servant was healed that same
hour.
    And Iesus went to Peter's house, and saw his wife's mother lying
sick of a fever, and he touched her hand, and the fever left her: and
she arose, and ministered unto them.
    When the even was come they brought unto him many that were
possessed with devils, and he cast out the spirits with a word, and
healed all that were sick, to fulfil that which was spoken by Esay
the prophet saying: he took on him our infirmities, and bare our
sicknesses.
    When Iesus saw much people about him, he commanded to go over the
water. And there came a scribe and said unto him: master, I will
follow thee whithersoever thou goest. And Iesus said unto him: the
foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have nests, but the son of
the man hath not whereon to lay his head: Another that was one of his
Disciples said unto him: master suffer me first, to go and bury my
father. But Iesus said unto him: follow me, and let the dead bury
their dead.
    And he entered into a ship, and his Disciples followed him. And
lo there arose a great storm in the sea, insomuch, that the ship was
hid with waves, and he was asleep. And his Disciples came unto him,
and awoke him, saying: master, save us, we perish. And he said unto
them: why are ye fearful, o ye endowed with little faith? Then he
arose, and rebuked the winds and the sea, and there followed a great
calm. And men marvelled and said: what man is this, that both winds
and sea obey him?
    And when he was come to the other side, into the country of the
Gergesites, there met him two possessed of devils, which came out of
the graves, and were out of measure fierce, so that no man might go
by that way. And lo they cried out saying: O Iesu the son of God,
what have we to do with thee? art thou come hither to torment us
before the time be come? There was a good way off from them a great
herd of swine feeding. Then the devils besought him saying: if thou
cast us out, suffer us to go our way into the herd of swine. And he
said unto them: go your ways. Then went they out, and departed into
the herd of swine. And lo, all the herd of swine was carried with
violence headlong into the sea, and perished in the water. Then the
herdsmen, fled and went their ways into the city, and told
everything, and what had fortuned unto them that were possessed of
the devils. And lo, all the city came out, and met Iesus. And when
they saw him they besought him, to depart out of their coasts.

The .ix. Chapter.

    And he entered into a ship: and passed over and came into his own
city. And lo, they brought unto him a man sick of the palsy, lying in
his bed. And when Iesus saw their faith, he said to the sick of the
palsy: son be of good cheer, thy sins be forgiven thee. And lo
certain of the scribes said in themselves, he blasphemeth. And when
Iesus saw their thoughts, he said: wherefore think ye evil in your
hearts? Whether is easier to say, thy sins be forgiven thee, or to
say: arise and walk? That ye may know, that the son of man hath power
to forgive sins in earth, then said he unto the sick of the palsy:
arise, take up thy bed, and go home to thine house. And he arose and
departed to his house. The people that saw it, marvelled and
glorified God, which had given such power to men.
    And as Iesus passed forth from thence he saw a man sit at the
receit of custom named Matthew, and said to him: follow me. And he
arose and followed him. And it came to pass, that Iesus sat at meat
in his house. And lo, many publicans and sinners, came and sat down
also with Iesus, and his disciples. When the pharisees had perceived
that, they said unto his disciples: why eateth your master with
publicans and sinners? When Iesus heard that, he said unto them: The
whole need not the physician, but they that are sick. Go and learn,
what that meaneth: I have pleasure in mercy, and not in offering. For
I am not come to call the righteous, but the sinners to repentance.
    Then came the disciples of Ihon to him, saying: why do we and the
pharisees fast oft, but thy disciples fast not? And Iesus said unto
them: can the wedding children mourn as long as the bridegroom is
with them? The time will come, when the bridegroom shall be taken
from them, and then shall they fast. No man pieceth an old garment
with a piece of new cloth. For then taketh he away the piece again
from the garment, and the rent is made worse. Neither do men put new
wine, into old vessels: for then the vessels break, and the wine
runneth out, and the vessels perish. But they pour new wine into new
vessels, and so are both saved together.
    While he thus spake unto them, lo, there came a certain ruler,
and worshipped him saying: my daughter is dead already, but come, and
lay thy hand on her, and she shall live. And Iesus arose and followed
him, with his disciples. And behold, a woman which was diseased with
an issue of blood xij. years, came behind him and touched the hem of
his vesture. For she said in herself: If I may touch but even his
vesture only I shall be safe. Iesus turned him about, and beheld her,
saying: daughter be of good comfort, thy faith hath made thee safe.
And she was made whole even that same hour.
    And when Iesus came into the ruler's house, and saw the minstrels
and the people wondering, he said unto them: Get you hence, for the
maid is not dead, but sleepeth. And they laughed him to scorn. As
soon as the people were put forth adoors, he went in and took her by
the hand, and the maid arose. And this was noised throughout all that
land.
    And as Iesus departed thence, two blind men followed him crying,
and saying: O thou son of David, have mercy on us. And when he was
come into the house, the blind came to him. And Iesus said unto them
believe ye that I am able to do this? they said unto him yea master.
Then touched he their eyes saying: according to your faith, be it
unto you. And their eyes were opened. And he charged them, saying:
see that no man know of it. But they as soon as they were departed,
spread abroad his name through out all the land.
    As they went out, behold, they brought to him a dumb man
possessed of a devil. And as soon as the devil was cast out, the dumb
spake. And the people marvelled, saying: it never so appeared in
Israhel. But the pharisees said: he casteth out devils, by the power
of the chief devil.
    And Iesus went about all cities and towns, teaching in their
synagogues, and preaching the gospell of the kingdom. And healing all
manner sickness and disease among the people. But when he saw the
people, he had pity on them, because they were pined away, and
scattered abroad even as sheep, having no shepherd. Then said he to
his disciples: the harvest is great, but the laborers are few.
Wherefore pray the harvest lord, to send forth laborers into his
harvest.

The .x. Chapter.

    And he called his xij. disciples unto him, and gave them power
against unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to heal all manner of
sicknesses, and all manner of diseases.
    The names of the xij. apostles are these. The first Simon which
is called Peter: and Andrew his brother. Iames the son of Zebedee,
and Ihon his brother. Philip and Bartholomew. Thomas and Matthew the
publican. Iames the son of Alphe and Lebbeus, otherwise called
Thaddeus. Simon of Chane, and Iudas Iscariot, which also betrayed
him.
    These xij. sent Iesus, and commanded them saying: Go not into the
ways that lead to the gentiles, and in to the cities of the
samaritans enter ye not: But go rather to the lost sheep of the house
of Israhel. Go and preach saying: how the kingdom of heaven is at
hand. Heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, raise the dead, cast out the
devils. Freely ye have received, freely give again. Possess not gold,
nor silver, neither brass in your girdles, nor yet scrip towards your
journey. Neither two coats, neither shoes, nor yet a rod: for the
workman is worthy to have his meat. Into whatsoever city, or town ye
shall come, enquire who is worthy in it, and there abide till ye go
thence.
    And when ye come into an house greet the same. And if the house
be worthy, your peace shall come upon the same. But if it be not
worthy, your peace shall return to you again. And whosoever shall not
receive you, nor will hear your preaching, when ye depart out of that
house, or that city, shake off the dust of your feet. Truly I say
unto you, it shall be easier for the land of Sodom, and Gomorra, in
the day of judgement, than for that city.
    Lo I send you forth, as sheep among wolves. Be ye therefore wise
as serpents, and innocent as doves. Beware of men, for they shall
deliver you up to the councils, and shall scourge you in their
synagogues. And ye shall be brought to the head rulers and kings for
my sake, in witness to them and to the gentiles.
    But when they put you up take no thought, how, or what ye shall
speak, for it shall be given you even in that same hour, what ye
shall say. For it is not ye that speak, but the spirit of your father
which speaketh in you. The brother shall betray the brother to death,
and the father the son. And the children shall arise against their
fathers, and mothers, and shall put them to death, and ye shall be
hated of all men, for my name. But whosoever shall continue unto the
end, shall be saved.
    When they persecute you in one city, fly into another. I tell you
for a truth, ye shall not finish all the cities of Israhel, till the
son of man be come. The disciple is not above his master: Nor yet the
servant above his lord. It is enough for the disciple to be as his
master is, and that the servant be as his lord is. If they have
called the lord of the house beelzebub: how much more shall they call
them of his household so? Fear them not therefore.
    There is nothing so close, that shall not be opened, and nothing
so hid, that shall not be known.
    What I tell you in darkness, that speak ye in light. And what ye
hear in the ear that preach ye on the house tops.
    And fear ye not them which kill the body, and be not able to kill
the soul. But rather fear him, which is able to destroy both soul and
body in hell. Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing? And none of
them doth light on the ground, without your father. And now are all
the hairs of your heads numbered. Fear ye not therefore, ye are of
more value, than many sparrows.
    Whosoever therefore knowledgeth me before men, him will I
knowledge before my father which is in heaven. But whosoever shall
deny me before men, him will I also deny before my father which is in
heaven.
    Think not, that I am come to send peace into the earth. I came
not to send peace, but a sword. For I am come to set a man at
variance against his father, and the daughter against her mother, and
the daughter in law against her mother in law: And a man's foes shall
be, they of his own household.
    He that loveth his father, or mother more than me, is not worthy
of me. And he that loveth his son, or daughter more than me, is not
meet for me. And he that taketh not his cross and followeth me, is
not meet for me. He that findeth his life, shall lose it: and he that
loseth his life for my sake, shall find it.
    He that receiveth you, receiveth me: and he that receiveth me,
receiveth him that sent me. He that receiveth a prophet in the name
of a prophet, shall receive a prophet's reward. And he that receiveth
a righteous man in the name of a righteous man, shall receive the
reward of a righteous man. And whosoever shall give unto one of these
little ones to, drink a cup of cold water only, in the name of a
disciple: I tell you of a truth, he shall not lose his reward.

The .xj. Chapter.

    And it came to pass when Iesus had ended his precepts unto his
disciples, he departed thence, to preach and teach in their cities.
    When Ihon being in prison heard the works of christ, he sent two
of his disciples and said unto him. Art thou he that shall come: or
shall we look for another. Iesus answered and said unto them. Go and
shew Ihon what ye have heard and seen. The blind see, the halt go,
the lepers are cleansed: The deaf hear, the dead are raised up again,
and the gospel is preached to the poor. And happy is he that is not
hurt by me.
    Even as they departed, Iesus began to speak unto the people of
Ihon. What went ye for to see in the wilderness? went ye out to see a
reed wavering with the wind? other what went ye out for to see? went
ye to see a man clothed in soft raiment? Behold, they that wear soft
clothing are in kings' houses. But what went ye out for to see? went
ye out to see, a prophet? Yea I say unto you, and more than a prophet.
For this is he of whom it is written. Behold, I send my messenger
before thy face which shall prepare thy way before thee.
    Verify I say unto you, among the children of women arose there
not a greater than Ihon baptist. Notwithstanding he that is less in
the kingdom of heaven, is greater than he. From the time of Ihon
baptist hitherto, the kingdom of heaven suffereth violence, and they
that make violence pulleth it to them. For all the prophets, and the
law prophesied unto the time of Ihon. Also if ye will receive it,
this is Helyas, which should come. He that hath ears to hear
whithall, let him hear.
    But whereunto shall I liken this generation? it is like unto
children, which sit in the market, and call unto their fellows, and
say: we have piped unto you, and ye have not danced, we have mourned
unto you, and ye have not sorrowed. For Ihon came, neither eating nor
drinking, and they say, he hath the devil. The son of man came eating
and drinking, and they say, behold a glutton, and drinker of wine,
and a friend unto publicans, and sinners. And wisdom is justified of
her children.
    Then began he to upbraid the cities, in which most of his
miracles were done, because they did not repent. Woe be to thee
Chorasin. Woe be to thee Bethsaida, for if the miracles which were
shewed in you, had been done in Tyre and in Sidon: they had repented
long agone in sackcloth and ashes. Nevertheless I say to you, it
shall be easier for Tyre and Sidon, at the day of judgement, than for
you. And thou Capernaum, which art lift up unto heaven, shalt be
thrust down to hell. For if the miracles which have been done in
thee, had been shewed in Sodom, they had remained to this day.
Nevertheless I say unto you, it shall be easier for Sodom in the day
of judgement, than for thee. Then Iesus answered and said. I praise
thee o father lord of heaven and earth, because thou hast hid these
things from the wise and prudent, and hast opened them unto babes,
even so father, for so it pleased thee. All things are given unto me
of my father. And no man knoweth the son, but thy father neither
knoweth any man the father, save the son, and he to whom the son will
open him.
    Come unto me all ye that labor, and are laden, and I will ease
you. Take my yoke on you, and learn of me, for I am meek, and lowly
in heart: and ye shall find ease unto your souls. For my yoke is
easy, and my burden is light.

The .xij. Chapter.

    In that time went Iesus on the sabbath day thorow the corn, and
his disciples were anhungered, and began to pluck the ears of corn,
and to eat. When the pharisees had seen that, they said unto him:
Behold thy disciples do that which is not lawful to do upon the
sabbath day. He said unto them: Have ye not read what David did, when
he was anhungered, and they also which were with him? How he entered
into the house of God, and ate the hallowed loaves, which were not
lawful for him to eat, neither for them which were with him, but only
for the priests. Or have ye not read in the law, how that the priests
in the temple break the sabbath day, and yet are blameless? But I say
unto you, that here is one greater than the temple. Wherefore if ye
had wist, what this saying meaneth: I require mercy, and not
sacrifice, ye would never have condemned innocents. For the son of
man is lord even of the Sabbath day.
    And he departed thence, and went into their synagogue, and
behold, there was a man, which had his hand dried up. And they asked
him saying: is it lawful to heal upon the sabbath day? because they
might accuse him. And he said unto them: which is he among you, if he
had a sheep fallen into a pit on the sabbath day, that would not take
him and lift him out? And how much is a man better then a sheep?
Wherefore it is lawful to do a good deed on the sabbath day. Then
said he to the man: stretch forth thy hand, and he stretched forth,
and it was again made even as whole as the other.
    Then the pharisees went forth, and took council against him, how
they might destroy him. When Iesus knew that, he departed thence, and
much people followed him, and he healed them all. and charged them,
that they should not make him known, to fulfil that which was spoken
by Esay the prophet, which sayeth: Behold my son, whom I have chosen,
my darling, in whom my soul hath had delight. I will put my spirit on
him, and he shall shew judgement to the gentiles. He shall not
strive, he shall not cry, neither shall any man hear his voice in the
streets, a bruised reed, shall he not break, and flax that beginneth
to burn he shall not quench, till he send forth judgement unto
victory, and in his name shall the gentiles trust.
    Then was brought to him, one possessed with a devil which was
both blind and dumb, and he healed him, insomuch that he which was
blind and dumb, both spake and saw. And all the people were amazed,
and said: Is not this the son of David? When the pharisees heard
that, they said: he driveth the devils no other wise out, but by the
help of belzebub the chief of the devils.
    But Iesus knew their thoughts, and said to them. Every kingdom
divided with in itself shall be desolate. Neither shall any city or
household divided against itself, continue. So if satan cast out
satan, then is he divided against him self. How shall then his
kingdom endure? Also if I by the help of belzebub cast out devils: by
whose help do your children cast them out? therefore they shall be
your judges: But if I cast out the devils by the spirit of God: then
is the kingdom of God come on you?
    Either how can a man enter into a mighty man's house, and
violently take away his goods, except he first bind the strong man,
and then spoil his house? He that is not with me, is against me: And
he that gathereth not with me, scattereth abroad. Wherefore I say
unto you, all manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men,
but the blasphemy against the holy ghost, shall not be forgiven unto
men. And whosoever speaketh a word against the son of man, it shall
be forgiven him: but whosoever speaketh against the holy ghost, it
shall not be forgiven him: no, neither in this world, neither in the
world to come.
    Either make the tree good, and his fruit good also, or else make
the tree evil, and his fruit evil also. For the tree is known by his
fruit. O generation of vipers, how can ye say well, when ye
yourselves are evil? For of the abundance of the heart, the mouth
speaketh. A good man out of the good treasure of his heart, bringeth
forth good things. And an evil man out of his evil treasure, bringeth
forth evil things. But I say unto you, that of every idle word, that
men shall have spoken, they shall give accounts at the day of
judgement. For by thy words thou shalt be justified: and by thy words
thou shalt be condemned.
    Then answered certain of the scribes and of the pharisees saying:
Master, we would fain see a sign of thee. He answered them saying:
the evil and advoutrous generation seeketh a sign, but there shall no
sign be given to them, but the sign of the prophet Ionas. For as
Ionas was iij days, and iij nights, in the whale's belly: so shall
the son of man be iij days and iij nights in the heart of the earth.
The men of Nineveh shall rise at the day of judgement, with this
nation, and condemn them: for they repented at the preaching of
Ionas. And behold a greater than Ionas is here. The queen of the
south shall rise at the day of judgement with this generation, and
shall condemn them: for she came from the utmost parts of the world,
to hear the wisdom of Solomon. And behold here is a greater than
Solomon.
    When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walketh
throughout dry places, seeking rest, and findeth none. Then he
sayeth: I will return again into my house, from whence I came out.
And when he is come, he findeth the house empty and swept, and
garnished. Then he goeth his way, and taketh vij. spirits worse than
him self, and so enter they in and dwell there. And the end of that
man is worse than the beginning. Even so shall it be to this froward
nation.
    While he yet talked to the people: behold, his mother and his
brethren stood without the doors, desiring to speak with him. Then
one said unto him: behold thy mother and thy brethren stand without,
desiring to speak with thee.
    He answered and said to him that told him: Who is my mother? or
who are my brethren? And he stretched forth his hand over his
disciples, and said: Behold my mother and my brethren. For whosoever
fulfilleth my father's will which is in heaven, he is my brother, my
sister, and my mother.

The .xiij. Chapter.

    The same day went Iesus out of the house, and sat by the sea
side, and much people resorted unto him, so greatly that he went, and
sat in a ship, and all the people stood on the shore. And he spake
many things to them in similitudes, saying: Behold, the sower went
forth to sow, and as he sowed, some fell by the ways side, and the
fowls came, and devoured it up. Some fell upon stony ground where it
had not much earth, and anon it sprong up, because it had no depth of
earth: and when the sun was up, it caught heat, and for lack of
rooting withered away. Some fell among thorns, and the thorns arose,
and choked it. Part fell in good ground, and brought forth good
fruit: some an hundred fold, some fifty {or sixty} fold, some thirty
fold. Whosoever hath ears to hear, let him hear.
    And his disciples came, and said to him: Why speakest thou to
them in parables? He answered and said unto them: It is given unto
you to know the secrets of the kingdom of heaven, but to them it is
not given. For whosoever hath, to him shall be given: and he shall
have abundance. But whosoever hath not: from him shall be taken away
even that same that he hath. Therefore speak I to them in
similitudes: for though they see, they see not: and hearing they hear
not: nether understand. And in them is fulfilled the prophecy of
Esay, which prophecy saith: with your ears ye shall hear, and shall
not understand, and with your eyes ye shall see, and shall not
perceive. For this people's heart is waxed gross: And their ears were
dull of hearing, and their eyes have they closed, lest they should
see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and should understand
with their hearts, and should turn, that I might heal them.
    But blessed are your eyes, for they see, and your ears, for they
hear. Verily I say unto you, that many prophets and perfect men have
desired to see those things which ye see, and have not seen them: and
to hear those things which ye hear, and have not heard them. Hear ye
therefore the similitude of the sower. When a man heareth the word of
the kingdom, and understandeth it not, there cometh the evil man, and
catcheth away that which was sown in his heart. And this is he which
was sown by the way side. But he that was sown in the stony ground is
he, which heareth the word of God, and anon with joy receiveth it,
yet hath no roots in himself, and therefore dureth but a season: for
as soon as tribulation or persecution ariseth because of the word, by
and by he falleth. He that was sown among thorns, is he, that heareth
the word of God, but the care of this world, and the deceitfulness of
riches choke the word, and so is he made unfruitful. He which is sown
in the good ground, is he, that heareth the word and understandeth
it, which also beareth fruit and bringeth forth, some an hundred
fold, some fifty {or sixty} fold, and some thirty fold.
    Another similitude put he forth, unto them saying: The kingdom of
heaven is like unto a man which sowed good seed in his field. But
while men slept, there came his foe, and sowed tares among the wheat,
and went his way. When the blade was sprung up, and had brought forth
fruit, then appeared the tares also. The servants came to the
householder, and said unto him: Sir sowest not thou good seed in thy
close, from whence then hath it tares? He said to them, the envious
man hath done this. Then the servants said unto him: wilt thou then
that we go and gather it? and he said, nay, lest while ye go about to
weed out the tares, ye pluck up also with them the wheat by the
roots: let both grow together till harvest come, and in time of
harvest, I will say yea unto my reapers, gather ye first the tares,
and bind them in sheaves to be brent: but gather the wheat into my
barn.
    Another parable he put forth unto them saying. The kingdom of
heaven is like unto a grain of mustard seed, which a man taketh and
soweth in his field, which is the least of all seeds. But when it is
grown, it is the greatest among herbs, and is a tree: so that the
birds of the air come, and build in the branches of it.
    Another similitude said he to them. The kingdom of heaven is like
unto leaven which a woman took and hideth in iij pecks of meal, till
all was leavened.
    All these things spake Iesus unto the people by similitudes, and
without similitudes spake he nothing to them, to fulfil that which
was spoken by the prophet saying: I will open my mouth in
similitudes, and will speak forth things which have been kept secret
from the beginning of the world.
    Then sent Iesus the people away, and came to house, and his
disciples came unto him, saying: declare unto us the similitude of
the tares of the field: Then answered he and said to them. He that
soweth the good seed, is the son of man, the field is the world. The
children of the kingdom are the good seed. The evil man's children
are the tares. But the enemy which soweth it, is the devil. The
harvest is the end of the world, and the reapers be the angels. For
even as the tares are gathered, and brent in the fire: so shall it be
in the end of this world. The son of man shall send forth his angels,
and they shall gather out of his kingdom all things that do hurt, and
all them which do iniquity, and shall cast them into a furnace of
fire. There shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth. Then shall the
just men shine as bright as the son in the kingdom of their father.
whosoever hath ears to hear, let him hear.
    Again the kingdom of heaven is like unto treasure hid in the
field, the which a man found and hid it: and for joy thereof goeth
and selleth all that he hath, and buyeth that field.
    Again the kingdom of heaven is like unto a merchant, seeking good
pearls, which when he had found one precious pearl, went and sold all
that he had, and bought it.
    Again the kingdom of heaven is like unto a net cast into the sea,
that gathereth of all kinds of fishes: the which when it is full, men
draw to land, and sit and gather the good into their vessels and cast
the bad away. So shall it be at the end of the world. The angels
shall come and sever the bad from the good, and shall cast them into
a furnace of fire, there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth.
    Iesus said unto them: have ye understood all these things: they
said, yea sir. Then said he unto them: Therefore every scribe which is
conning unto the kingdom of heaven, is like an householder, which
bringeth forth, out of his treasure, things both new and old.
    And it came to pass when Iesus had finished these similitudes
that he departed thence, and came in to his own country, and taught
them in their synagogues, in so much that they were astonied, and
said: whence came all this wisdom and power unto him? is not this the
carpenter's son? is not his mother called Mary? and his brethren be
called, Iames and Ioses and Simon and Iudas? and are not his sisters
all here with us? Whence hath he all these things. And they were hurt
by him. Then Iesus said unto them: there is no prophet without
honour, save in his own country, and among his own kin. And he did
not many miracles there, for their unbelief's sake.

The .xiiij. Chapter.

    In that time Herod the tetrarcha heard of the fame of Iesu, and
said unto his servants: This is Ihon baptist, he is risen again from
death, and therefore his power is so great. For Herod took Ihon and
bound him, and put him in prison for Herodias' sake, his brother
Philip's wife: for Ihon said unto him: it is not lawful for thee to
have her. And when he would have put him to death, he feared the
people, because they counted him as a prophet.
    When Herode's birthday was come, the daughter of Herodias danced
before them, and pleased Herod. Wherefore he promised with an oath,
that he would give her whatsoever she would ask. And she being
informed of her mother before, said give me here Ihon baptist's head
in a platter. And the King sorrowed: nevertheless for his oath's
sake, and for their sakes which sat also at the table, he commanded
it to be given her. And sent and beheaded Ihon in the prison: and his
head was brought in a platter, and given to the damsel, and she
brought it to her mother. And his disciples came, and took up his
body, and buried it: And went and told Iesus.
    When Iesus heard that, he departed thence by ship into a desert
place out of the way. And when the people had heard thereof, they
followed him afoot out of their cities. And Iesus went forth and saw
much people: and his heart did melt upon them, and he healed of them
those that were sick. When even was come, his disciples came to him
saying. This is a desert place, and the day is spent, let the people
depart that they may go into the towns, and buy them vitailles. But
Iesus said unto them: They have no need to go away: Give ye them to
eat. Then said they unto him: we have here but v. loaves, and two
fishes. He said: bring them hither to me. And he commanded, the
people to sit down on the grass, and took the v. loaves, and the ij.
fishes, and looked up to heaven, and blessed, and brake and gave the
loaves to his disciples, and the disciples gave them to the people.
And they all ate, and were sufficed. And they gathered up of the
gobbets that remained xij baskets full. They that ate were in number
about v. M. men, besides women and children.
    And straightway Iesus made his disciples enter into a ship, and
to go over before him, while he sent the people away. And as soon as
he had sent the people away, he went up into a mountain alone to
pray. And when night was come he was there himself alone. and the
ship was in the middes of the sea, and was tossed with waves, for it
was a contrary wind. In the fourth watch of the night Iesus came unto
them walking on the sea: and when his disciples saw him walking on
the sea, they were amazed, saying: it is some spirit, and cried out
for fear. And straightway Iesus spake unto them saying: be of good
cheer, it is I, be not afraid.
    Peter answered, and said: master, and thou be he, bid me come
unto thee on the water. and he said come. And when Peter was come
down out of the ship, he walked on the water, to go to Iesus. But
when he saw a mighty wind, he was afraid. And as he began to sink, he
cried saying: master save me. And immediately Iesus stretched forth
his hand, and caught him, and said to him: O thou of little faith:
wherefore didst thou doubt? And as soon as they were come into the
ship, the wind ceased. Then they that were in the ship came and
worshipped him, saying: of a truth thou art the son of God. And when
they were come over, they went in to the land of Genazareth. And when
the men of that place had knowledge of him, they sent out into all
that country round about, and brought unto him all that were sick,
and besought him, that they might touch the border of his vesture
only. And as many as touched it, were made safe.

The .xv. Chapter.

    Then came to Iesus: scribes and pharisees from Ierusalem, saying:
why do thy disciples transgress the traditions of the seniors? for
they wash not their hands, when they eat bread. He answered, and said
unto them: why do ye also transgress the commandment of God, thorow
your traditions? for God commanded, saying: honour thy father and
mother, and he that speaketh evil against his father or mother, shall
suffer death. But ye say, every man shall say to his father or
mother: whatsoever thing I offer, that same doth profit thee, and so
shall he not honour his father and mother. And thus have ye made,
that the commandment of God is with out effect, through your
traditions. Hypocrites, well prophesied of you, Esay saying: This
people draweth nigh unto me with their mouths, and honoureth me with
their lips, yet their hearts are far from me: but in vain they
worship me teaching doctrine, which is nothing but men's precepts.
    And he called the people unto him, and said to them: hear and
understand. That which goeth into the mouth, defileth not the man:
but that which cometh out of the mouth, defileth the man.
    Then came his disciples, and said unto him: perceivest thou, how
that the pharisees are offended hearing this saying? He answered, and
said: all plants which my heavenly father hath not planted, shall be
plucked up by the roots. Let them alone, they be the blind leaders of
the blind. If the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the
ditch.
    Then answered Peter and said to him: declare unto us this
parable. Then said Iesus: are ye yet withouten understanding:
perceive ye not, that whatsoever goeth in at the mouth, descendeth
down into the belly, and is cast out into the draught? But those
things which proceed out of the mouth come from the heart, and they
defile a man. For out of the heart come evil thoughts, murder,
breaking of wedlock, whoredom, theft, false witness bearing,
blasphemy. These are the things which defile a man. But to eat with
unwashen hands, defileth not a man.
    And Iesus went thence, and departed into the coasts of Tyre and
Sidon. And behold a woman which was a Canaanite came out of the same
coasts, and cried unto him, saying: have mercy on me lord the son of
David, my daughter is piteously vexed with a devil. And he gave her
never a word to answer. Then came to him his disciples, and besought
him saying: send her away, for she followeth us crying. He answered,
and said: I am not sent, but unto the lost sheep of the house of
Israhel. Then she came and worshipped him, saying: master succor me.
He answered and said: it is not good, to take the children's bread,
and to cast it to whelps. She answered and said: it is truth,
nevertheless the whelps eat of the crumbs, which fall from their
masters' table. Then Iesus answered and said unto her. O woman great
is thy faith, be it to thee, even as thou desirest. And her daughter
was made whole even at that same time.
    Then Iesus went away from thence, and came nigh unto the sea of
Galilee, and went up in to a mountain, and sat down there. And much
people came unto him, having with them, halt, blind, dumb, maimed,
and other many: and cast them down at Iesus' feet. And he healed
them, in so much that the people wondered, to see the dumb speak, the
maimed whole, and the halt to go, the blind to see, and glorified the
God of Israhel.
    Iesus called his disciples to him and said: I have compassion on
the people because they have continued with me now iij days, and have
nothing to eat: and I will not let them depart fasting lest they
perish in the way. And his disciples said unto him: whence should we
get so much bread in the wilderness as should suffice so great a
multitude? And Iesus said unto them: how many loaves have ye? and
they said: seven and a few fishes. And he commanded the people to sit
down on the ground. And took the seven loaves, and the fishes, and
gave thanks, and brake them, and gave to his disciples, and his
disciples gave them to the people. And they all ate and were
sufficed. And they took up of the broken meat that was left vij
baskets full. They that ate were iiij M men, beside women and
children. And he sent away the people, and took ship and came into
the parts of Magdala.

The .xvj. Chapter.

    Then came to him the pharisees with the sadducees also, and did
tempt him, desiring that he would shew them some sign from heaven. He
answered and said unto them: At even ye say, we shall have fair
weather, and that because the sky is red: in the morning: ye say,
today shall be foul weather, and that because the sky is tremulous
and red. O ye hypocrites, ye can discern the fashion of the sky: and
can ye not discern the signs of the times? The froward nation, and
advoutrous, seeketh a sign: there shall none other sign be given unto
them, but the sign of the prophet Ionas. So left he them and
departed.
    And when his disciples were come to the other side of the water,
they had forgotten to take bread with them. Then Iesus said unto
them: Take heed and beware of the leaven of the pharisees and of the
sadducees. They thought among themselves saying: we have brought no
bread with us. When Iesus understood that, he said unto them. O ye of
little faith, why are your minds cumbered because ye have brought no
bread? Do ye not yet perceive, neither remember those v loaves when
there were v M men, and how many baskets took ye up? Neither the vij
loaves, when there were iiij M: and how many baskets took ye up? Why
perceive ye not then, that I spake not unto you of bread, when I
said, beware of the leaven of the pharisees and of the sadducees?
Then understood they, how that he bade not them beware of the leaven
of bread: but of the doctrine of the pharisees, and of the sadducees.
    When Iesus came into the coasts of the city which is called
Cesarea Philippi, he asked his disciples saying: whom do men say that
I the son of man am? They said, some say that thou art Ihon baptist,
some Helyas, some Ieremias, or one of the prophets. He said unto
them, but whom say ye that I am? Simon Peter answered, and said: Thou
art Christ the son of the living God. And Iesus answered and said to
him: happy art thou Simon the son of Ionas, for flesh and blood have
not opened unto thee that, but my father which is in heaven. And I
say also unto thee, that thou art Peter. And upon this rock I will
build my congregation: and the gates of hell shall not prevail
against it. And I will give unto thee, the keys of the kingdom of
heaven, and whatsoever thou bindest upon earth, it shall be bound in
heaven: and whatsoever thou lowsest on earth, it shall be lowsed in
heaven.
    Then he charged his disciples, that they should tell no man, that
he was Iesus Christ. From that time forth, Iesus began to shew unto
his disciples, how that he must go unto Ierusalem, and suffer many
things of the seniors, and of the high priests, and of the scribes,
and must be killed, and rise again the third day. Peter took him
aside, and began to rebuke him saying: master favor thy self, this
shall not come unto thee. Then turned he about, and said unto Peter:
go after me Satan, thou offendest me, because thou perceivest not
godly things: but worldly things.
    Iesus then said to his disciples. If any man will follow me, let
him forsake himself, and take up his cross and follow me. For
whosoever will save his life, shall loose it. And whosoever shall
loose his life for my sake, shall find it. What shall it profit a
man, if he should win all the whole world: so he loose his own soul?
Or else what shall a man give to redeem his soul again withall? For
the son of man shall come in the glory of his father, with his
angels, and then shall he reward every man according to his deeds.
Verily I say unto you, some there be among them that here stand,
which shall not taste of death, till they shall have seen the son of
man come in his kingdom.

The .xvij. Chapter.

    And after vj days Iesus took Peter and Iames and Ihon his
brother, and brought them up into an high mountain out of the way,
and was transfigured before them: and his face did shine as the sun,
and his clothes were as white as the light. And behold there appeared
unto them Moses and Helyas talking with him. Then answered Peter, and
said to Iesus: master here is good being for us. If thou wilt, let us
make here iij tabernacles, one for thee, and one for Moses, and one
for Helyas. While he yet spake, behold a bright cloud shadowed them.
And lo a voice out of the cloud said: This is my dear son, in whom I
delight, hear him. And when the disciples heard that, they fell on
their faces, and were sore afraid. And Iesus came and touched them,
and said: arise and be not afraid. Then lift they up their eyes, and
saw no man, but Iesus only.
    And as they came down from the mountain, he charged them saying,
see that ye shew this vision to no man, til the son of man be risen
again from death. And his disciples asked of him, saying: Why then
say the scribes, that Helias must first come? Iesus answered, and
said unto them: Helias shall first come, and restore all things. And
I say unto you, that Helias is come already: And they knew him not,
but have done unto him whatsoever they lusted. In likewise shall also
the son of man suffer of them. Then his disciples perceived that he
spake unto them of Ihon baptist.
    And when they were come to the people, there came to him a
certain man, and kneeled down to him saying: Master have mercy on my
son, for he is frantic, and is sore vexed. And ofttimes falleth into
the fire, and oft into the water, and I brought him to thy disciples,
and they could not heal him. Iesus answered and said: O generation
faithless and crooked: how long shall I be with you? how long shall I
suffer you? bring him hither to me. And Iesus rebuked the devil, and
he came out. And the child was healed even that same hour.
    Then came his disciples secretly and said: Why could not we cast
him out? Iesus said unto them, because of your unbelief. For I say
verily unto you, if ye had faith as a grain of mustard seed, ye
should say unto this mountain, remove hence to yonder place, and he
should remove: Neither should any thing be unpossible for you to do.
But this kind, goeth not out but by prayer and fasting.
    While they passed the time in Galilee, Iesus said unto them: the
son of man shall be betrayed into the hands of men, and they shall
kill him, and the third day he shall rise again. And they sorrowed
greatly.
    When they were come to Capernaum: They that were wont to gather
poll money, came to Peter and said: Doth your master pay tribute? He
said: yea. And when he was come into the house, Iesus spake first to
him, saying: What thinkest thou Simon? of whom do the kings of the
earth take tribute, or poll money? of their children, or of
strangers? Peter said unto him, of strangers. Then said Iesus unto
him again. Then are the children free. Nevertheless, lest we should
offend them, go to the sea and cast in thine angle, and take the fish
that first cometh up: and when thou hast opened his mouth, thou shalt
find a piece of twelve {or twenty} pence, that take and pay for me
and thee.

The .xviij. Chapter.

    The same time the disciples came to Iesus saying: who is the
greatest in the kingdom of heaven? Iesus called a child unto him, and
set him in the midst of them, and said: Verily I say unto you, except
ye turn, and become as children, ye cannot enter into the kingdom of
heaven: whosoever therefore: shall submit himself: as this child, he
is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven. And whosoever receiveth
such a child in my name, receiveth me. But whosoever offend one of
these little ones, which believe in me: it were better for him, that
a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in
the depth of the sea. Woe be unto the world because of evil
occasions. It is necessary that evil occasions be given, nevertheless
woe be to that man, by whom evil occasion cometh. Wherefore if thy
hand, or thy foot, give thee an occasion of evil: cut him off, and
cast him from thee. It is better for thee to enter into life halt or
maimed, rather than thou shouldest having two hands, or two feet, be
cast into everlasting fire. And if also thine eye offend thee, pluck
him out and cast him from thee. It is better for thee, to enter into
life with one eye, than having two eyes to be cast into hellfire.
    See that ye despise not one of these little ones. For I say unto
you, that in heaven their angels behold the face of my father, which
is in heaven. Yea and the son of man is come to save that which is
lost. How think ye? If a man have an hundred sheep, and one of them
should go astray, will he not leave ninety and nine in the mountains,
and go and seek that one which is gone astray? If it happen that he
find him, verily I say unto you, he rejoiceth more of that sheep,
then of the ninety and nine which went not astray. Even so it is not
the will of your father in heaven, that one of these little ones
should perish.
    Moreover if thy brother trespass against thee. Go and tell him
his fault between him and thee alone. If he hear thee, thou hast won
thy brother: but if he hear thee not, then take yet with thee one or
two, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses, all things may
stand. If he hear not them, tell it unto the congregation: if he hear
not the congregation, take him as an heathen man, and as a publican.
Verily I say unto you whatsoever ye bind on earth, shall be bound in
heaven. And whatsoever ye lowse on earth, shall be lowsed in heaven.
    Again I say unto you that if two of you shall agree in earth in
any manner thing whatsoever they shall desire: it shall be given them
of my father which is in heaven. For where two or three are gathered
together in my name, there am I in the midst of them.
    Then came Peter to him, and said: master, how oft shall my
brother trespass against me, and I shall forgive him? shall I forgive
him seven times? Iesus said unto him: I say not unto thee seven
times: but seventy times seven times. Therefore is the kingdom of
heaven likened unto a certain king, which would take accounts of his
servants, and when he had begun to reckon, one was brought unto him,
which ought him ten thousand talents: but when he had nought to pay,
the lord commanded him to be sold, and his wife, and his children:
and all that he had, and payment to be made. The servant fell down
and besought him saying: Sir, give me respite, and I will pay it
every whit. Then had the lord pity on that servant, and lowsed him,
and forgave him the debt.
    The same servant went out and found one of his fellows, which
ought him an hundred pence. And laid hands on him, and took him by
the throat, saying: pay that thou owest. And his fellow fell down,
and besought him, saying: have patience with me, and I will pay thee
all. And he would not, but went and cast him into prison, till he
should pay the debt. When his other fellows saw what was done, they
were very sorry, and came and told unto their lord all that had
happened. Then the lord called him, and said unto him. O evil
servant, I forgave thee all that debt, because thou praydest me: was
it not mete also, that thou shouldest have had compassion on thy
fellow, even as I had pity on thee? And his lord was wroth, and
delivered him to the jailers, till he should pay all that was due to
him. So likewise shall your heavenly father do unto you, if ye will
not forgive with your hearts, each one to his brother their
trespasses.

The .xix. Chapter.

    And it followed when Iesus had finished those sayings, he gat him
from Galilee, and came into the coasts off Iewry beyond Iordan, and
much people followed him, and he healed them there. Then came unto
him the pharisees to tempt him, and said to him: Is it lawful for a
man to put away his wife for all manner of causes? He answered, and
said unto them: Have ye not read, how that he which made man at the
beginning, made them man and woman? and said: for this thing, shall a
man leave father and mother, and cleave unto his wife, and they twain
shall be one flesh. Wherefore now are they not twain, but one flesh.
Let not man therefore put asunder, that which God hath coupled
together. Then said they to him: why did Moses command to give unto
her a testimonial of divorcement, and to put her away? He said unto
them: Moses because of the hardness of your hearts suffered you to
put away your wives: But from the beginning it was not so. I say
therefore unto you, whosoever putteth away his wife (except it be for
fornication) and marrieth another, breaketh wedlock. And whosoever
marrieth her which is divorced, doth commit advoutry.
    Then spake his disciples to him: if the matter be so between man
and wife, then is it not good to marry. He said unto them: all men
cannot away with that saying: but they to whom it is given. There are
chaste, which were so born out of their mother's belly. And there are
chaste, which be made chaste of men. And there be chaste, which have
made themselves chaste for the kingdom of heavens' sake. He that can
take it let him take it.
    Then were brought to him young children, that he should put his
hands on them and pray. And his disciples rebuked them. Iesus said
unto them: suffer the children, and forbid them not to come to me,
for unto such belongeth the kingdom of heaven. And when he had put
his hands on them, he departed thence. And behold one came, and said
unto him: good master, what good thing shall I do, that I may have
eternal life? He said unto him: why callest thou me good? there is
none good but one, and that is God. But and thou wilt enter into
life, keep the commandments. He said: Which? And Iesus said: thou
shalt not kill: thou shalt not break wedlock. Thou shall not steal:
thou shalt not bear false witness. Honour father and mother: and thou
shalt love thine neighbor as thyself. The young man said unto him: I
have observed all these things from my youth, what have I more to do?
Iesus said unto him: if thou wilt be perfect, go and sell that thou
hast, and give it to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in
heaven, and come and follow me. When the young man heard that saying,
he went away mourning. For he had great possessions.
    Iesus said then unto his disciples: Verily I say unto you, a rich
man shall with difficulty enter into the kingdom of heaven. And
moreover I say unto you: it is easier for a camel to go through the
eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of
Heaven. When his disciples heard that, they were exceedingly amazed,
saying: who then can be saved? Iesus beheld them, and said unto them:
with men this is unpossible, but with God all things are possible.
    Then answered Peter, and said to him: Behold, we have forsaken
all and have followed thee: what shall we have therefore? Iesus said
unto them: verily I say unto you: that ye which have followed me in
the second generation (when the son of man shall sit in the seat of
his majesty) shall sit also upon xij seats, and judge the xij tribes
of Israhel. And whosoever forsaketh house, or brethren, or sisters,
other father, or mother, or wife, or children, or livelihood, {or
lands,} for my name's sake, the same shall receive an hundred fold,
and shall inherit everlasting life. Many that are first, shall be
last, and the last, shall be first.

The .xx. Chapter.

    For the kingdom of heaven is like unto an householder which went
out early in the morning to hire laborers into his vineyard. And he
agreed with the laborers for a penny a day and sent them into his
vineyard. And he went out about the third hour, and saw other
standing idle in the market place, and said unto them: go ye also
into my vineyard, and whatsoever is right, I will give you: and they
went their way. Again he went out about the sixth and ninth hour, and
did likewise. And he went out about the eleventh hour and found other
standing idle, and said unto them: Why stand ye here all the day
idle? They said unto him: because no man hath hired us. He said to
them: go ye also into my vineyard, and whatsoever shall be right,
that shall ye receive.
    When even was come, the lord of the vineyard, said unto his
steward: call the laborers, and give them their hire, beginning at
the last, till thou come to the first. And they which were hired
about the eleventh hour, came and received every man a penny. Then
came the first, supposing that they should receive more, and they
likewise received every man a penny. And when they had received it,
they grudged against the good man of the house saying: These last
have wrought but one hour, and thou hast made them equal unto us
which have borne the burden and heat of the day.
    He answered to one of them, saying: friend I do thee no wrong:
didst thou not agree with me for a penny? Take that which is thy
duty, and go thy way. I will give unto this last, as much as to thee.
Is it not lawful for me to do as me listeth with mine own? Is thine
eye evil because I am good? So the last shall be first, and the first
shall be last. For many are called, and few be chosen.
    And Iesus ascended to Ierusalem, and took the xij disciples apart
in the way, and said to them: Lo we go up to Ierusalem, and the son
of man shall be betrayed unto the chief priests, and unto the
scribes, and they shall condemn him to death, and shall deliver him
to the gentiles, to be mocked, to be scourged, and to be crucified:
and the third day he shall rise again.
    Then came to him the mother of Zebedee's children with her sons
worshipping him, and desiring a certain thing of him. He said unto
her: What wilt thou have? She said unto him: Grant that these my two
sons may sit, one on thy right hand, and the other on thy left hand
in thy kingdom.
    Iesus answered, and said: Ye wot not what ye ask. Are ye able to
drink of the cup that I shall drink of? And to be baptised with the
baptism, that I shall be baptised with? They answered to him: That we
are. He said unto them: Ye shall drink of my cup, and shall be
baptised with the baptism that I shall be baptised with all. But to
sit on my right hand, and on my left hand, is not mine to give you:
but to them for whom it is prepared of my father.
    And when the ten heard this, they disdained at the two brethren.
But Iesus called them unto him, and said: Ye know, that the lords of
the gentiles have domination over them. And they that are great,
exercise power over them. It shall not be so among you: But whosoever
will be great among you, let him be your minister, and whosoever will
be chief, let him be your servant. Even as the son of man came, not
to be ministered unto, but to minister: and to give his life for the
redemption of many.
    And as they departed from Hiericho, much people followed him. And
behold, two blind men sitting by the wayside, when they heard, that
Iesus passed by, cried saying: Master the son of David have mercy on
us. And the people rebuffed them, because they should hold their
peace: But they cried the more, saying: have mercy on us master which
art the son of David. Then Iesus stood still, and called them, and
said: what will ye that I should do to you? They said unto him:
Master, that our eyes may be opened. Iesus pitied them, and touched
their eyes. And immediately their eyes received sight: And they
followed him.

The .xxj. Chapter.

    When they drew nigh unto Ierusalem, and were come to Bethphage,
unto mount Olivet, then sent Iesus two of his disciples, saying to
them: Go into the town that lieth over against you, and anon ye shall
find an ass bound, and her colt with her, loose them and bring them
unto me. And if any man say ought unto you, say ye that your master
hath need of them, and straight way he will let them go. All this was
done, to fulfil that which was spoken by the prophet, saying: Tell ye
the daughter of Sion: behold thy king cometh unto thee meek, sitting
upon an ass and a colt, the foal of an ass used to the yoke. The
disciples went, and did as Iesus commanded them, and brought the ass
and the colt, and put on them their clothes, and set him thereon.
Many of the people spread their garments in the way. Other cut down
branches from the trees, and strawed them in the way. Moreover the
people that went before, and they also that came after, cried saying:
Hosianna to the son of David. Blessed be he that cometh in the name
of the lord, Hosianna in the highest.
    And when he was come into Ierusalem, all the city was moved,
saying: who is this? And the people said: this is Iesus the prophet
of Nazareth a city of Galilee. And Iesus went into the temple of God,
and cast out all them that bought and sold in the temple, and
overthrew the tables of the moneychangers, and the seats of them that
sold doves. And said to them: it is written, mine house shall be
called the house of prayer, but ye have made it a den of thieves. And
the blind and the halt came to him in the temple, and he healed them.
    When the chief priests and scribes saw, the marvels that he did,
and the children crying in the temple and saying, Hosianna to the son
of David, they disdained, and said unto him: hearest thou what these
say? Iesus said unto them: have ye never read, of the mouth of babes
and sucklings thou hast ordained praise? And he left them, and went
out of the city unto Bethany, and passed the time there.
    In the morning as he returned into the city again, he hungered,
and spied a fig tree in the way, and came to it, and found nothing
thereon, but leaves only, and said to it, never fruit grow on thee
hence forwards. And anon the fig tree withered away. And when his
disciples saw that, they marvelled saying: How soon is the fig tree
withered away? Iesus answered, and said unto them: Verily I say unto
you, if ye shall have faith, and shall not doubt, ye shall not only
do that which I have done to the fig tree: but also if ye shall say
unto this mountain, take thyself away, and cast thyself into the sea,
it shall be done. And whatsoever thing ye shall ask in your prayers
if ye believe, ye shall receive it.
    And when he was come into the temple, the chief priests and the
seniors of the people came unto him as he was teaching, and said: by
what authority doest thou these things? and who gave thee this power?
Iesus answered, and said unto them: I also will ask of you a certain
question, which if ye assoil me, I in like wise will tell you by what
authority I do these things. Whence was the baptism of Ihon? from
heaven, or of men? And they thought in themselves, saying: if we
shall say, from heaven, he will say unto us: why did ye not then
believe him? But and if we shall say of men, then fear we the people.
For all men held Ihon as a prophet. And they answered Iesus, and
said: we cannot tell. He likewise said unto them: neither tell I you
by what authority I do these things. What say ye to this? A certain
man had ij sons, and came to the elder saying: go and work today in
my vineyard. He answered and said, I will not: but afterward repented
and went. Then came he to the second, and said likewise, and he
answered and said: I will sir: yet went he not. Whether of these ij
fulfilled their father's will? And they said unto him: the first.
Iesus said unto them: verily I say unto you, that the publicans and
the harlots shall come into the kingdom of God before you. For Ihon
came unto you, in the way of righteousness, and ye believed him not.
But the publicans and the whores believed him. But ye (though ye saw
it) yet were not moved with repentance, that ye might afterward have
believed him.
    Hearken another similitude. There was a certain householder,
which set a vineyard, and hedged it round about, and made a winepress
in it, and built a tower, and let it out to husbandmen, and went into
a strange country. And when the time of the fruit drew near, he sent
his servants to the husbandmen, to receive the fruits of it, and the
husbandmen caught his servants, and beat one, killed another, and
stoned another. Again he sent other servants more than the first, and
they served them likewise. But last of all, he sent unto them his own
son, saying: they will fear my son. When the husbandmen saw his son,
they said among themselves: This is the heir, come on let us kill
him, and let us take his inheritance to ourselves. And they caught
him and thrust him out of the vineyard, and slew him. When the lord
of the vineyard cometh: what will he do with those husbandmen? They
said unto him: he will evil destroy those evil persons, and will let
out his vineyard unto other husbandmen, which shall deliver him his
fruit at times convenient.
    Iesus said unto them: did ye never read in the scriptures? The
same stone which the builders refused, is set in the principal part
of the corner: this was the lord's doing, and it is marvelous in our
eyes. Therefore say I unto you, the kingdom of God shall be taken
from you, and shall be given to the Gentiles which shall bring forth
the fruits of it. And whosoever shall fall on this stone, shall be
alto broken. And whosoever this stone shall fall upon, he shall grind
him to powder. And when the chief priests and pharisees heard these
similitudes they perceived that he spake of them. And they went about
to lay hands on him, but they feared the people, because they counted
him as a prophet.

The .xxij. Chapter.

And Iesus answered and spake unto them again, in similitudes, saying:
    The kingdom of heaven is like unto a certain King, which married
his son, and sent forth his servants, to call them that were bid to
the wedding, and they would not come. Again he sent forth other
servants, saying: tell them which are bidden: Lo I have prepared my
dinner, mine oxen and my fatlings are killed, and all things are
ready, come unto the marriage. They made light of it, and went their
ways: one to his firm place, another about his merchandise, the
remnant took his servants and intreated them ungoodly, and slew them.
When the king heard that, he was wroth, and sent forth his warriors
and destroyed those murderers, and burnt up their city.
    Then said he to his servants: The wedding was prepared: but they
which were bidden thereto, were not worthy. Go ye therefore out into
the highways, and as many as ye find, bid them to the marriage. The
servants went out into the ways, and gathered together as many as
they could find, both good and bad, and the wedding was furnished
with guests. The king came in, to visit the guests, and spied there a
man which had not on a wedding garment, and said unto him: friend,
how camest thou in hither, and * hast not on a wedding garment? and
he was even speechless. Then said the king to his ministers: take and
bind him hand and foot, and cast him into utter darkness, there shall
be weeping and gnashing of teeth. For many are called and few be
chosen.
    Then went the pharisees and took counsel, how they might tangle
him in his words. And sent unto him their disciples with Herod's
servants, saying: Master, we know that thou art true, and that thou
teachest the way of God truly, neither carest for any man, for thou
considerest not men's estate. Tell us therefore: how thinkest thou?
is it lawful to give tribute unto Cesar, or not? Iesus perceived
their wickedness, and said: Why tempt ye me ye hypocrites? let me see
the tribute money. And they took him a penny. And he said unto them:
whose is this image and superscription? They said unto him: Cesar's.
Then said he unto them: Give therefore to Cesar, that which is
Cesar's: and give unto God, that which is God's. When they heard that
they marvelled, and left him and went their way.
    The same day the sadducees came to him (which say that there is
no resurrection) and they asked him saying: Master, Moses bade, if a
man die having no children, that the brother marry his wife, and
raise up seed unto his brother. There were with us seven brethren,
the first married and died without issue, and left his wife unto his
brother. Likewise the second and the third, unto the seventh: Last of
all the woman died also. Now in the resurrection whose wife shall she
be of the vij? for all had her. Iesus answered and said unto them: ye
are deceived, and know not what the scripture meaneth, nor yet the
virtue of God. For in the resurrection they neither marry nor are
married: but are as the angels of God in heaven.
    As touching the resurrection of the dead: have ye not read what
is said unto you of God, which sayeth: I am Abraham's God, and
Isaac's God, and the God of Iacob? God is not the God of the dead:
but of the living. And when the people heard that, they were astonied
at his doctrine.
    When the pharisees had heard, how that he had put the Sadducees
to silence, they drew to gether, and one of them which was a doctor
of law asked him a question tempting him and saying: Master which is
the great commandment in the law? Iesus said unto him: thou shalt
love thy lord God with all thine heart, with all thy soul, and with
all thy mind. This is the first and that great commandment. And there
is another like unto this. Thou shalt love thine neighbor as thyself.
In these two commandments, hang all the law and the prophets.
    While the pharisees were gathered together Iesus asked them
saying: what think ye of Christ? whose son is he? they said unto him:
the son of David. He said unto them: how then doth David in spirit
call him lord, saying? The lord said to my lord, sit on my right
hand: till I make thine enemies thy footstool. If David call him
lord: how is he then his son? And none of them could answer him again
one word. Neither durst any from that day forth, ask him any more
questions.

The .xxiij. Chapter.

    Then spake Iesus to the people, and to his disciples, saying: The
scribes and the pharisees sit in Moses' seat, whatsoever they bid you
observe, that observe and do: but after their works do not: for they
say, and do not. Yea and they bind heavy burdens and grievous to be
borne, and lay them on men's shoulders: but they themselves will not
heave them with one finger. All their works they do, for to be seen
of men. They set abroad their phylacteries, and make large borders on
their garments, and love to sit uppermost at feasts, and to have the
chief seats in the synagogues, and greetings in the markets and to be
called of men Rabbi.
    But ye shall not suffer yourselves to be called Rabbi, for one is
your master, that is to wit Christ, and all ye are brethren. And call
ye no man your father upon the earth, for one is your father, and he
is in heaven. Be not called masters, for one is your master, and he
is Christ. He that is greatest among you, shall be your servant. But
whosoever exalteth himself, shall be brought low. And he that
submiteth himself, shall be exalted.
    Woe be unto you scribes and pharisees dissemblers, for ye shut up
the kingdom of heaven before men: ye yourselves go not in, neither
suffer ye them that come to enter in.
    Woe be unto you scribes and pharisees, for ye devour widows'
houses, and that under a colour of praying long prayers, wherefore ye
shall receive greater damnation.
    Woe be unto you scribes and pharisees hypocrites, for ye compass
sea and land, to bring one into your belief: and when ye have brought
him ye make him two fold more the child of hell, than ye yourselves
are.
    Woe be unto you blind guides, for ye say: whosoever swear by the
temple, it is nothing: but whosoever swear by the gold of the temple,
he is debtor. Ye fools and blind? whether is greater, the gold, or
the temple that sanctifieth the gold. And whosoever sweareth by the
altar it is nothing: but whosoever sweareth by the offering that
lieth on the altar is debtor. Ye fools and blind: whether is greater
the offering, or the altar which sanctifieth the offering? whosoever
therefore sweareth by the altar, sweareth by it, and by all that
thereon is. And whosoever sweareth by the temple sweareth by it, and
by him that dwelleth therein. And he that sweareth by heaven,
sweareth by the seat of God, and by him that sitteth thereon.
    Woe be to you scribes and pharisees dissemblers, for ye tithe
mint, annise, and cummin, and leave the weightier matters of the law
undone: judgement, mercy, and faith: these ought ye to have done, and
not to have left the other undone. Ye blind guides, which strain out
a gnat, and swallow a camel.
    Woe be to you scribes and pharisees hypocrites, for ye make clean
the outer side of the cup, and of the platter: but within they are
full of bribery and excess. Thou blind Pharisee, cleanse first, that
which is within the cup and the platter, that the outside may also be
clean.
    Woe be to you scribes, and pharisees hypocrites, for ye are like
unto painted tombs which appear beautiful outwards: but are within
full of dead men's bones and of all filthiness. So are ye, for
outward ye appear righteous unto men, when within ye are full of
dissimulation and iniquity.
    Woe be unto you scribes and pharisees hypocrites, for ye build
the tombs of the prophets, and garnish the sepulchers of just men,
and say: If we had been in our fathers' time, we would not have been
partners with them in the blood of the prophets. So are ye be
witnesses unto yourselves, that ye are the children of them, which
killed the prophets. Fulfil ye likewise the measure of your fathers:
ye {yee} serpents and generation of vipers, how shall ye scape the
damnation of hell?
    Wherefore behold I send unto you, prophets wise men and scribes,
and of them some shall ye kill and crucify, and some shall ye scourge
in your synagogues, and persecute from city to city, that all
righteous blood may fall upon you, which was shed upon the earth,
from the blood of righteous Abel, unto the blood of Zacharias the son
of Barachias, whom ye slew between the temple and the altar: Verily I
say unto you, all these things shall light upon this generation.
Hierusalem Hierusalem which killest prophets, and stonest them which
are sent to thee: how often would I have gathered thy children
together, as the hen gathereth her chickens under her wings? but ye
would not? behold your habitation shall be left unto you desolate.
For I say unto you, ye shall not see me henceforth, till that ye say:
blessed is he that cometh in the name of the lord.

The .xxiiij. Chapter.

    And Iesus went out and departed from the temple: and his
disciples came to him, for to shew him the building of the temple.
Iesus said unto them: see ye not all these things? Verily I say unto
you: There shall not be here left one stone upon another, that shall
not be destroyed.
    And as he sat upon the mount Olivet, his disciples came unto him
secretly saying: Tell us, when this shall be? and what sign shall be
of thy coming, and of the end of the world? and Iesus answered, and
said unto them: take heed that no man deceive you, for many shall
come in my name saying: I am Christ: and shall deceive many.
    Ye shall hear of wars, and of the noise of wars, but see that ye
be not troubled, for all these things must come to pass, but the end
is not yet. For nation shall rise against nation, and realm against
realm: and there shall be pestilence, and hunger, and earthquakes in
all quarters. All these are the beginning of sorrows.
    Then shall they put you to trouble, and shall kill you, and ye
shall be hated of all nations for my name's sake: and then shall many
fall, and shall betray one another, and shall hate one the other, and
many false prophets shall arise, and shall deceive many: and because
iniquity shall have the upper hand, the love of many shall abate. But
he that endureth to the end shall be safe. And this Gospel of the
kingdom shall be preached in all the world, for a witness unto all
nations, and then shall the end come.
    When ye then shall see the abomination and desolation (spoken of
by Daniel the prophet) stand in the holy place: whosoever readeth it,
let him understand it. Then let them which be in Iury fly into the
mountains. And let him which is on the housetop, not come down to
take anything out of his house. Neither let him which is in the
field, return back to fetch his clothes. Woe be in those days to them
that are with child, and to them that give suck. But pray that your
flight be not in the winter, neither on the Sabbath day. For then
shall be great tribulation, such as was not from the beginning of the
world to this time, nor shall be. Yea and except those days should be
shortened, should no flesh be saved: But for the chosens' sake those
days shall be shortened.
    Then if any man shall say unto you: lo, here is Christ, or there
is Christ: believe it not: for there shall arise false christs, and
false prophets and shall give great signs and wonders. So greatly
that if it were possible, even the chosen should be brought into
error. Take heed I have told you before. If they shall say unto you:
lo, he is in the desert, go not forth: lo, he is in the secret
places, believe not. For as the lightning cometh out of the east, and
shineth unto the west: so shall the coming of the son of man be. For
wheresoever a dead body is, even thither will the eagles resort.
    Immediately after the tribulations of those days, shall the sun
be darkeneth: and the moon shall not give her light, and the stars
shall fall from heaven, and the powers of heaven shall move. And then
shall appear the sign of the son of man in heaven. And then shall all
the kindreds of the earth mourn, and they shall see the son of man
come in the clouds of heaven with power and great majesty: And he
shall send his angels with the great voice of a trumpet, and they
shall gather together his chosen from the four winds, and from the
one end of the world to the other.
    Learn a similitude of the fig tree: when his branches are yet
tender, and his leaves sprung, ye know that summer is nigh. So
likewise when ye see all these things, be ye sure that it is near
even at the doors. Verily I say unto you, that this generation shall
not pass, till all be fulfilled. Heaven and earth shall perish: but
my words shall abide. But of that day and hour knoweth no man, no not
the angels of heaven, but my father only.
    As the time of Noe was, so likewise shall the coming of the son
of man be. For as in the days before the flood: they did eat and
drink, marry, and were married, even unto the day that Noe entered in
to the ship, and knew of nothing till the flood came and took them
all away. So shall also the coming of the son of man be. Then two
shall be in the fields, the one shall be received, and the other
shall be refused, two shall be grinding at the mill: the one shall be
received, and the other shall be refused.
    Wake therefore, because ye know not what hour your master will
come. Of this be sure, that if the good man of the house knew what
hour the thief would come: he would surely watch, and not suffer his
house to be broken up. Therefore be ye also ready, for what hour ye
think least on, in the same shall the son of man come. Who is a
faithful servant and wise, whom his master hath made ruler over his
household, for to give them meat in season convenient? happy is that
servant whom his master (when he cometh) shall find so doing. Verily
I say unto you, he shall make him ruler over all his goods. But and
if that evil servant shall say in his heart, my master will defer his
coming, and begin to smite his fellows: yea and to eat and to drink
with the drunken: that servants master will come in a day when he
looketh not for him: and in an hour that he is not ware of, and will
divide him, and give him his reward with hypocrites. There shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth.

The .xxv. Chapter.

    Then the kingdom of heaven shall be likened unto x virgins, which
took their lamps, and went to meet the bridegroom: five of them were
foolish, and five were wise. The foolish took their lamps, but took
none oil with them. But the wise took oil with them in their vessels
with their lamps also. While the bridegroom tarried, all slumbered
and slept. And even at midnight, there was a cry made: behold, the
bridegroom cometh, go and meet him. Then all those virgins arose, and
prepared their lamps. And the foolish said to the wise: give us of
your oil, for our lamps go out? But the wise answered, saying: not
so, lest there be not enough for us and you, but go rather to them
that sell, and buy for yourselves. In conclusion while they went to
buy, the bridegroom came: and they that were ready, went in with him
to the wedding, and the gate was shut up. Afterwards came also the
other virgins, saying: master master, open to us. But he answered,
and said: verily I say unto you: I know you not: look that ye watch
therefore, for ye know neither the day nor yet the hour, when the son
of man shall come.
    Likewise as a certain man ready to take his journey to a strange
country, called his servants to him, and delivered to them his goods.
And unto one he gave v. talents, to another ij. and to another one:
to every man after his ability, and straight way departed. Then he
that had received the five talents, went and bestowed them, and won
other five. Likewise he that received ij gained other ij. But he that
received one, went and digged a pit in the earth and hid his master's
money. After a long season the lord of those servants came, and
reckoned with them. Then came he that had received five talents, and
brought other five saying: master, thou deliveredst unto me five
talents, lo I have gained with them five more. His master said unto
him: well good servant and faithful, Thou hast been faithful in
little, I will make thee ruler over much: enter in into thy master's
joy. Also he that received ij talents came, and said: master, thou
deliveredest unto me ij talents: lo I have won ij other talents with
them. His master said unto him, well good servant and faithful thou
hast been faithful in little, I will make thee ruler over much, go in
into thy master's joy.
    He which had received the one talent came also, and said: master,
I considered that thou wast an hard man, which reapest where thou
sowedst not, and gatherest where thou strawedst not, and was afraid,
and went and hid thy talent in the earth: lo, thou hast thine own.
His master answered, and said unto him: evil servant and slothful,
thou knewest that I reap where I sowed not, and gather where I
strawed not: thou oughtest therefore to have had my money to the
changers, and then at my coming should I have received my money with
vantage. Take therefore the talent from him, and give it unto him
which hath x. talents. For unto every man that hath shall be given,
and he shall have abundance. And from him that hath not, shall be
taken away, even that he hath. And cast that unprofitable servant
into utter darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
    When the son of man shall come in his majesty, and all his holy
angels with him, then shall he sit upon the seat of his majesty, and
before him shall be gathered all nations. And he shall sever them one
from another, as a shepherd putteth asunder the sheep from the goats.
And he shall set the sheep on his right hand, and the goats on the
left hand. Then shall the King say to them on his right hand: Come ye
blessed children of my father, inherit ye the kingdom prepared for
you from the beginning of the world. For I was an hungered, and ye
gave me meat. I thirsted, and ye gave me drink. I was harborless, and
ye lodged me. I was naked and ye clothed me: I was sick and ye
visited me. I was in prison and ye came unto me.
    Then shall the just answer him saying: master, when, saw we thee
an hungered, and fed thee? or a thirst, and gave thee drink? when saw
we thee harborless, and lodged thee? or naked and clothed thee? or
when saw we thee sick, or in prison and came unto thee? And the king
shall answer and say unto them: verily I say unto you: in as much as
ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren: ye have
done it to me.
    Then shall the king say unto them that shall be on the left hand:
depart from me ye cursed, into everlasting fire, which is prepared
for the devil and his angels. For I was an hungered, and ye gave me
no meat. I thirsted, and ye gave me no drink. I was harborless, and
ye lodged me not. I was naked, and ye clothed me not. I was sick and
in prison, and ye visited me not.
    Then shall they also answer him saying: master, when saw we thee
an hungered, or a thirst, or harborless, or naked, or sick, or in
prison, and have not ministered unto thee? then shall he answer them,
and say: Verily I say unto you, in as much as ye did it not to one of
the least of these, ye did it not to me. And these shall go into
everlasting pain: And the righteous into life eternal.

The .xxvj. Chapter.

    And it followed: when Iesus had finished all these sayings, he
said unto his disciples: ye know that after ij. days shall be ester,
and the son of man shall be delivered to be crucified.
    Then assembled together the chief priests and scribes and seniors
of the people into the palace of the high priest, called Caiphas: and
held a counsel, how they might take Iesus by subtlety, and kill him.
but they said, not on the holy day, lest any trouble arise among the
people.
    When Iesus was in Bethany, in the house of Simon the leper, there
came unto him a woman, which had an alabaster box of precious
ointment, and poured it on his head, as he sat at the board. When his
disciples saw that, they had indignation saying: what needed this
waste? This ointment might have been well sold, and given to the
poor. When Iesus understood that, he said unto them: why trouble ye
the woman? she hath wrought a good work upon me. For ye shall have
poor folk always with you: but me shall ye not have always. And in
that she casted this ointment on my body, she did it to bury me with
all. Verily I say unto you, wheresoever this gospel shall be preached
throughout all the world, there shall also this that she hath done,
be told for a memorial of her.
    Then one of the twelve called Iudas Iscariot went unto the chief
priests, and said: what will ye give me, and I will deliver him unto
you? And they appointed unto him thirty pieces of silver. And from
that time he sought opportunity to betray him.
    The first day of unleavened bread the disciples came to Iesus
saying unto him: where wilt thou that we prepare for thee to eat the
ester lamb? And he said: Go into the city, unto such a man, and say
to him: the master saith, my time is almost come, I will keep mine
ester at thy house with my disciples. And the disciples did as Iesus
had appointed them, and made ready the ester lamb.
    When the even was come, he sat down with the xij. And as they did
eat, he said: Verily I say unto you, that one of you shall betray me.
And they were exceeding sorrowful, and began every one of them to say
unto him: is it I master? He answered and said: he that dippeth his
hand with me in the dish, shall betray me. The son of man goeth as it
is written of him: but woe be to that man, by whom the son of man
shall be betrayed. It had been good for that man, if he had never
been born.
    Then Iudas which betrayed him, answered and said: is it I master?
He said unto him: thou hast said. As they did ate, Iesus took bread
and gave thanks, brake it, and gave it to the disciples, and said:
Take, eat, this is my body. And he took the cup, and gave thanks, and
gave it them, saying: drink of it every one. This is my blood of the
new testament, which shall be shed for many, for the forgiveness of
sins. I say unto you: I will not drink henceforth of this fruit of
the vine tree, until that day, when I shall drink it new with you in
my father's kingdom.
    And when they had said grace, they went out into mount olivet.
Then said Iesus unto them: all ye shall fall this night because of
me. For it is written: I will smite the shepherd, and the sheep of
the flock shall be scattered abroad. But after I am risen again, I
will go before you into Galile. Peter answered, and said unto him:
though all men should be hurt by thee, yet would I not be hurt. Iesus
said unto him: verily I say unto thee, that this same night before
the cock crow, thou shalt deny me thrice. Peter said unto him: If I
should die with thee, yet will I not deny thee. Likewise also said
all the disciples.
    Then went Iesus with them into a place, which is called
Gethsemane, and said unto his disciples: sit ye here while I go and
pray yonder. And he took with him Peter and the two sons of Zebede,
and began to wax sorrowful and to be in agony. Then said Iesus unto
them: my soul is heavy even unto the death. Tarry ye here: and watch
with me. And he went away a little apart, and fell flat on his face,
and prayed saying: O my father, if it possible, let this cup pass
from me: nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou wilt. And he came
unto the disciples, and found them asleep, and said to Peter: what,
could ye not watch with me one hour? watch and pray, that ye fall not
into temptation. The spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak.
    He went away once more, and prayed, saying: O my father, if this
cup cannot pass away from me, but that I drink of it, thy will be
fulfilled. And he came, and found them asleep again. For their eyes
were heavy. And he left and went again, and prayed the third time
saying the same words. Then came he to his disciples and said unto
them: Sleep henceforth, and take your rest. Take heed the hour is at
hand, and the son of man shall be betrayed into the hands of sinners.
Rise, let us be going, he is at hand that shall betray me.
    While he yet spake, lo, Iudas one of the twelve came, and with
him a great multitude with swords and staves, which were sent from
the chief priests and seniors of the people. He that betrayed him,
gave them a token, saying: whosoever I kiss, that same is he, lay
hands on him. And forth with all he came to Iesus, and said: hail
master. And kissed him. And Iesus said unto him: friend, wherefore
art thou come? Then came they and laid hands on Iesus and took him.
    And behold, one of them which were with Iesus, stretched out his
hand and drew his sword, and struck a servant of the high priest, and
smote off his ear. Then said Iesus unto him: put up thy sword into
his sheath. For all they that lay hands on the sword, shall perish
with the sword. Either thinkest thou that I cannot now pray to my
father, and he shall give me more than xij. legions of angels? how
then should the scriptures be fulfilled, for so must it be.
    The same time said Iesus to the multitude: ye be come out as it
were unto a thief, with swords and staves for to take me: daily I sat
among you teaching in the temple, and ye took me not. All this was
done that the scriptures of the prophets might be fulfilled. Then all
the disciples forsook him and fled. And they took Iesus and led him
to Caiphas the high priest, where the scribes and the seniors were
assembled. Peter followed him afar off, unto the high priest's place:
and went in, and sat with the servants to see the end.
    The chief priests, and the seniors, and all the council, sought
false witness against Iesus, for to put him to death, and they found
none: in so much that when many false witnesses came, yet found they
none. At the last came two false witnesses, and said: This fellow
said: I can destroy the temple of God, and build the same in iij
days.
    And the chief priest arose, and said to him: answerest thou
nothing? How is it that these bear witness against thee? but Iesus
held his peace. And the chief priest answered, and said to him: I
charge thee in the name of the living God, that thou tell us whether
thou be Christ the son of God. Iesus said to him: thou hast said.
Nevertheless I say unto you, hereafter shall ye see the son of man
sitting on the right hand of power, and come in the clouds of the
sky.
    Then the high priest rent his clothes saying? He hath blasphemed:
what need we of any more witnesses? Lo, now have ye heard his
blasphemy: what think ye? They answered and said: he is worthy to
die. Then spat they in his face, and beat him with their fists. And
other smote him with the palm of their hands on the face, saying:
areed to us Christ, who is he that smote thee?
    Peter sat without in the palace, and a damsel came to him,
saying: Thou also wast with Iesus of Galilee: he denied before them
all saying: I wot not what thou sayest. When he was gone out into the
porch, another wench saw him, and said unto them that were there:
This fellow was also with Iesus of Nazareth: And again he denied with
an oath, and said: I know not the man. And after a while came unto
him they that stood by, and said unto Peter: surely thou art even one
of them, for thy speech betrayeth thee. Then began he to curse and to
swear, that he knew not the man. And immediately the cock crew. And
Peter remembered the words of Iesu, which he said unto him: before
the cock crow, thou shalt deny me thrice: and went out at the doors
and wept bitterly.

The .xxvij. Chapter.

    When the morning was come, all the chief priests and seniors of
the people held a counsel against Iesu, to put him to death, and
brought him bound and delivered him unto Pontius Pilate the deputy.
    Then when Iudas which betrayed him, saw that he was condemned, he
repented himself, and brought again the xxx. plates of silver to the
chief priests and seniors saying: I have sinned betraying the
innocent blood. And they said: what is that to us? see thou to that.
And he cast down the silver plates in the temple, and departed, and
went and hung himself.
    The chief priests took the silver plates and said: it is not
lawful for to put them into the treasury, because it is the price of
blood. And they took counsel, and bought with them a potter's field
to bury strangers in. Wherefore that field is called, the field of
blood, until this day. Then was fulfilled, that which was spoken by
Ieremy the prophet, saying: and they took xxx. silver plates, the
value of him that was priced, whom they bought of the children of
Israhel, and they gave them for the potter's field, as the lord
appointed me.
    Iesus stood before the deputy: and the deputy asked him, saying:
Art thou the king of the jewes? Iesus said unto him: Thou sayest.
When he was accused of the chief priests and seniors, he answered
nothing. Then said Pilate unto him: hearest thou not how many things
they lay against thee? and he answered him to never a word: in so
much that the deputy marvelled very sore.
    At that feast, the deputy was wont to deliver unto the people a
prisoner whom they would choose. He had then a notable prisoner
called Barabbas. And when they were gathered together, Pilate said
unto them: whether will ye that I give loose unto you, Barabbas, or
Iesus which is called Christ? For he knew well, that for envy they
had delivered him.
    When he was set down to give judgement, his wife sent to him,
saying: have thou nothing to do with that just man, I have suffered
many things this day in my sleep about him.
    The chief priests and the seniors had persuaded the people, that
they should ask Barabbas, and should destroy Iesus. The deputy
answered and said unto them: whether of the twain will ye that I let
loose unto you? And they said, Barabbas. Pilate said unto them: what
shall I do then with Iesus, which is called Christ? They all said to
him: let him be crucified. Then said the deputy: what evil hath he
done? And they cried the more saying: let him be crucified.
    When Pilate saw that he prevailed nothing, but that more business
was made, he took water and washed his hands before the people
saying: I am innocent of the blood of this just person, and that ye
shall see. Then answered all the people, and said: his blood fall on
us, and on our children. Then let he Barabbas loose unto them, and
scourged Iesus, and delivered him to be crucified. Then the soldiers
of the deputy took Iesus unto the common hall, and gathered unto him
all the company. And they stripped him, and put on him a purple robe,
and plaited a crown of thorns and put upon his head, and a reed in
his right hand. And bowed their knees before him, saying: hail king
of the jewes, and spitted upon him, and took the reed and smote him
on the head.
    And when they had mocked him, they took the robe off him again,
and put his own raiment on him, and led him away to crucify him. And
as they came out, they found a man of Cyren, named Simon: him they
compelled to bear his cross. And came unto the place, which is called
Golgotha (that is to say a place of dead men's skulls) they gave him
vinegar to drink mixt with gall. And when he had tasted thereof, he
would not drink.
    When they had crucified him, they parted his garments, and did
cast lots. To fulfil that was spoken by the prophet: They divided my
garments among them: and upon my vesture have cast lots. And they sat
and watched him there. And they set up over his head the cause of his
death written: This is Iesus the king of the jewes. And there were
two thieves crucified with him, one on the right hand, and another on
the left hand.
    They that passed by, reviled him wagging their heads and saying:
Thou that destroyest the temple of God, and buildest it in three days
save thyself. If thou be the son of God, come down from the cross.
Likewise also the prelates mocking him with the scribes and seniors
said: He saved other, himself he cannot save. If he be the king of
Israhell: let him now come down from the cross, and we will believe
him. He trusted in God, let God deliver him now if he will have him,
for he said, I am the son of God. That same also the thieves, which
were crucified with him cast in his teeth.
    From the sixth hour was there darkness over all the land unto the
ninth hour. And about the ninth hour Iesus cried with a loud voice,
saying: Eli Eli lama sabathani. That is to say, my God, my God, why
hast thou forsaken me? Some of them that stood there, when they heard
that said: This man calleth for Helias. And straightway one of them
ran and took a sponge and filled it full of vinegar, and put it on a
reed, and gave him to drink. Other said let be, let us see whether
Helias will come and deliver him. Iesus cried again with a loud voice
and yielded up the ghost.
    And behold the veil of the temple was rent in twain from the top
to the bottom, and the earth did quake, and the stones did rent, and
graves did open, and the bodies of many saints which slept, arose:
and came out of the graves after his resurrection, and came into the
holy city, and appeared unto many.
    When the petty captain, and they that were with him watching
Iesus, saw the earthquake and those things which happened, they
feared greatly saying, Of a surety this was the son of God.
    And many women were there, beholding him afar off, which followed
Iesus from Galile, ministering unto him: among the which was Mary
Magdalen, and Mary the mother of Iames and the mother of Ioses, and
the mother of Zebedee's children.
    When the even was come, there came a rich man of Arimathia named
Ioseph, which same also was Iesus' disciple. He went to Pilate and
begged the body of Iesus. Then Pilate commanded the body to be
delivered. And Ioseph took the body, and wrapped it in a clean linen
cloth, and put it in his new tomb, which he had hewn out even in the
rock, and rolled a great stone to the door of the sepulchre and
departed. And there was Mary Magdalene and the other Mary sitting
over against the sepulchre.
    The next day that followeth good friday, the high priests and
pharisees got themselves to Pilate, and said: Sir, we remember, that
this deceiver said while he was yet alive. After three days I will
arise again, command therefore that the sepulchre be made sure until
the third day, lest peradventure his disciples come, and steal him
away, and say unto the people, he is risen from death: And then the
last error shall be worse than the first was. Pilate said unto them:
Take watchmen: Go and make it as sure as ye can. They went and made
the sepulchre sure with watchmen, and sealed the stone.

The .xxviij. Chapter.

    The saboth day at even which dawneth the morrow after the saboth,
Mary Magdalene and the other Mary came to see the sepulchre.
    And behold there was a great earthquake. For the angel of the
lord descended from heaven: and came and rolled back the stone from
the door, and sat upon it. His countenance was like lightning, and
his raiment white as snow. For fear of him the keepers were astunned,
and became as dead men.
    The angel answered, and said to the women, Fear ye not. I know
well ye seek Iesus which was crucified: he is not here: he is risen
as he said. Come, and see the place where the lord was put. And go
quickly and tell his disciples that he is risen from death. And
behold, he will go before you into Galile, there ye shall see him. Lo
I have told you.
    And they departed quickly from the sepulchre with fear and great
Ioy. And did run to bring his disciples word. And as they went to
tell his disciples: behold, Iesus met them saying: God speed you.
They came and held him by the feet and worshipped him. Then said
Iesus unto them: be not afraid. Go and tell my brethren, that they go
into Galile, and there shall they see me. When they were gone:
behold, some of the keepers came in to the city, and shewed unto the
prelates, all the things which had happened. And they gathered them
together with the seniors, and took counsel, and gave large money
unto the soldiers, saying: Say that his disciples came by night, and
stole him away while ye slept. And if this come to the ruler's ears,
we will pease him, and make you safe. And they took the money and did
as they were taught. And this saying is noised among the jews unto
this day.
    Then the xj. disciples went away into Galile, into a mountain
where Iesus had appointed them. And when they saw him, they
worshipped him. But some of them doubted. Iesus came and spake unto
them, saying: All power is given unto me in heaven, and in earth. Go
therefore and teach all nations, baptising them in the name of the
father, and the son, and the holy ghost: Teaching them to observe all
things, whatsoever I commanded you. And lo, I am with you alway even
until the end of the world.

Here endeth the Gospell of S. Mathew.


The gospell of S. Marke

The first Chapter.

    The beginning of the Gospell of Iesu Christ the son of God, as it
is written in the prophets, behold I send my messenger before thy
face which shall prepare thy way before thee. The voice of one that
crieth in the wilderness: prepare ye the way of the lord, make his
paths straight.
    Ihon did baptise in the wilderness, and preach the baptism of
repentance, for the remission of sins. And all the land of Iewry, and
they of Ierusalem went out unto him, and were all baptised of him in
the river Iordan, knowledging, their sins.
    Ihon was clothed with camel's hair, and with a girdle of a beasts
skin about his loins. And he ate locusts and wild honey, and preached
saying: a stronger than I cometh after me, whose shoe latchet I am
not worthy to stoop down and unloose. I have baptised you with water:
but he shall baptise you with the holy ghost.
    And it came to pass in those days, that Iesus came from Nazareth,
a city of Galile: and was baptised of Ihon in Iordan.
    And immediately he came out of the water, and saw the heavens
open, and the holy ghost descending upon him like a dove. And there
came a voice from heaven: Thou art my dear son, in whom I delight.
And immediately the spirit drove him into a wilderness: and he was
there in the wilderness xl. days, and was tempted of Satan, and was
with wild beasts. And the angels ministered unto him.
    After that Ihon was taken, Iesus came into Galile, preaching the
gospel of the kingdom of God, and saying: the time is ful come, and
the kingdom of God is even at hand, repent and believe the gospel.
    As he walked by the sea of Galile, he saw Simon and Andrew his
brother casting nets into the sea, for they were fishers. And Iesus
said unto them: follow me, and I will make you to be fishers of men.
And they straightway forsook their nets, and followed him.
    And when he had gone a little further thence, he saw Iames the
son of Zebede, and Ihon his brother, even as they were in the ship
dressing their nets. And anon he called them. And they left their
father Zebede in the ship with his hired servants, and went their way
after him.
    And they entered into Capernaum, and straight way on the Sabbath
days he entered into the synagogue and taught. And they marvelled at
his learning. For he taught them as one which had power with him, and
not as the scribes did.
    And there was in the Synagogue, a man vexed with an unclean
spirit, and he cried saying: let me alone: what have we to do with
thee Iesus of Nazareth? Art thou come to destroy us? I know what thou
art, thou art that holy man promised of God. And Iesus rebuked him,
saying: hold thy peace and come out of the man. And the unclean
spirit tare him, cried out with a loud voice, and came out of him.
And they were all amazed, insomuch that they demanded one of another
among themselves, saying: what thing is this? what new doctrine is
this? for he commandeth the foul spirits with power, and they obey
him. Anon his name spread abroad throughout all the region bordering
on Galile.
    And immediately as soon as they were come out of the Synagogue,
they entered into the house of Simon and Andrew with Iames and Ihon.
Simon's motherinlaw lay sick of a fever, and anon they told him of
her. And he came and took her by the hand and lifted her up, and the
fever forsook her by and by: And she ministered unto them.
    And at even when the sun was down, they brought unto him all that
were diseased, and them that were possessed with devils, and all the
city gathered together at the door, and he healed many that were sick
of divers diseases. And he cast out many: devils and suffered not the
devils to speak, because they knew him.
    And in the morning very early, Iesus arose and went out into a
solitary place, and there prayed. And Simon and they that were with
him followed after him. And when they had found him, they said unto
him: all men seek for thee. And he said unto them: let us go in to
the next towns, that I may preach there also: for truly I came out
for that purpose. And he preached in their synagogues, throughout all
Galile, and cast devils out.
    And there came a leper to him beseeching him, and kneeled down
unto him, and said unto him: if thou wilt, thou arte able to make me
clean. Iesus had compassion on him, and put forth his hand, touched
him, and said unto him: I will, be clean. And as soon as he had
spoken, immediately the leprosy departed from him, and he was
cleansed. and he charged him and sent him away forthwith and said
unto him: See that thou tell no man, but get thee hence and shew
thyself to the priest, and offer for thy cleansing, those things
which Moses commanded, for a testimonial unto them. But he (as soon
as he was departed) began to tell many things and to publish the
deed, insomuch that Iesus could no more openly enter into the city,
but was without in desert places, and they came to him from every
quarter.

The .ij. Chapter.

    After a few days he entered into Capernaum again, and it was
noised that he was in a house: And anon many gathered together,
insomuch that now there was no room to receive them: no, not in
places about the door. And he preached unto them. And there came unto
him that brought one sick of the palsy, borne of four men: and
because they could not come nigh unto him for press: They opened the
roof of the house where he was. And when they had broken it open,
they let down the bed wherein the sick of the palsy lay. When Iesus
saw their faith, he said to the sick of the palsy, son thy sins are
forgiven thee.
    There were certain of the scribes sitting, and reasoning in their
hearts: how doth this fellow so blaspheme? Who can forgiven sins, but
God only? And immediately when Iesus perceived in his spirit, that
they so reasoned in themselves, he said unto them: why think ye such
things in your hearts? Whether is it easier to say to the sick of the
palsy, thy sins are forgiven thee: or to say, arise, take up thy bed
and walk? That ye may know that the son of man hath power in earth to
forgive sins, he spake unto the sick of the palsy: I say unto thee,
arise and take up thy bed, and get thee hence into thine own house.
And by and by he arose, took up his bed, and went forth before them
all: in so much that they were all amazed, and glorified God saying:
we never saw it on this fashion.
    And he went out again unto the sea, and all the people resorted
unto him, and he taught them. And as Iesus passed by, he saw Levi the
son of Alphey, sit at the receipt of custom and said unto him: follow
me. And he arose and followed him. And it came to pass, as Iesus sat
at meat in his house, many publicans and sinners sat at meat also
with Iesus and his disciples. For there were many that followed him.
And when the scribes and pharisees saw him eat with publicans and
sinners, they said unto his disciples: how is it, that he eateth and
drinketh with publicans and sinners? When Iesus heard that, he said
unto them. The whole have no need of the Physician: but the sick. I
came to call the sinners to repentance, and not the just.
    And the disciples of Ihon and of the pharisees did fast, and they
came and said unto him: Why do the disciples of Ihon and of the
pharisees fast, and thy disciples fast not. And Iesus said unto them:
can the children of a wedding fast, while the bridegroom is with
them? As long as they have the bridegroom with them, they cannot
fast. But the days will come when the bridegroom shall be taken from
them and then shall they fast in those days.
    Also no man soweth a piece of new cloth unto an old garment, for
then taketh he away the new piece from the old, and so is the rent
worse.
    In like wise, no man poureth new wine into old vessels, for if he
do the new wine breaketh the vessels, and the wine runneth out, and
the vessels are marred. But new wine must be poured into new vessels.
    And it chanced that he went thorow the corn fields on the sabboth
day, and his disciples as they went on their way, began to pluck the
ears of corn. And the pharisees said unto him: Take heed why do they
on the sabboth day that which is unlawful? And he said to them: have
ye never read what David did, when he had need, and was an hungered
both he and they that were with him? How they went into the house of
God in the days of Abiathar the high priest, and ate the hallowed
loaves, which is not lawful but for the priests only to eat: and gave
also to them which were with him? And he said to them: the saboth day
was made for man, and not man for the saboth day. Wherefore is the
son of man lord even of the saboth day.

The .iij. Chapter.

    And he entered again into the synagogue, and there was a man
which had a withered hand: and they watched him to see, if he would
heal him on the saboth day, that they might accuse him. And he said
unto the man which had the withered hand: arise and stand in the
midst. And he said to them: whether is it lawful to do a good deed on
the sabboth day, or an evil? to save a man's life, or to kill? But
they held their peace. And he looked round about on them angerly
mourning on the blindness of their hearts. And said to the man:
stretch forth thine hand. And he stretched it forth: And the hand was
restored, even as whole as the other.
    The pharisees departed, and straightway gathered a counsel with
them that belonged to Herode against him, that they might destroy
him. And Iesus avoided with his disciples to the sea: and a great
multitude followed him from Galilee and from Iewry, and from
Hierusalem, and from Idumea, and from beyond Iordan: and they that
dwelled about Tyre and Sidon, a great multitude: which when they had
heard what things he did, came unto him.
    And he commanded his disciples, that a ship should wait on him,
because of the people, lest they should throng him. For he had healed
many, in so much that they pressed upon him, for to touch him, as
many as had plagues. And when the unclean spirits saw him, they fell
down before him, and cried saying: thou art the son of God: And he
straightly charged them that they should not utter him.
    And he went up into a mountain, and called unto him whom he
would, and they came unto him. And he ordained the twelve that they
should be with him, and that he might send them to preach. And that
they might have power to heal sicknesses and to cast out devils. And
he gave Simon, to name, Peter. And he called Iames the son of
Zebedee, and Ihon Iames brother, and gave them Bonargs to name, which
is to say the sons of thunder. And Andrew, and Philip, and
Bartelemew, and Matthew, and Thomas, and Iames the son of Alphey, and
Taddeus, and Simon of Cane, and Iudas Iscarioth, which same also
betrayed him.
    And they came unto house, and the people assembled together
again, so greatly that they had not leisure so much as to eat bread.
And when they that longed unto him heard of it, they went out to hold
him. For they said, he is too fervent. And the scribes which came
from Ierusalem, said: he hath Beelzebub, and by the power of the
chief devil, casteth out devils. And he called them unto him, and in
similitudes said unto them.
    How can Satan drive out Satan? For if a realm be divided against
itself, that realm cannot endure. And if a house be divided against
itself, that house cannot continue: So if Satan make insurrection
against himself, and be divided, he cannot continue, but hath an end.
No man can enter into a strong man's house, and take away his goods,
except he first bind that strong man and then spoil his house.
    Verily I say unto you all sins shall be forgiven unto men's
children: and blasphemy, wherewith they blaspheme: but he that
blasphemeth the holy ghost, shall never have forgiveness: but is in
danger of eternal damnation. For they said, he had an unclean spirit.
    And there came his mother and his brethren, and stood without,
and sent unto him and called him: And the people sat about him, and
said unto him: behold thy mother and thy brethren seek for thee
without. And he answered them, saying: who is my mother, and my
brethren? And he looked round about on his disciples, which sat in
compass about him, and said: behold my mother, and my brethren:
    For whosoever doeth the will of God, he is my brother, my sister
and mother.

The .iiij. Chapter.
And he began again to teach by the seaside. And there gathered
together unto him much people, so greatly that he entered in to a
ship, and sat in the sea, and all the people was by the seaside on
the shore: And he taught them many things in similitudes, and said
unto them in his doctrine. Hearken to. Behold, The sower went out to
sow, and it fortuned as he sowed, that some fell by the wayside, and
the fowls of the air came and devoured it up. Some fell on a stony
ground: where it had not much earth: and by and by sprang up, because
it had not depth of earth: and as soon as the sun was up it caught
heat: and because it had not rooting it withered away. And some fell
among the thorns, and the thorns grew up and choked it, so that it
gave no fruit. And some fell upon good ground: and did yield fruit
that sprang and grew: and brought forth some thirty fold, some forty
{or sixty} fold, and some an hundred fold. And he said unto them: He
that hath ears to hear, let him hear.
    When he was alone, they that were, about him with the twelve
asked him of the similitude. And he said unto them: To you it is
given to know the mystery of the kingdom of God: But unto them that
are without, shall all things be done in similitudes: that when they
see, they shall see, and not discern: and when they hear they shall
hear, and not understand: lest at any time they should turn, and
their sins should be forgiven them. And he said unto them: Perceive
ye not this similitude. And how ye shall know all similitudes?
    The sower soweth the word. These be they which are by the ways
side, where the word is sown, to whom as soon as they have heard it,
cometh the devil and taketh away the word that was sown in their
hearts. And these also are they that are sown on the stony ground:
which when they have heard the word, at once they receive it with
joy, yet have no root in themselves, and so endure but for a season:
afterward as soon as any trouble or persecution ariseth for the
word's sake, anon they fall. And these are they that are sown among
the thorns, which hear the word of God, and the care of this world
and the deceitfulness of riches, and the lusts of other things enter
in, and choke the word, and it is made unfruitful. And these that
were sown in good ground, are they that hear the word and receive it,
and bring forth fruit, some thirty fold some sixty fold, some an
hundred fold.
    And he said unto them: is the candle lighted, to be put under a
bushel, or under the bord: is it not therefore lighted that it should
be put on a candlestick? For there is nothing so privy, that shall
not be opened: neither so secret, but that it shall come abroad. If
any man have ears to hear, let him hear. And he said unto them: take
heed what ye hear. With what measure ye mete, with the same shall it
be measured unto you again. And unto you that have shall more be
given. For unto him that hath, shall it be given: And unto him that
hath not, shall be taken away, even that he hath.
    And he said: so is the kingdom of God, even as if a man should
sow seed in the ground, and should sleep and rise up night and day:
and the seed should spring, and grow up while he is not ware. For the
earth bringeth forth fruit of herself, first the blade, then the
ears, after that full corn in the ears. And as soon as the fruit is
brought forth, anon he thrusteth in the sickle because that harvest
is come.
    And he said: whereunto shall we liken the kingdom of God? or with
what comparison shall we compare it? It is like a grain of mustard
seed, which when it is sown in the earth, is the least of all seeds
that be in the earth: And after that it is sown it groweth up, and is
greatest of all herbs: and beareth great branches so that the fowls
of the air may dwell under the shadow of it.
    And with many such similitudes he preached the word unto them,
after as they might hear it. And without similitude spake he nothing
unto them. But when they were apart, he expounded all things to his
disciples. And the same day when even was come he said unto them: let
us pass over into the other side. And they late the people depart and
took him even as he was in the ship. There were also with him other
ships.
    And there arose a great storm of wind, and dashed the waves into
the ship, so that it was full. And he was in the stern asleep on a
pillow. And they awoke him, and said to him: Master, carest thou not
that we perish? And he rose up and rebuked the wind, and said unto
the sea: peace and be still. And the wind allayed, and there followed
a great calm: and he said unto them: why are ye fearful? How is it
that ye have no faith? And they feared exceedingly, and said one to
another: what fellow is this? for both wind and sea obey him.

The .v. Chapter.

    And they came over to the other side of the sea into the country
of the Gaderens. And when he was come out of the ship, anon met him
out of the graves a man possessed of an unclean spirit, which had his
abiding among the graves. And no man could bind him with chains,
because that when he was often bound with fetters and chains, he
plucked the chains asunder, and brake the fetters in pieces: Neither
could any man tame him. And always both night and day he cried in the
mountains and in the graves and beat himself with stones. When he had
spied Iesus afar off, he ran, and worshipped him, and cried with a
loud voice and said: what have I to do, with thee Iesus the son of
the most highest God? I require thee in the name of God, that thou
torment me not. For he had said unto him: Come forth of the man thou
foul spirit. And he asked him: what is thy name? and he answered him,
my name is legion, for we are many. And he prayed him instantly, that
he would not send them away out of that region.
    There was there nigh unto the mountains a great herd of swine
feeding, and all the devils besought him saying: send us into the
herd of swine, that we may enter into them. And anon Iesus gave them
leave, And the unclean spirits went out and entered into the swine.
And the herd startled, and ran headlong into the sea. They were about
ijM. swine, and they were drowned in the sea. And the swine herders
fled, and told it in the city, and in the country. And they came out
for to see, what had happened, And they came out to Iesus, and they
saw him that was vexed with the fiend and had the Legion sit, both
clothed and in his right mind, and were afraid. And they that saw it
told them, how it had happened unto him that was possessed with the
devil: and also of the swine. And they began to pray him, that he
would depart from their coasts. And when he was come into the ship,
he that had the devil prayed him that he might be with him. Iesus
would not suffer him but said unto him: go home into thine own house
and to thy friends, and shew them what things the lord hath done unto
thee, and how he had compassion on thee. And he departed, and began
to publish in the ten cities, what things Iesus had done unto him,
and all men did marvel.
    And when Iesus was come over again in the ship unto the other
side, much people gathered unto him, and he was nigh unto the sea.
And behold, there came unto him one of the rulers of the Synagogue,
whose name was Iairus: and when he saw him, he fell down at his feet,
and besought him greatly saying: my daughter lieth at point of death,
I would thou wouldst come and lay thy hand on her, that she might be
safe and live. And he went with him, and much people followed him,
and thronged him.
    And there was a woman, which was diseased of an issue of blood
twelve year, and had suffered many things of many physicians, and
had spent all that she had, and felt none amendment at all: But waxed
worse and worse. When she had heard of Iesus: she came into the press
behind him, and touched his garment. For she said: If I may but touch
his clothing, I shall be whole. And straight way her fountain of
blood was dried up, and she felt in her body, that she was healed of
the plague.
    And Iesus immediately felt in himself, the vertue that went out
of him, and turned him round about in the press, and said: Who
touched my clothes? And his disciples said unto him: thou seest the
people thrusting thee on every side, and yet sayest: who did touch
me? And he looked round about, for to see her that had done that
thing. The woman feared and trembled, for she knew what was done
within her. And she came and fell down before him and told him the
truth of everything. And he said unto her: Daughter, thy faith hath
saved thee, go in peace, and be whole of thy plague.
    While he yet spake, there came from the ruler of the synagogi's
house, certain which said: thy daughter is dead: why diseasest thou
the Master any further? As soon as Iesus heard that word spoken, he
said unto the ruler of the Synagogue: Be not afraid, only believe.
And he suffered no man to follow him more than Peter, and Iames and
Ihon Iames brother. And he came unto the house of the ruler of the
Synagogue, and saw the wondering and them that wept and wailed
greatly,
    And he went in and said unto them: Why make ye this ado and weep?
The maiden is not dead, but sleepeth. And they laughed him to scorn.
Then he put them all out, and took the father and the mother of the
maiden, and them that were with him, and entered in where the maiden
lay, And took the maiden by the hand, and said unto her: Tabitha,
cumi: which is by interpretation: maiden I say unto thee, arise. And
straight the maiden arose, and went on her feet. For she was of the
age of twelve year. And they were astonied at it out of measure.
And he charged them straitly that no man should know of it. And
commanded to give her meat.

The .vj. Chapter.

    And he departed thence, and came into his own country, and his
disciples followed him. And when the saboth day was come, he began to
teach in the synagogue. And many that heard him were astonied, and
said: From whence hath he these things? and what wisdom is this that
is given unto him? and such virtues that are wrought by his hands? Is
not this that carpenter Marys son, the brother of Iames, and Ioses
and Iuda and Simon? and are not his sisters here with us? And they
were hurt by the reason of him. And Iesus said unto them: a prophet
is not despised but in his own country, and among his own kin, and
among them that are of the same household. And he could there shew no
miracles but laid his hands upon a few sick folk and healed them. And
he marvelled at their unbelief.
    And he went about by the towns that lie in circuit, teaching. And
he called the twelve, and began to send them, two and two, and gave
them power over unclean spirits. And commanded them, that they should
take nothing unto their Iourney, save a rod only: Neither scrip,
neither bread, neither money in their purses: but should be shod with
sandals. And that they should not put on two coats. And said unto
them: wheresoever ye enter into an house, there abide till ye depart
thence. And whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear you, when ye
depart thence, shake off the dust that is under your feet, for a
remembrance unto them. I say verily unto you, it shallbe easier for
Sodom and Gomor, at the day of judgement, than for that city.
    And they went out and preached, that they should repent: and they
cast out many devils. And they anointed, many that were sick with oil
and healed them.
    And king Herode heard of him, for his name was spread abroad, And
he said: Ihon Baptist is risen again from death, and therefore
miracles are wrought in him. Other said, it is Helias: and some said:
it is a prophet, or as one of the prophets. But when Herode heard of
him, he said: it is Ihon whom I beheaded, he is risen from death
again.
    For Herode himself, had sent forth, and had taken Ihon, and bound
him and cast him into prison for Herodias' sake which was his brother
Philip's wife. For he had married her. Ihon said unto Herode: It is
not lawful for thee to have thy brother's wife. Herodias laid wait
for him, and would have killed him, but she could not. For Herode
feared Ihon, knowing that he was just and holy, and gave him
reverence, And when he heard him he did many things, and heard him
gladly.
    And when a convenient day was come: Herode on his birthday made a
supper to the lords, captains, and chief estates of Galile. And the
daughter of the same Herodias came in and danced, and pleased Herode
and them that sat at board also. Then the king said unto the maiden:
ask of me what thou wilt, and I will give it thee. And he sware unto
her, whatsoever thou shalt ask of me, I will give it thee, even unto
the one half of my kingdom. And she went forth and said to her
mother: what shall I ask? And she said: Ihon baptist's head. And she
came in straightway with haste unto the king, and asked saying: I
will, that thou give me by and by in a charger the head of Ihon
baptist. And the king was sorry yet for his oath's sake, and for
their sakes which sat at supper also, he would not put her beside her
purpose. And immediately the king sent the hangman and commanded his
head to be brought in. And he went and beheaded him in the prison,
and brought his head in a charger and gave it to the maiden, and the
maiden gave it to her mother. When his disciples heard of it, they
came and took up his body, and put it in a tomb.
    And the apostles gathered themselves together to Iesus, and told
him all things, both what they had done, and what they had taught.
And he said unto them: come ye apart into the wilderness, and rest
awhile. For there were many comers and goers. And they had no leisure
wos for to eat. And he went by ship aside out of the way into a
desert place. And the people spied them when they departed: and many
knew him, and they hasted afoot thither out of every city, and came
thither before them, And came together unto him. And Iesus went out
and saw much people, and had compassion on them, because they were
like sheep which had no shepherd. And he began to teach them many
things.
    And when the day was now far spent, his disciples came unto him
saying: this is a desert place, and now the day is far passed, let
them depart, that they may go into the country round about, and into
the towns, and buy them bread: for they have nothing to eat. He
answered and said unto them: give ye them to eat. And they said unto
him: shall we go and buy ij.C. pennyworth of bread, and give them to
eat? He said unto them: how many loaves have ye? Go and look. And
when they had searched, they said: v. and ij. fishes. And he
commanded them to make them all sit down, by companies upon the green
grass. And they sat down here a row and there a row, by hundreds and
by fifties. And he took the v. loaves and the ij. fishes And looked
up to heaven and blest, and brake the loaves, and gave them to his
disciples to put before them, and the ij. fishes he divided among
them all. And they all ate, and were satisfied. And they took up
twelve baskets full of the gobbets and of the fishes. And they that
ate were about five thousand men.
    And straightway he caused his disciples to go into the ship, and
to go over the water before unto Bethsaida, while he sent away the
people. And as soon as he had sent them away, he departed into a
mountain to pray. And when even was come the ship was in the midst of
the sea, and he alone on the land, and he saw them troubled in
rowing, for the wind was contrary unto them. And about the fourth
quarter of the night, he came unto them, walking upon the sea, and
would have passed by them. When they saw him walking upon the sea,
they supposed it had been a spirit, and cried out: For they all saw
him, and were afraid. And anon he talked with them, and said unto
them: be of good cheer, it is I, be not afraid. And he went up unto
them into the ship, and the wind ceased, and they were sore amazed in
themselves beyond measure, and marvelled. For they remembered not of
the loaves, because their hearts were blinded.
    And they came over, and went into the land of Genazareth, and
drew up into the haven. And as soon as they were come out of the
ship, straight they knew him, and ran forth throughout all the region
round a about, and began to carry about in beds all that were sick,
when they heard tell that he was there. And whithersoever he entered
into the towns, or cities, or villages, they laid their sick in the
streets, and prayed him, that they might touch and it were but the
edge of his vesture. And as many as touched him were safe.

The .vij. Chapter.

    And the pharisees came together unto him, and divers of the
scribes which came from Ierusalem. And when they saw certain of his
disciples eat bread with common hands (that is to say, with unwashen
hands) they complained. For the pharisees, and all the jews, except
they wash their hands often, eat not, observing the traditions of the
seniors. And when they come from the market, except they wash
themselves they eat not. And many other things there be, which they
have taken upon them to observe, as the washing of cups and cruses,
and of brazen vessels, and of tables.
    Then asked him the pharisees and scribes: why walk not thy
disciples according to the traditions of the seniors, but eat bread
with unwashen hands? He answered and said unto them: well prophesied
hath Esaias of you hypocrites as it is written: This people honoureth
me with their lips, but their heart is far from me: In vain they
worship me, teaching doctrines which are nothing but the commandments
of men, for ye lay the commandment of God apart, and ye observe the
traditions of men as the washing of cruses and of cups, and many
other such like things ye do.
    And he said unto them: well, ye put away the commandment of God,
to maintain your own traditions. For Moses said: Honour thy father
and thy mother: and whosoever saith evil of his father or mother, let
him die for it. But ye say: a man shall say to his father or mother
Corban, that is, whatsoever thing I offer, that same doeth profit
thee. And ye suffer no more that a man do anything for his father or
mother, and thus have ye made the commandment of God of none effect
through your own traditions which ye have ordained. And many such
things ye do.
    And he called all the people unto him, and said unto them:
Hearken unto me every one of you and understand: There is nothing
with out a man that can defile him when it entereth into him, but
those things which proceed out of him are those which defile a man.
If any man have ears to hear, let him hear. And when he came into a
house away from the people, his disciples asked him of the
similitude, and he said unto them: Do ye than lack understanding: Do
ye not yet perceive, that whatsoever thing from without entereth into
a man, it cannot defile him, because it entereth not into his heart,
but into the belly: and goeth out into the draught that purgeth out
all meats.
    And he said that defileth a man which cometh out of a man. For
from within even out of the heart of men, proceed evil thoughts:
advoutry, fornication, murder, theft, covetousness, wickedness,
deceit, uncleanness, and a wicked eye, blasphemy, pride, foolishness:
All these evil things, come from within, and defile a man.
    And from thence he rose and went into the borders of Tyre and
Sidon, and entered into an house, and would that no man should have
known of him: But he could not be hid. For a certain woman whose
daughter had a foul spirit when she heard of him, came and fell down
at his feet. The woman was a greek out of Syrophenicia, and she
besought him that he would cast out the devil out of her daughter.
Iesus said unto her: let the children first be fed. It is not meet,
to take the children's bread, and to cast it unto whelps. She
answered and said unto him: even so Master, nevertheless, the whelps
also eat under the table of the children's crumbs. And he said unto
her: for this saying go thy way, the devil is gone out of thy
daughter. And when she was come home to her house she found the devil
departed, and her daughter lying on the bed.
    And he departed again from the coasts of Tyre and Sidon, and came
unto the sea of Galile thorow the midst of the coasts of the x.
cities. And they brought unto him one that was deaf, and stammered in
his speech, and prayed him to lay his hand upon him. And he took him
aside from the people, and put his fingers in his ears, and did spit,
and touched his tongue, and looked up to heaven and sighted, and said
unto him: ephatha that is to say, be opened. And straightway his ears
were opened, and the string of his tongue was loosed, and he spake
plain. And he commanded them that they should tell no man. But the
more he forbade them, so much the more a great deal they published
it. And were beyond measure astonied, saying: He hath done all things
well, and hath made both the deaf to hear and the dumb to speak.

The .viij. Chapter.

    In those days when there was a very great company, and had
nothing to eat, Iesus called his disciples to him and said unto them:
My heart melteth on this people, because they have now been with me
iij. days, and have nothing to eat: And if I should send them away
fasting to their own houses, they should faint by the way. For divers
of them came from far. And his disciples answered him: from whence
might a man suffice them with bread here in the wilderness? And he
asked them: how many loaves have ye? They said: seven. And he
commanded the people to sit down on the ground. And he took the vij.
loaves, gave thanks, brake, and gave to his disciples, to set before
them. And they set them before the people. And they had a few small
fishes. And he blessed them and commanded them also to be set before
them. They ate and were sufficed, and they took up of the broken meat
that was left, vij. baskets full. They that ate were in number about
four thousand. And he sent them away.
    And anon he took ship with his disciples, and came into the parts
of Dalmanutha. And the pharisees came forth, and began to dispute
with him, and sought of him a sign from heaven tempting him, and he
sighed in his spirit and said: why doth this generation seek a sign?
Verily I say unto you, there shall no sign be given unto this
generation. And he left them and went into the ship again, and
departed over the water. And they had forgotten to take bread with
them, neither had they in the ship with them more than one loaf. And
he charged them saying: take heed, beware of the leaven of the
pharisees, and of the leaven of Herode. And they reasoned among
themselves saying: we have no bread. And when Iesus knew that he said
unto them: why take ye thought because ye have no bread? perceive ye
not yet, neither understand? Have ye your hearts yet blinded? Have ye
eyes and see not? and have ye ears and hear not? Do ye not remember?
When I v. five loaves among v.M. men: How many baskets full of broken
meat took ye up? They said unto him, xij. When I brake vij among iiij
M how many baskets of the leavings of broken meat took ye up? They
said, vij. And he said unto them: how is it that ye understand not?
    And he came to Bethsaida, and they brought a blind man unto him
and desired him, to touch him. And he caught the blind by the hand,
and led him out of the town, and spat in his eyes and put his hands
upon him, and asked him if he saw anything, and he looked up and
said: I see men, For I see them walk as they were trees. After that
he put his hands again upon his eyes, and made him see. And he was
restored to his sight, and saw every man clearly. And he sent him
home to his own house saying: neither go into the town, nor tell it
any in the town.
    And Iesus went out and his disciples into the towns that long to
the city called Cesarea Philippi, and by the way he asked his
disciples saying: whom do men say that I am? They answered: some say
that thou art Ihon Baptist: some say Helias, and some one of the
prophets. And he said unto them: But whom say ye that I am? Peter
answered and said unto him: Thou art very Christ. And he charged
them, that they should tell no man of it. And he began to declare
unto them, how that the son of man must suffer many things, and
should be reproved of the seniors and of the high priests and
scribes, and should be killed, and after three days arise again. And
he spake that saying openly. And Peter took him aside, and began to
chide him. He turned about, and looked on his disciples, and rebuked
Peter saying: Go after me Satan. For thou savourest not the things of
God but the things of men.
    And he called the people unto him, with his disciples also, and
said unto them. Whosoever will follow me, let him forsake himself,
and take up his cross, and follow me. For whosoever will save his
life, shall lose it. But whosoever shall lose his life for my sake
and the Gospel's, the same shall save it. What shall it profit a man,
if he should win all the world and lose his own soul? or else what
shall a man give, to redeem his soul again? Whosoever therefore shall
be ashamed of me and of my words, among this advoutrous and sinful
generation: of him shall the son of man be ashamed, when he cometh in
the glory of his father with the holy angels.

The .ix. Chapter.
And he said unto them: Verily I say unto you: There be some of them
that stand here, which shall not taste of death, till they have seen
the kingdom of God come with power.
    And after vj. days Iesus took Peter, Iames, and Ihon and led them
up into an high mountain out of the way alone, and he was
transfigured before them. And his raiment did shine, and was made
very white, even as snow: so white as no fuller can make upon the
earth. And there appeared unto them Helias with Moses: and they
talked with Iesu. And Peter answered and said to Iesu: Master, here
is good being for us, let us make iij. tabernacles, one for thee, one
for Moses, and one for Helias. And wist not what he said. For they
were afraid. And there was a cloud that shadowed them. And a voice
came out of the cloud saying: This is my dear son, hear him. And
suddenly, they looked round about them, and saw no man more, but
Iesus only.
    As they came down from the hill, he charged them, that they
should tell no man what they had seen, till the son of man were risen
from death again. And they kept that saying within them, and demanded
one of another, what that rising from death again should mean? And
they asked him saying: why then Say the scribes, that Helias must
first come? He answered and said unto them: Helias at his first
coming, shall bring all things again into good order: And even so is
it written of the son of man, that he shall suffer many things, and
shall be set at nought. And I say unto you, that Helias is come, and
they have done unto him whatsoever pleased them, as it is written of
him.
    And he came to his disciples, and saw much people about them, and
the scribes disputing with them. And straightway all the people
beheld him and were amazed, and ran to him, and saluted him. And he
said unto the scribes: What dispute ye with them? And one of the
company answered and said: Master I have brought my son unto thee,
which hath a dumb spirit. And whensoever he taketh him, he teareth
him, and he foameth, and gnasheth with his teeth, and pineth away.
And I spake to thy disciples that they should cast him out, and they
could not.
    He answered him and said: O generation without faith, how long
shall I be with you. How long shall I suffer you? bring him unto me.
And they brought him unto him. And as soon as the spirit saw him, he
tare him. And he fell down on the ground wallowing: And foaming. And
he asked his father: how long is it ago, since this hath happened
him? And he said, of a child. And often times casteth him into the
fire, and also into the water, to destroy him. But if thou canst do
anything, have mercy on us, and help us. Iesus said unto him: ye if
thou couldest believe, all things are possible to him that believeth.
And straight way the father of the child cried with tears saying:
lord I believe, succor mine unbelief.
    When Iesus saw that the people came running together unto him, he
rebuked the foul spirit, saying unto him: Thou dumb and deaf spirit,
I charge thee come out of him, and enter no more into him. And the
spirit cried, and rent him sore and came out: And he was as one that
had been dead, insomuch that many said, he is dead. But Iesus caught
his hand, and lift him up, and he rose. And when he was come into the
house, his disciples asked him secretly: why could not we cast him
out? And he said unto them: this kind can by no other means come
forth, but by prayer and fasting.
    And they departed thence, and took their journey thorow Galile,
and would not, that any man should have known it. For he taught his
disciples, and said unto them: The son of man shall be delivered into
the hands of men, and they shall kill him, and after that he is
killed he shall arise again the third day. But they wist not what
that saying meant, and were afraid to ask him.
    And he came to Capernaum, and when he was come to house, he said
to them: what was it that ye disputed between you by the way? And
they held their peace (for by the way they reasoned among themselves,
who should be the chiefest) And he sat down, and called the twelve
unto him, and said to them: if any man desire to be first, the same
shallbe last of all, and servant unto all. And he took a child, and
set him in the midst of them, and took him in his arms and said unto
them: Whosoever receive any such a child in my name, receiveth me:
And whosoever receiveth me, receiveth not me, but him that sent me.
    Ihon answered him, saying: Master, we saw one casting out devils
in thy name, which followeth not us and we forbade him, because he
followeth us not. But Iesus said: forbid him not. For there is no man
that shall do a miracle in my name, and can speak lightly evil of me.
Whosoever is not against you, is on your part. And whosoever shall
give you a cup of water to drink for my name's sake because ye are
belonging to Christe, verily I say unto you, he shall not lose his
reward.
    And whosoever shall hurt one of these little ones, that believe
in me, it were better for him, that a millstone were hanged about his
neck, and that he were cast into the sea. And if thy hand offend
thee, cut him off. It is better for thee, to enter into life maimed,
than to go, with two hands into hell, into fire that never shall be
quenched, where their worm dieth not, and the fire never goeth out.
And if thy foot offend thee, cut him off. It is better for thee to go
halt into life, than with ij. feet to be cast into hell, into fire
that never shall be quenched: where their worm dieth not, and the
fire never goeth out? And if thine eye offend thee pluck him out. It
is better for thee to go into the kingdom of God with one eye, than
having two eyes to be cast into hell fire: where their worm dieth
not, and the fire never goeth out.
    Every man therefore shall be salted with fire: And every
sacrifice shall be seasoned with salt. Salt is good. But if the salt
be unsavoury: what shall ye salt therewith? See that ye have salt in
yourselves. And have peace among yourselves, one with another.

The .x. Chapter.

    And he rose from thence, and went into the coasts of Iewry
through the region that is beyond Iordan. And the people resorted
unto him afresh: And as he was wont he taught them again. And the
Pharises came and asked him a question: whether it were lawful for a
man to put away his wife: To prove him. He answered and said unto
them: what did Moses bid you do? And they said: Moses suffered to
write a testimonial of her divorcement, and to put her away. And
Iesus answered, and said unto them: For because of your hard hearts
he wrote this precept unto you. But at the first creation, God made
them man and woman, saying: For this thing's sake shall man leave
father and mother, and bide by his wife, and, ij. shall be made one
flesh. So then are they now not twain, but one flesh, therefore that
which God hath coupled, let not man separate.
    And in the house his disciples asked him again of that matter.
And he said unto them: Whosoever putteth away his wife, and marrieth
another, breaketh wedlock to herward. And if a woman forsake her
husband, and be married to another, she committeth advoutry.
    And they brought children to him that he should touch them. And
his disciples chid those that brought them. When Iesus saw that, he
was displeased, and said to them: Suffer the children to come unto me
and forbid them not. For unto such belongeth the kingdom of God.
Verily I say to you, whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God
as a child, he shall not enter therein. And he took them up in his
arms, and put his hands upon them, and blessed them.
    And when he was come out into the way, there came one running and
kneeled to him, and asked him: Good Master, what shall I do, that I
may inherit eternal life? Iesus said to him: why callest thou me
good? there is no man good but one, which is God. Thou knowest the
commandments: break not matrimony, kill not, steal not, bear no false
witness, defraud no man, honour thy father and thy mother. He
answered and said to him: master, all these I have observed from my
youth. Iesus beheld him, and had a favour to him, and said unto him:
One thing is lacking unto thee Go, and sell all that thou hast, and
give it to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven, and come
and follow me, and take thy cross on thee. But he was discomforted
with that saying, and went away mourning, for he had great
possessions.
    And Iesus looked round about, and said unto his disciples: with
what difficulty shall they that have riches enter into the kingdom of
God. His disciples were astonied at his words. Iesus answered
again, and said unto them: children, how hard is it for them, that
trust in their riches, to enter into the kingdom of God? It is easier
for a camel to go thorow the eye of an needle, than for a rich man to
enter into the kingdom of God. And they were astonied out of
measure, saying between themselves: who then can be saved? Iesus
looked upon them, and said: with men it is unpossible, but not with
God: for with God all things are possible.
    And Peter began to say unto him: Lo, we have forsaken all, and
have followed thee. Iesus answered and said: Verily I say unto you,
there is no man that hath forsaketh house, or brethren, or sisters,
or father, or mother, or wife, other children, or lands, for my sake
and the Gospel's, which shall not receive an hundred fold now in this
life, houses, and brethren, and sisters, and mothers and children,
and lands with persecutions, and in the world to come eternal life.
Many that are first, shall be last. And the last first. They were in
the way going up to Ierusalem. And Iesus went before them, and they
were amazed, and as they followed, were afraid.
    And Iesus took the xij. again, and began to tell them what things
should happen unto him. Behold we go up to Ierusalem, and the son of
man shall be delivered unto the high priests and unto the scribes:
and they shall condemn him to death, and shall deliver him to the
gentiles, and they shall mock him, and scourge him and spit upon him,
and kill him, and the third day he shall rise again.
    And Iames and Ihon the sons of Zebedee, came unto him, saying:
Master, we would that thou shouldest do for us whatsoever we desire.
He said unto them: what would ye I should do unto you? They said to
him: grant unto us that we may sit one on thy right hand, and the
other on thy left hand, in thy glory. But Iesus said unto them: Ye
wot not what ye ask. Can ye drink of the cup, that I shall drink of?
And be baptised in the baptism that I shall be baptised in? And they
said unto him: that we can. Iesus said unto them: ye shall drink of
the cup that I shall drink of, and be baptised with the baptism that
I shall be baptised in: But to sit on my right hand and on my left
hand, is not mine to give, but to them for whom it is prepared.
    And when the x. heard that, they began to disdain at Iames and
Ihon. But Iesus called them unto him, and said to them: Ye know well
that they which seem to bear rule among the gentiles, reign as lords
over them. And they that be great among them exercise authority over
them. So shall it not be among you but whosoever of you will be great
among you shall be your minister. And whosoever will be chief, shall
be servant unto all. For even the son of man came, not that other
should minister unto him: but to minister, and to give his life for
the redemption of many.
    And they came to Hiericho, and as he went out of Hiericho, with
his disciples and a great number of people: Barthimeus the son of
Thimeus which was blind, sat by the highways side begging. And when
he heard that it was Iesus of Nazareth, he began to cry and to say:
Iesus the son of David, have mercy on me. And many rebuked him,
because he should hold his peace. But he cried the more a great deal,
thou son of David have mercy on me. And Iesus stood still, and
commanded him to be called, and they called the blind, saying unto
him: Be of good comfort, rise, he called thee. He threw away his cloak,
and rose and came to Iesus: And Iesus answered, and said unto him:
what wilt thou that I do unto thee? The blind said unto him: Master,
that I might see. Iesus said unto him: go thy way, thy faith hath
saved thee: And by and by he received his sight, and followed Iesus
in the way.

The .xj. Chapter.

    And when they came nigh to Hierusalem, unto Bethphage, and
Bethani, besides mount Olivete, he sent forth ij. of his disciples,
and said unto them: Go your ways into the town that is over against
you. And as soon as ye be entered into it ye shall find a colt bound,
whereon never man sat: loose him and bring him hither. And if any man
say unto you: why do ye so? say that the lord hath need of him: and
straightway he will send him hither. And they went their way, and
found a colt tied by the door without in a place where two ways met,
and they loosed him. And divers of them that stood there, said unto
them: what do ye loosing the colt? And they said unto them even as
Iesus had commanded them. And they let them go. And they brought the
colt to Iesus, and cast their garments on him, and he sat upon him.
And many spread their garments in the way. Other cut down branches of
the trees, and strawed them in the way. And they that went before and
they that followed, cried, saying: Hosianna: blessed be he that
cometh in the name of the lord. Blessed be the kingdom that cometh in
the name of him that is lord of our father David. Hosianna in the
highest.
    And the lord entered into Hierusalem, and into the temple. And
when he had looked round about upon all things, and now the eventide
was come he went out unto Bethany with the twelve. And on the morrow
when they were come out from Bethany, he hungered, and he spied a fig
tree afar off, having leaves, and went to see whether he might find
anything thereon: but when he came thereto, he found nothing but
leaves. For the time of figs was not yet. And Iesus answered and said
to it: never man eat fruit of thee hereafter while the world
standeth. And his disciples heard it.
    And they came to Hierusalem, and Iesus went into the temple, and
began to cast out them which sold and bought in the temple. And
overthrew the tables of the money changers, and the stools of them
that sold doves: and would not suffer that any man carried a vessel
thorow the temple. And he taught saying unto them, is it not written,
how that mine house shall be called the house of prayer unto all
nations? But ye have made it a den of thieves.
    And the scribes and high priests heard it and sought how to
destroy him. For they feared him because all the people marvelled at
his doctrine. And when even was come, he went out of the city. And in
the morning as they passed by, they saw the fig tree dried up by the
roots. And Peter remembered, and said unto him: master, behold, the
fig tree which thou cursedst, is withered away. And Iesus answered,
and said unto them: Have confidence in God. Verily I say unto you,
that whosoever shall say unto this mountain: take away thyself, and
cast thyself into the sea, and shall not waver in his heart, but
shall believe that those things which he sayeth shall come to pass,
whatsoever he sayeth shall be done to him. Therefore I say unto you,
whatsoever ye desire when ye pray, believe that ye shall have it and
it shall be done unto you. And when ye stand and pray, forgive if ye
have anything against any man: that your father also which is in
heaven, may forgive you your trespasses. And they came again to
Hierusalem, and as he walked in the temple, there came to him the
high priests, and the scribes, and the seniors, and said unto him: by
what authority doest thou these things? and who gave thee this
authority, to do these things? Iesus answered, and said unto them: I
will also ask of you a certain thing, and answer ye me, and I will
tell you by what authority I do these things. Whether was the baptism
of Ihon from heaven, or of men? Answer me. And they thought in
themselves, saying: if we shall say, from heaven, he will say: why
then did ye not believe him? but if we shall say, of men, then fear
we the people. For all men counted Ihon, that he was a very prophet.
And they answered, and said unto Iesu: we cannot tell. And Iesus
answered, and said unto them: neither will I tell you, by what
authority I do these things.

The .xij. Chapter.

    And he began to speak unto them in similitudes. A certain man
planted a vineyard, and compassed it with an hedge, and ordained a
winepress, and built a tower in it, and let it out to hire unto
husbandmen, and went into a strange country. And when the time was
come he sent to the tenants a servant that he might receive of the
tenants of the fruit of the vineyard. And they caught him and beat
him and sent him again empty. And moreover he sent unto them another
servant, and at him they cast stones and brake his head, and sent him
again all too reviled. And again he sent another, and him they killed:
and many other, beating some, and killing some.
    Yet had he one son whom he loved tenderly, him also sent he at
the last unto them, saying: they will fear my son. But the tenants
said within themselves: This is the heir, come let us kill him and
the inheritance shall be ours. And they took him and killed him, and
cast him out of the vineyard. What shall then the lord of the
vineyard do? He will come and destroy the tenants, and let out the
vineyard to other. Have ye not read this scripture? the stone which
the builders did refuse, is made the chief stone in the corner: This
was done of the lord, and is marvellous in our eyes. And they went
about to take him, but they feared the people. For they perceived
that he spake that similitude against them. And they left him and
went their way.
    And they sent unto him certain of the pharisees with Herode's
servants, to take him in his words. And as soon as they were come,
they said unto him: master, we know that thou art true, and carest
for no man: For thou considerest not the degree of men, but teachest
the way of God truly: Is it lawful to pay tribute to Cesar, or not?
ought we to give, or ought we not to give? He knew their
dissimulation, and said unto them: Why tempt ye me? Bring me a penny,
that I may see it. And they brought him one. And he said unto them:
Whose is this image and superscription? And they said unto him,
Cesar's. And Iesus answered, and said unto them: Then give to Cesar
that which belongeth to Cesar: and give God that which pertaineth to
God. And they marvelled at him.
    And the Saduces came unto him, which say, there is no
resurrection. And they asked him saying: Master, Moses wrote unto us,
if any man's brother die, and leave his wife, behind him, and leave
no children: that then his brother should take his wife, and raise up
seed unto his brother. There were seven brethren and the first took a
wife, and when he died left no seed behind him. And the second took
her, and died: neither left he any seed, and the third likewise. And
seven had her, and left no seed behind them. Last of all the wife
died also. In the resurrection then, when they shall rise again:
whose wife shall she be of them? For seven had her to wife. Iesus
answered, and said unto them: Are ye not therefore deceived because
ye know not the scriptures? Neither the power of God? For when they
shall rise again from death, they neither marry, nor are married: but
are as the angels which are in heaven. As touching the dead, that
they shall rise again: have ye not read in the book of Moses, how in
the bush God spake unto him saying: I am the God of Abraham, and the
God of Isaac, and the God of Iacob? He is not the God of the dead,
but the God of the living, ye are therefore greatly deceived.
    And there came one of the scribes, and when he had heard them
disputing together, and perceived that he had answered them well, he
asked him: Which is the first of all the commandments? Iesus answered
him: the first of all the commandments is. Hear Israhel, our lord
God, is one lord. And thou shalt love thy lord God with all thy
heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and with all thy
strength. This is the first commandment. And the second is like unto
this. Thou shalt love thy neighbor, as thy self. There is none other
commandment greater than these.
    And the scribe said unto him: well master, thou hast said the
truth, that there is one God, and that there is none but he. And to
love him with all the heart, and with all the mind, and with all the
soul, and with all the strength. And to love a man's neighbor as
himself, is a greater thing than all holocausts and sacrifices. And
when Iesus saw that he answered discreetly, he said unto him: Thou
art not far from the kingdom of God. And no man after that durst ask
him any question.
    And Iesus answered, and said teaching in the temple: how say the
scribes, that Christ is the son of David? for David himself inspired
with the holy ghost said: The lord said to my lord, sit on my right
hand till I make thine enemies thy foot stool. Then David himself
calleth him lord, and by what means is he then his son? And much
people heard him gladly.
    And he said unto them in his doctrine: beware of the scribes
which love to go in long, clothing: and love salutations in the
market places, and the chief seats in the synagogues, and to sit in
the uppermost rooms at feasts, and devour widows' houses, and under a
colour pray long prayers. These shall have greater damnation.
    And Iesus sat over against the treasury, and beheld how the
people put money into the treasury. And many that were rich, cast in
much. And there came a certain poor widow, and she threw in two
mites, which make a farthing. And he called unto him his disciples,
and said unto them: Verily I say unto you, that this poor widow hath
cast more in, than all they which have cast into the treasury. For
they all put in of their superfluity: But she of her poverty, cast in
all that she had, even all her living.

The .xiij. Chapter.

    And as he went out of the temple, one of his disciples said unto
him: Master, see what stones, and what buildings are here. And Iesus
answered, and said unto him: Seest thou these great buildings? There
shall not be left one stone upon another, that shall not be thrown
down.
    And as he sat on mount Olivet over against the temple, Peter and
Iames and Ihon and Andrew asked him secretly, tell us when these
things shall be? And what is the sign, when all these things shall be
fulfilled? And Iesus answered them, and began to say: take heed lest
any man deceive you. For many shall come in my name saying: I am
Christ, and shall deceive many.
    When ye shall hear of war, and tidings of war, be ye not
troubled. For such things must needs be. But the end is not yet. For
there shall nation arise against nation, and realm against realm. And
there shall be earthquakes, in all quarters, and famishment, and
troubles. These are the beginning of sorrows.
    But take ye heed to yourselves. For they shall bring you up to
the councils and into the synagogues, and ye shall be beaten, and ye
shall be brought before rulers and kings, for my sake, for a
testimonial unto them. And the gospel must first be published among
all nations.
    But when they lead you and present you take no thought, aforehand
what ye shall say, neither imagine: but whatsoever is given you at
the same time, that speak. For it shall not be ye that shall speak,
but the holy ghost. Yea and the brother shall deliver the brother to
death. And the father the son, and the children shall rise against
their fathers and mothers, and shall put them to death. And ye shall
be hated of all men for my name's sake. But whosoever shall endure
unto the end shall be safe.
    Moreover when ye see the abominable desolation, whereof is spoken
by Daniel the prophet, stand where it ought not, let him that readeth
understand it. Then let them that be in Iewry, flee to the mountains.
And let him that is on the housetop, not descend down into the house,
neither enter therein, to fetch anything out of his house. And let
him that is in the field, not turn back again unto those things which
he left behind him, for to take his clothes with him. But woe is then
to them that are with child, and to them that give suck in those
days. But pray, that your flight be not in the winter. For there
shall be in those days such tribulation, as was not from the
beginning of creatures, which God created, unto this time, neither
shall be. And except that the lord had shortened those days, no man
should be saved. But for the elects' sake, which he hath chosen, he
hath shortened those days.
    And then, if any man say to you: lo, here is Christ, lo, he is
there, believe not. For false christs shall arise, and false
prophets, And shall shew miracles and wonders, to deceive if it were
possible, even the elect. But take ye heed, behold I have shewed you
all things before.
    Moreover in those days after that tribulation, the sun shall wax
dark, and the moon shall not give her light, and the stars of heaven
shall fall, And the powers which are in heaven, shall move. And then
shall they see the son of man coming in the clouds, with great power
and glory. And then shall he send his angels, and shall gather
together his elect from the four winds, and from the one end of the
world to the other.
    Learn a similitude of the fig tree. When his branches are yet
tender, and hath brought forth leaves, ye know, that summer is near.
So in like manner when ye see these things come to pass, understand,
that it is nigh even at the doors. Verily I say unto you, that this
generation shall not pass till all these things be done. Heaven and
earth shall pass, but my words shall not pass. But of the day and the
hour, knoweth no man: no not the Angels which are in heaven: neither
the son himself, save the father only.
    Take heed, watch, and pray, for ye know not when the time is. As
a man which is gone into a strange country and hath left his house,
and given authority to his servants, and to every man his work, and
commanded the porter to watch. Watch therefore, for ye know not when
the master of the house will come, whether at even, or at midnight,
whether at the cock crowing, or in the dawning: lest if he come
suddenly, he should find you sleeping. And that I say unto you, I say
unto all men, watch.

The .xiiij. Chapter.

    After two days followed ester, and the days of sweet bread. And
the high priests and the scribes sought means, how they might take
him by craft and put him to death. But they said: not on the feast
day, least any business arise among the people.
    When he was in Bethania, in the house of Simon the leper, even as
he sat at meat, there came a woman having an alabaster box of
ointment, called nard, that was pure and costly, and she brake the
box and poured it on his head. And there were some that disdained in
themselves, and said: what needed this waste of ointment? For it
might have been sold for more than two hundred pence, and been given
unto the poor. And they grudged against her.
    And Iesus said: let her be in rest, why grieve ye her? She hath
done a good work on me. Yea, and ye shall have poor with you all ways:
and whensoever ye will ye may do them good: but me ye shall not have
always. She hath done that she could: she came aforehand to anoint my
body to his buryingward. Verily I say unto you: wheresoever this
gospel shall be preached thorowout the whole world: this also that
she hath done, shall be rehearsed in remembrance of her.
    And Iudas Iscariot, one of the twelve, went away unto the high
priests, to betray him unto them. When they heard that, they were
glad, and promised that they would give him money. And he sought, how
he might conveniently betray him.
    And the first day of sweet bread, when men offer the paschal
lamb, his disciples said unto him: where wilt thou that we go and
prepare that thou mayest eat the ester lamb? And he sent forth two of
his disciples, and said unto them: Go ye into the city, and there
shall a man meet you bearing a pitcher of water, follow him. And
whithersoever he goeth in, say ye to the good man of the house: the
master asketh where is the guest chamber, where I shall eat the ester
lamb with my disciples? And he will shew you a great parlour, paved,
and prepared: there make ready for us. And his disciples went forth,
and came in to the city, and found as he had said unto them, and made
ready the ester lamb.
    And at even, he came with the twelve. And as they sat at board
and ate, Iesus said: Verily I say unto you: that one of you shall
betray me, which eateth with me. And they began to mourn, and to say
to him one by one: is it I? And another said: Is it I? he answered,
and said unto them: It is one of the xij. and the same dippeth with
me in the platter. The son of man goeth, as it is written of him: but
woe be to that man, by whom the son of man is betrayed. Good were it
for him, if that man had never been born.
    And as they ate, Iesus took bread, gave thanks, brake it and gave
it to them and said: Take, eat, This is my body. And he took the cup,
gave thanks, and gave it to them, and they drank all of it. And he
said unto them: This is my blood of the new Testament, which shall be
shed for many. Verily I say unto you: I will drink no more of this
fruit of the vine, until that day, that I shall drink it new in the
kingdom of God. And when they had said grace, they went out into the
mount olivet.
    And Iesus said unto them: All ye shall hurt thorow me this night.
For it is written: I will smite the shepherd, and the sheep shall be
scattered. But after that I am risen again I will go into Galile
before you. Peter said unto him: And though all men should be hurt,
yet would not I. And Iesus said unto him: Verily I say unto thee this
day even in this night, before the cock crow twice, thou shalt deny
me thrice. And he spake bolder: no, if I should die with thee, I will
not deny thee. Likewise also said they all.
    And they came into a place named Gethsemani. And he said to his
disciples: Sit ye here while I go apart and pray. And he took with
him Peter, Iames, and Ihon, and he began to wax abashed and to be in
an agony. And said unto them: My soul is very heavy even unto the
death, tarry here and watch. And he went forth a little and fell down
on the ground and prayed: That if it were possible, the hour might
pass from him. And he said: Abba father, all things are possible unto
thee, take away this cup from me. Nevertheless not that I will, but
that thou wilt be done.
    And he came and found them sleeping, and said to Peter: Simon
sleepest thou? Couldest not thou watch with me one hour? watch ye,
and pray, least ye enter into temptation, the spirit is ready, but
the flesh is weak. And again he went away and prayed, and spake the
same words. And he returned and found them asleep again, for their
eyes were heavy: neither could they tell what they might answer to
him. And he came the third time, and said unto them: sleep hence
forth and take your ease. It is enough. The hour is come, Behold the
son of man shall be delivered into the hands of sinners. Rise up, let
us go. Lo he that betrayeth me, is come nigh.
    And immediately while he yet spake came Iudas, one of the twelve,
and with him a great number of people with swords and staves from the
high priests and scribes and seniors. He that betrayed him, gave them
a general token, saying: whosoever I do kiss, he it is, take him, and
lead him away warily. And as soon as he was come, he went straightway
to him, and said unto him: master, master, and kissed him. And they
laid their hands on him, and took him. And one of them that stood by
drew out a sword, and smote a servant of the high priest, and cut off
his ear.
    And Iesus answered and said unto them: ye came out as unto a
thief with swords and with staves for to take me, I was daily with
you in the temple teaching, and ye took me not, but that the
scriptures should be fulfilled: And they all forsook him and ran
away. And there was a certain young man that followed him clothed in
linen upon the bare, and the young men caught him, and he left his
linen and fled from them naked.
    And they led Iesus away to the highest priest of all, and to him
came all the high priests and the seniors, and the scribes. And Peter
followed him a great way off even into the palace of the high priest,
and he was there and sat with the servants, and warmed himself at the
fire.
    And the high priests and all the council sought for witness
against Iesu, to put him to death, And they found none. Yet many bare
false witness against him, but their witness agreed not together. And
there arose certain and brought false witness against him, saying: We
heard him say: I will destroy this temple made with hands, and within
three days I will build another, made without hands. And their
witness agreed not together.
    And the highest priest stood up amongst them all, and asked Iesus
saying: answerest thou nothing? How is it that these bear witness
against thee? And he held his peace, and answered nothing. Again the
highest priest asked him, and said unto him: Art thou the Christ the
son of the blessed? And Iesus said: I am. And ye shall see the son of
man sit on the right hand of power, and come in the clouds of heaven.
Then the highest priest rent his clothes and said: what need we any
further witness? ye have heard the blasphemy, what think ye? And they
all gave sentence that he was worthy of death. And some began to spit
at him, and to cover his face, and to beat him with their fists, and
to say unto him, aread unto us. And the servants buffeted him on the
face.
    And Peter was beneath in the palace, and there came one of the
wenches of the highest priest, And when she saw Peter warming
himself, she looked on him, and said: was not thou also with Iesus of
Nazareth? And he denied it saying: I know him not, neither wot I what
thou sayest: And he went out into the porch, and the cock crew. And a
damsel saw him, and again began to say to them that stood by, this is
one of them. And he denied it again. And anon after, again they that
stood by, said to Peter: surely thou art one of them, for thou art of
Galile, and thy speech agreeth thereto. And he began to curse and to
swear, saying: I know not this man of whom ye speak. And again the
cock crew. And Peter remembered the word that Iesus said unto him:
before the cock crow twice, thou shalt deny me thrice, and began to
weep.

The .xv. Chapter.

    And anon in the dawning held the high priests a council with the
seniors and the scribes, And also the whole congregation, and bound
Iesus and led him away, and delivered him to Pilate. And Pilate asked
him: art thou the king of the jewes? And he answered, and said unto
him: thou sayest it. And the high priests accused him of many things.
Pilate asked him again, saying: Answerest thou nothing? Behold how
many things they lay unto thy charge. Iesus yet answered never a
word, so that Pilate marvelled.
    At the feast Pilate was wont to deliver at their pleasure a
prisoner: whomsoever they would desire. And there was one named
Barabas, which lay bound with them, that caused insurrection, and in
the insurrection committed murder. And the people called unto him,
and began to desire of him, according as he had ever done unto them.
Pilate answered them, and said: Will ye that I loose unto you the
king of the jewes? For he knew that the high priests had delivered
him of envy. But the high priests had moved the people that he should
rather deliver Barabas unto them.
    Pilate answered again, and said unto them: What will ye then that
I do with him, whom ye call the king of the jewes? And they cried
again: crucify him. Pilate said unto them: What evil hath he done?
And they cried the more fervently: Crucify him. Pilate willing to
content the people, lowsed them Barabas, And delivered Iesus scourged
for to be crucified.
    And the soldiers led him away into the common hall, and called
together the whole multitude, and they clothed him with purple, and
they plaited a crown of thorns and crowned him with all, And began to
salute him: Hail king of the jewes. And they smote him on the head
with a reed, and spat upon him, and kneeled down and worshipped him.
    And when they had mocked him, they took the purple off him, and
put his own clothes on him, and led him out, to crucify him. And they
compelled one that passed by, called Simon of Cyrene (which came out
of the field, and was father of Alexander and Rufus) to bear his
cross. And they brought him to a place named Golgotha (which is by
interpretation, the place of dead men's skulls) and they gave him to
drink wine mingled with myrrh, but he received it not.
    And when they had crucified him, they parted his garments,
casting lots for them, what every man should have. And it was about
the third hour, and they crucified him. And the title of the cause of
his death was written: The king of the jewes. And they crucified with
him two thieves: the one on his right hand, and the other on his left
hand. And the scripture was fulfilled, which sayeth: and he was
counted among the wicked.
    And they that went by, railed on him: wagging their heads, and
saying: A wretch, that destroyest the temple and buildest it in three
days. Save thyself, and come down from the cross. Likewise also
mocked him the high priests among themselves with the scribes, and
said: He saved other men, himself he cannot save. Let Christ the king
of Israel now descend from the cross, that we may see and believe.
And they that were crucified with him, checked him also.
    And when the sixth hour was come, darkness arose over all the
earth, until the ninth hour. And at the ninth hour Iesus cried with a
loud voice, saying: Eloi, Eloi, lama sabaththani, which is if it be
interpreted: my God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? And some of
them that stood by when they heard that said: behold he calleth for
Helias. And one ran, and filled a sponge full of vinegar, and put it
on a reed, and gave it him to drink, saying: let him alone, let us
see whether Helias will come and take him down.
    But Iesus cried with a loud voice, and gave up the ghost. And the
veil of the temple did rent in two parts, from the top to the bottom.
And when the undercaptain which stood before him saw that he so cried
and gave up the ghost, and he said: truly this man was the son of
God. There were also women a good way off beholding him: among whom
was Mary Magdalen, and Mary the mother of Iames the little and of
Ioses, and Mary Salome: which also when he was in Galile, followed
him and ministered unto him, and many other women which came up with
him to Hierusalem.
    And now when night was come (because it was the even that goeth
before the saboth) Ioseph of Arimathia a noble senator (which also
looked for the kingdom of God) came And went in boldly unto Pilate,
and begged the body of Iesu. Pilate marvelled that he was already
dead, and called unto him the under captain, and asked of him,
whether he had been any while dead. And when he knew the truth of the
under captain, he gave the body to Ioseph. And he bought a linen
cloth, and took him down and wrapped him in the linen cloth, and laid
him in a tomb, that was hewn out of the rock. And rolled a stone unto
the door of the sepulcre. And Mary Magdalene and Mary Iose beheld
where he was laid.

The .xvj. Chapter.

    And when the saboth day was past, Mary Magdalen, and Mary Iacobi,
and Salome, bought ointments, that they might come and anoint him.
And early in the morning the next day after the saboth day, they came
unto the sepulchre, when the sun was risen. And they said one to
another: who shall roll us away the stone from the door of the
sepulchre? And when they beheld it, they saw how the stone was rolled
away. For it was a very great one, and they went into the sepulchre,
and saw a young man, sitting on the right side, clothed in a long
white garment, and they were abashed.
    He said unto them, be not afraid, ye seek Iesus of Nazareth,
which was crucified. He is risen, he is not here. Behold the place,
where they put him. But go your way, and tell his disciples, and
namely Peter, that he is gone before you into Galile, there shall ye
see him, as he said unto you. And they went out quickly and fled from
the sepulchre. For they trembled and were amazed. Neither said they
anything to any man, for they were afraid.
    When Iesus was risen the morrow after the saboth day, he appeared
first to Mary Magdalen, out of whom he cast seven devils. And she
went, and told them that were with him, as they mourned and wept. And
when they heard, that he was alive, and had appeared to her: they
believed it not. After that, he appeared unto two of them in a
strange figure, as he walked, and went into the country. And they
went, and told it to the remnant. And they believed them neither.
    After that he appeared unto the eleven as they sat at meat: and
cast in their teeth their unbelief, and hardness of heart: because
they believed not them which had seen him after his resurrection. And
he said unto them: Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to
all creatures: Whosoever believeth, and is baptised, shall be safe:
And whosoever that believeth not, shall be damned.
    And these signs shall follow them that believe: In my name they
shall cast out devils, and shall speak with new tongues, and shall
kill serpents. And if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt
them. They shall lay their hands on the sick, and they shall recover.
So then when the lord had spoken unto them, he was received into
heaven, and sat on the right hand of God. And they went forth, and
preached everywhere. And the lord wrought with them, And confirmed
their preaching with miracles that followed.

The end of the gospell off S. Marke.


The gospell of S. Luke

The first Chapter.

    Forasmuch as many have taken in hand to compile a treatise of
those things, which are surely known among us, even as they declared
them unto us, which from the beginning saw them with their eyes, and
were ministers at the doing: I determined also, as soon as I had
searched out diligently all things from the beggining, that then I
would write unto thee, good Theophilus, that thou mightest know the
certainty of those things, whereof thou art informed.
    In the time of Herode king of jewry, there was a certain priest
named Zacharias, of the course of Abie. And his wife was of the
daughters of Aaron: And her name was Elizabeth. Both were perfect
before God, and walked in all the laws and ordinances of the lord
that no man could find fault with them. And they had no child,
because that Elizabeth was barren, And both were well stricken in
age.
    It came to pass, as he executed the priest's office, before God
as his course came (according to the custom of the priest's office)
his lot was to burn odoures. And went into the temple of the lord,
and all the multitude of people were without in their prayers while
the odoures were a burning. There appeared unto him the lord's angel,
standing on the right side of the altar of odoures. And when
Zacharias saw him, he was abashed, and fear came on him.
    The angel said unto him: fear not Zacary, for thy prayer is
heard: And thy wife Helizabeth shall bear thee a son, and thou shalt
call his name Ihon: And thou shalt have joy and gladness: And many
shall rejoice at his birth. For he shall be great in the sight of
God, and shall neither drink wine nor strong drink. And he shall be
filled with the holy ghost, even in his mother's womb: and many of
the children of Israhel shall he turn to their lord God. And he shall
go before him in the spirit and power of Helias to turn the hearts of
the fathers to their children, and the unbelievers to the wisdom of
the just men: to make the people ready for the lord.
    And Zacary said unto the angel: Whereby shall I know this? seeing
that I am old, and my wife well stricken in years. And the angel
answered, and said unto him: I am Gabriel that stand in the presence
of God, and am sent to speak unto thee: and to shew thee this glad
tidings. And take heed thou shalt be dumb, and not able to speak
until the time that these things be performed, because thou
believedst not my words, which shall be fulfilled in their season.
    And the people waited for Zacharias and marvelled that he tarried
in the temple. When he came out, he could not speak unto them. And
they perceived, that he had seen some vision in the temple. And he
beckoned unto them, and remained speechless.
    And it fortuned, as soon as the time of his office was out, he
departed home into his own house. And after those days, his wife
Elizabeth conceived, and hid herself v. months, saying: This wise
hath God dealt with me in the days when he looked on me, to take from
me the rebuke that I suffered among men.
    And in the vj. month the angel Gabriel was sent from God unto a
city of Galile, named Nazareth, to a virgin spoused to a man, whose
name was Ioseph, of the house of David, and the virgins name was
Mary. And the angel went in unto her, and said: Hail full of grace,
the lord is with thee: blessed art thou among women. When she saw
him, she was abashed at his saying: and cast in her mind what manner
of salutation that should be. And the angel said unto her: fear not
Mary, thou hast found grace with God. Lo: thou shalt conceive in thy
womb, and shalt bear a child, and shalt call his name Iesus. He shall
be great, and shall be called the son of the highest. And the lord
God shall give unto him the seat of his father David: And he shall
reign over the house of Iacob for ever, and of his kingdom shall be
none end.
    Then said Mary unto the angel: How shall this be, seeing I know
not a man? And the angel answered, and said unto her: The holy ghost
shall come upon thee, and the power of the highest shall overshadow
thee. Therefore also that holy thing which shall be born, shall be
called the son of God. And mark, thy cousin Elizabeth, hath also
conceived a son in her old age. And this is the .vj. month to her,
which was called barren, for with God shall nothing be unpossible.
Mary said: behold the handmaiden of the lord, be it unto me even as
thou hast said. And the angel departed from her.
    Mary arose in those days, and went into the mountains with haste
into a city of jewry, and entered into the house of Zachary, and
saluted Elizabeth: And it fortuned, as Elizabeth heard the salutation
of Mary, the babe sprang in her belly. And Elizabeth was filled with
the holy ghost, and cried with a loud voice, and said: Blessed art
thou among the women, and blessed is the fruit of thy womb. And
whence happeneth this to me, that the mother of my lord should come
to me? Lo, as soon as the voice of thy salutation sounded in mine
ears, the babe sprang in my belly for joy. And blessed art thou that
believedst: For those things shall be performed which were told thee
from the lord.
    And Mary said: My soul magnifieth the lord. And my spirit
rejoiceth in God my saviour: For he hath looked on the poor degree of
his handmaiden. Behold now from hence forth shall all generations
call me blessed. For he that is mighty hath done to me great things,
and blessed is his name. And his mercy is always on them that fear
him thorow out all generations. He hath shewed strength with his arm,
he hath scattered them that are proud in the imagination of their
hearts. He hath put Down the mighty from their seats, and hath
exalted them of low degree. He hath filled the hungry with good
things: And hath sent away the rich empty. He hath remembered mercy:
and hath holpen his servant Israhel. Even as he promised to our
fathers, Abraham and to his seed for ever. And Mary abode with her
about a iij. months, And returned home again.
    Elizabeths time was come that she should be delivered, And she
brought forth a son. And her neighbours and her cousins heard tell
how, the lord had magnified his mercy upon her, and they rejoiced
with her.
    And it fortuned the eighth day: they came to circumcise the
child: and called his name Zacari after the name of his father, and
his mother answered, and said: not so, but he shall be called Ihon.
And they said unto her: There is none of thy kin, that is named with
this name. And they made signs to his father, how he would have him
called. And he asked for writing tables and wrote saying: his name is
Ihon. And they marvelled all. And his mought was opened immediately,
and his tongue, and he spake lauding God. And fear came on all them
that dwelt nigh: And all these sayings were noised abroad throughout
all the hill country of jewry: and all they that heard them laid them
up in their hearts, saying: What manner child shall this be? And the
hand of God was with him.
    And his father Zacharias was filled with the holy ghost, and
prophesied saying: Blessed be the lord God of Israhel, for he hath
visited and redeemed his people. And hath raised up an horn of
salvation unto us, in the house of his servant David. Even as he
promised by the mouth of his holy prophets which were since the world
began. That we should be saved from our enemies: And from the hands
of all that hate us: To shew mercy towards our fathers, and to
remember his holy promise. That is to say the oath, which he sware to
our father Abraham, for to give us. That we delivered out of the
hands of our enemies, might serve him without fear: all the days of
our life, in such holiness and righteousness that are accept before
him. And thou child, shalt be called the prophet of the highest, for
thou shalt go before the face of the lord, to prepare his ways: And
to give knowledge of health unto his people, for the remission of
sins: Through the tender mercy of our lord, wherewith hath visited us
the day spring from on high: To give light to them that sat in
darkness, and in shadow of death, and to guide our feet into the way
of peace. And the child increased and waxed strong in spirit, and was
in wilderness, till the day came, when he should shew himself unto
the Israhelites.

The second Chapter.

    It followed in those days: that there went out a commandment from
August the Emperor, that all the world should be valued. This taxing
was first executed when Syrenus was leftenant in Syria. And every man
went into his own shire town, there to be taxed. And Ioseph also
ascended from Galilee, out of a city called Nazareth, into jewry:
into the city of David, which is called Bethlehem, because he was of
the house and lineage of David to be taxed with Mary his wedded wife,
which was with child.
    And it fortuned while they were there, her time was come that she
should be delivered. And she brought forth her first begotten son.
And wrapped him in swaddling clothes, and laid him in a manger,
because there was no room for them within, in the hostry.
    And there were in the same region shepherds abiding in the field,
and watching their flock by night. And lo: the angel of the lord
stood hard by them, and the brightness of the lord shone round about
them, and they were sore afraid. And the angel said unto them: Be not
afraid: Behold I bring you tidings of great joy, that shall come to
all the people: for unto you is born this day in the city of David a
saviour, which is Christ the lord. And take this for a sign: ye shall
find the child swaddled, and laid in a manger. And straight way there
was with the angel a multitude of heavenly soldiers, lauding God, and
saying: Glory to God on high, and peace on the earth: and unto men
rejoicing.
    And it fortuned, as soon as the angels were gone away into
heaven, the shepherds said one to another: let us go even unto
Bethlehem, and see this thing that is happened, which the lord hath
shewed unto us. And they came with haste, and found Mary and Ioseph,
and the babe laid in a manger. And when they had seen it, they
published abroad the saying, which was told them of that child. And
all that heard it wondered, at those things which were told them of
the shepherds. But Mary kept all those sayings, and pondered them in
her heart. And the shepherds returned, praising and lauding God for
all that they had heard and seen, even as it was told unto them.
    And when the eighth day was come that the child should be
circumcised, his name was called Iesus, which was named of the Angel
before he was conceived in the mother's womb.
    And when the time of their purification (after the law of Moses)
was come they brought him to Hierusalem, to present him to the lord
(As it is written in the law of the lord: every man child that first
openeth the matrix, shall be called holy to the lord) and to offer
(as it is said in the law of the lord) a pair of turtle doves, or ij.
young pigeons.
    And behold there was a man in Hierusalem, whose name was Simeon.
And the same man was just and feared God, and longed for the
consolation of Israhel, and the holy ghost was in him. And an answer
was given him of the holy ghost, that he should not see death, before
he had seen the lord's Christ. And he came by inspiration into the
temple.
    And as the father and mother brought in the child Iesus, to do
for him after the custom of the law: Then took he him up in his arms
and said. Lord Now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace according
to thy promise. For mine eyes have seen the saviour sent from thee:
Which thou hast prepared before the face of all people. A light to
lighten the gentiles, and the glory of thy people Israhel. And his
father and mother marvelled at those things, which were spoken of
him: And Simeon blessed them, and said unto Mary his mother: behold,
this child shall be the fall, and resurrection of many in Israhel:
And a sign which shall be spoken against. And moreover the sword
shall pierce the very heart of thee, that the thoughts of many hearts
may be opened.
    And there was Anna, a prophetess, the daughter of Phanuel of
tribe of Aser. And she was of a great age, and had lived with an
husband. vij. years from her virginity. And this widow about iiij.
score and iiij. years of age, which went never out of the temple, but
served there with fasting and prayer night and day. And she came
forth that same hour, and praised God, and spake of him to all that
looked for redemption in Hierusalem.
    And as soon as they had performed all things according to the law
of the lord, they returned into Galile into their own city Nazareth.
And the child grew and waxed strong in spirit, and was full of
wisdom, and the favour of God was with him.
    And his father and mother went to Hierusalem every year at the
feast of ester. And when he was xij. years old, they went up to
Hierusalem after the custom of the feast. And when they had fulfilled
the days, as they returned home, the child Iesus bode still in
Hierusalem, unknowing to his father and mother. For they supposed he
had been in the company. They came a day's journey, and sought him
among their kinsfolk and acquaintance, and found him not They went
back again to Hierusalem, and sought him. And it fortuned after iij.
days, they found him in the temple sitting in the midst of the
doctors, both hearing them, and posing them. And all that heard him
marvelled at his wit and answers.
    And when they saw him, they were astonied. And his mother said
unto him: son why hast thou thus dealt with us? Behold thy father and
I have sorowed and sought thee. And he said unto them: how is it that
ye sought me? wist ye not that I must go about my father's business?
And they understood not the saying that he spake to them. And he went
with them, and came to Nazareth, and was obedient to them. His mother
kept all these things in her heart. And Iesus increased in wisdom and
age, and in favour with God and man.

The .iij. Chapter.

    In the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius the Emperor,
Pontius Pilate being leftenant of Iewry, and Herod being Tetrarch of
Galilee, and his brother Philip Tetrarch in Iturea, and in the region
of Traconitis, and Lysanias the Tetrarch of Abyline: When Anna and
Cayphas were the high priests: The commandment of God was published
unto Ihon the son of Zacharias in the wilderness. And he came into
all the coasts about Iordan, preaching the baptism of repentance for
the remission of sins, as it is written in the book of the sayings of
Esayas the prophet, which sayeth: The voice of a crier in wilderness,
prepare the way of the lord, make his paths straight. Every valley
shall be filled, and every mountain and hill shall be brought low:
And crooked things shall be made straight: and the rough ways shall
be made smooth. And all flesh shall see the saviour sent of God.
    Then said he to the people, that were come to be baptised of him.
O generation of vipers: who hath shewed the craft to fly from wrath
to come? Bring forth due fruits of repentance, And begin not to say
in yourselves, we have Abraham to our father. For I say unto you: God
is able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham. Now also
is the axe laid unto the root of the trees. Every tree therefore,
which bringeth not forth good fruit, shall be hewn down, and cast
into the fire.
    And the people asked him, saying: What shall we do then. He
answered and said unto them: He that hath ij. coats, let him part
with him that hath none: And he that hath meat, let him do likewise.
    Then came there publicans to be baptised, and said unto him:
Master, what shall we do? He answered unto them: require no more than
that, which is appointed unto you.
    The soldiers likewise demanded of him, saying: and what shall we
do? And he said to them: Do violence to no man: neither trouble any
man wrongfully: And be content with your wages.
    As the people were in a doubt, and all men disputed in their
hearts of Ihon: Whether he were very Christ, Ihon answered and said
to them all: I baptise you with water, but a stronger then cometh,
whose shoe latchet I am not worthy to unloose: he will baptise you
with the holy ghost, and with fire, which hath his fan in his hand,
and will purge his floor, and will gather his corn into his barn: And
the chaff will he burn with fire that never shall be quenched. And
many other things in his exhortation preached he unto the people.
    Then Herod the Tetrach (when he was rebuked of him for Herodias
his brother Philippe's wife, and for all the evils which Herod had
done) added this above all, and laid Ihon prison.
    And it fortuned as all the people received baptism (And when
Iesus was baptised and did pray) that heaven was opened, and the holy
ghost came down in a bodily shape like a dove upon him, And a voice
came from heaven, saying: Thou art my dear son, In thee do I delight.
    And Iesus himself was about thirty year of age when he began,
being as men supposed the son of Ioseph: which Ioseph was the son of
Heli: which was the son of Mathat: which was the son of Levi: which
was the son of Melchi: which was the son of Ianna: which was the son
of Ioseph: which was the son of Matatthias: which was the son of
Amos: which was the son of Nahum: which was the son of Esli: which
was the son of Nagge: which was the son of Maath: which was the son
of Matathias: which was the son of Semei: which was the son of
Ioseph: which was the son of Iuda: which was the son of Iohanna:
which was the son of Rhesya: which was the son of Zorobabel: which
was the son of Salathiel: which was the son of Neri: which was the
son of Melchi: which was the son of Addi: which was the son of Cosam:
which was the son of Helmadam: which was the son of Her: which was
the son of Ieso: which was the son of Helieser: which was the son of
Ioram: which was the son of Mattha: which was the son of Levi: which
was the son of Simeon: which was the son of Iuda: which was the son
of Ioseph: which was the son of Ionam: which was the son of Heliacim:
which was the son of Melea: which was the son of Menam: which was the
son of Matathan: which was the son of Nathan: which was the son of
David: which was the son of Iesse: which was the son of Obed: which
was the son of Boos: which was the son of Salmon: which was the son
of Naason: which was the son of Aminadab: which was the son of Aram:
which was the son of Esrom: which was the son of Phares: which was
the son of Iuda: which was the son of Iacob: which was the son of
Ysaac: which was the son of Abraham: which was the son of Tharra:
which was the son of Nachor: which was the son of Saruch: which was
the son of Ragau: which was the son of Phalec: which was the son of
Heber: which was the son of Sala: which was the son of Cainan: which
was the son of Arphaxad: which was the son of Sem: which was the son
of Noe: which was the son of Lameth: which was the son of Mathusala:
which was the son of Enoch: which was the son of Iareth: which was
the son of Malalehel: which was the son of Cainan: which was the son 
of Enos: which was the son of Seth: which was the son of Adam: which 
was the son of God.

The .iiij. Chapter.

    Iesus then full of the holy ghost, returned from Iordan, and was
carried of the spirit into a wilderness, and was xl. days tempted of
the devil. And in those days ate he nothing:     And when they were
ended, he afterward hungered. And the devil said unto him: if thou be
the son of God, command this stone that he be bread. And Iesus
answered him, saying: It is written: man shall not live by bread
only, but by every word of God.
    And the devil took him up into an high mountain, and shewed him
all the kingdoms of the earth, even in the twinkling of an eye. And
the devil said unto him: all this power will I give thee every whit,
and the glory of them (for that is delivered to me, and to whosoever
I will I give it. If thou therefore wilt worship me, they shall be
all thine. Iesus answered and said unto him: hence from me Satan. For
it is written. Thou shalt honour thy lord God, and him only serve.
    And he carried him to Ierusalem, and set him on a pinnacle of the
temple, and said unto him: If thou be the son of God, cast thyself
down from hence. For it is written, he shall give his angels charge
over thee, to keep thee, and with their hands they shall stay thee
up, that thou hurt not thy foot against a stone. Iesus answered and
said unto him, it is said, thou shalt not tempt the thy lord God. And
as soon as the devil had ended all his temptations, he departed from
him for a season.
    And Iesus returned by the power of the spirit into Galile, and
the fame of him went thorow out all the region round about. And he
taught in their synagogues, and was commended of all men.
    And he came to Nazareth where he was nursed, and as his custom
was, went into the synagogue on the saboth days, and stood up for to
read. And there was delivered unto him the book of the prophet
Esaias. And when he had opened the book, he found the place, where it
was written: The spirit of the lord upon me, because he hath anointed
me, To preach the gospell to the poor he hath sent me, And to heal
which are troubled in their hearts: To preach deliverance to the
captive, And sight to the blind, And freely to set at liberty them
that are bruised, And to preach the acceptable year of the lord.
    And he closed the book, and gave it again to the minister, and
sat down. And the eyes of all that were in the synagogue, were
fastened on him. And he began to say unto them. This day is this
scripture fulfilled in your ears. And all they bare him witness, and
wondered at the gracious words, which proceeded out of his mouth, and
said: Is not this Ioseph's son?
    And he said unto them: Ye may very well say unto me this proverb.
Physician, heal thyself. Whatsoever we have heard done in Capernaum,
do the same likewise in thine own country. And he said: Verily I say
unto you: No prophet is accepted in his own country.
    But I tell you of a truth, Many widows were in Israhell in the
days of Helyas, when heaven was shut three years and six months, when
great famishment was throughout all the land, And unto none of them
was Helyas sent, save into Sarepta besides Sydon unto a woman that
was a widow. And many lepers were in Israhel in the time of Heliseus
the prophet, and yet none of them was healed, saving Naaman of Siria.
    And as many as were in the synagogue when they heard that, were
filled with wrath and rose up, and thrust him out of the city, and
led him even unto the edge of the hill, whereon their city was built,
to cast him down headlong. But he went his way even thorow the midst
of them: and came into Capernaum a city of Galile, and there taught
them on the saboth days. And they were astonied at his doctrine: for
his preaching was with power.
    And in the synagogue there was a man, which had a foul spirit
within him, and cried with a loud voice, saying: let me alone, what
hast thou to do with us, thou Iesus of Nazareth? Art thou come to
destroy us? I know thee what thou art, thou art the holy man of God.
And Iesus rebuked him, saying: hold thy peace, and come out of him.
And the devil threw him in the midst of them and came out of him, and
hurt him not. And fear came on them all, And they spake among
themselves, saying: what manner a thing is this? For with authority
and power he commandeth the foul spirits and they come out? And the
fame of him spread abroad thorow out all places of the country round
about.
    And he rose up and came out of the synagogue, and entered into
Simon's house. And Simon's motherinlaw was taken with a great fever,
And they made intercession to him for her. And he stood over her, and
rebuked the fever: and it left her. And immediately she rose and
ministered unto them.
    When the son was down, all they that had sick, taken with divers
diseases, brought them unto him: and he laid his hands on every one
of them, and healed them. And devils also came out of many of them,
crying and saying: thou art Christ the son of God. And he rebuked
them, and suffered them not to speak, for they knew that he was
Christ.
    As soon as it was day, he departed and went away into a desert
place, and the people sought him and came to him, and kept him that
he should not depart from them. And he said unto them: I must to
other cities also preach the word of God, for therefore am I sent.
And he preached in the synagogues of Galilee.

The .v. Chapter.

    It came to pass as the people pressed upon him, to hear the word
of God, that he stood by the lake of Genazareth: and saw two ships
stand by the lakeside, for the fishermen were gone out of them, and
were washing their nets. Iesus entered into one of the ships, which
pertained to Simon, and prayed him, that he would carry him a little
from the land. And he sat down and taught the people out of the ship.
    When he had left speaking, he said unto Simon: Carry us into the
deep, and let slip thy net to make a draught. And Simon answered, and
said to him: Master we have laboured all night, and have taken
nothing. Yet now at thy word I will loose forth the net. And when
they had so done, they inclosed a great multitude of fishes. And the
net brake: and they made signs to their fellows which were in the
other ship, that they should come and help them. And they came, and
they filled both the ships, that they sunk again.
    When Simon Peter saw that, he fell down at Iesus' knees saying:
lord go from me, for I am a sinful man. For he was utterly astonied,
and all that were with him at the draught of fish which they took:
and so was also Iames and Ihon the sons of Zebedei, which were
partakers with Simon. And Iesus said unto Simon: fear not, from
henceforth thou shalt catch men. And they brought the ships to land,
and forsook all, and followed him.
    And it fortuned as he was in a certain city, and behold there was
a man full of leprosy: and when he had spied Iesus, he fell on his
face and besought him saying: lord if thou wilt, thou canst make me
clean. And he stretched forth his hand, and touched him saying: I
will, be thou clean. And immediately the leprosy departed from him.
And he warned him, that he should tell no man: but that he should go
and shew himself to the priest, and offer for his cleansing according
as Moses commandment was, for a witness unto them.
    But his name spread the more abroad, and the people came together
to hear, and to be healed of him, of infirmities. And he kept himself
apart in the wildernesses, and gave himself to prayer.
    And it happened on a certain day, that he taught, and there sat
the pharisees, and doctors of law, which were come out of all the
towns of Galile, Iewry, and Ierusalem, and the power of the lord was
to heal them. And behold, men brought a man lying in his bed, which
was taken with a palsy, and they sought means to bring him in, and to
lay him before him. And when they could not find by what way they
might bring him in, because of the press, they went up on the top of
the house, and let him down thorow the tiling, bed and all in the
midst before Iesus. When he saw their faith he said unto him: man thy
sins are forgiven thee. And the scribes, and the pharisees, began to
think saying: What fellow is this: which speaketh blasphemy? Who can
forgive sins, but God only?
    When Iesus perceived their thoughts, he answered and said unto
them: What think ye in your hearts? Whether is easier to say, thy
sins are forgiven thee, or to say: Rise and walk? That ye may know
that the son of man hath power to forgive sins on earth, he said unto
the sick of the palsy: I say to thee, arise, take up thy bed and go
home to thy house. And immediately he rose up before them all, and
took up his bed whereon he lay, and departed to his own house
praising God. And they were ail amazed, and they lauded God, and were
filled with fear, saying: We have seen strange things today.
    And after that he went forth, and saw a publican, named Levi,
sitting at the receipt of custom, and said unto him: follow me. And
he left all, rose up, and followed him. And that same Levi made him a
great feast at home in his own house. And there was a great company
of publicans, and of other that sat at meat with him. And the scribes
and pharisees murmured against his disciples, saying: Why eat ye and
drink ye, with publicans and sinners? Iesus answered and said unto
them: They that are whole, need not of the physician: but they that
are sick. I came not to call the righteous to repentance: but the
sinners.
    They said unto him: Why do the disciples of Ihon fast often and
pray: and the disciples of the pharisees also: and thine eat and
drink? To whom he said: Can ye make the Children of the wedding fast,
as long as the bridegroom is present with them? The days will come,
when the bridegroom shall be taken away from them, then shall they
fast in those days.
    He spake unto them in a similitude: No man putteth a piece of a
new garment, into an old vesture: for if he do, then breaketh he the
new and the piece that was taken out of the new, agreeth not with the
old. Also no man poureth new wine into old vessels, if he do, the new
wine breaketh the vessels, and runneth out itself, and the vessels
perish: But new wine must be poured into new vessels, and both are
preserved. Also no man that drinketh old wine, straightway can away
with new, for he sayeth: the old is pleasanter.

The .vj. Chapter.

    It happened on an after Sabbath, they went thorow the corn field,
and his disciples plucked the ears of corn, and ate them, and rubbed
them in their hands. Certain of the pharisees said unto them: Why do
ye that which is not lawful to be done on the saboth days? Iesus
answered them and said: Have ye not read what David did, when he
himself was an hungered, and they which were with him: how he went
into the house of God, and took and ate the loaves of hallowed bread,
and gave also to them which were with him: which was not lawful to
eat, but for the priests only. And he said unto them: The son of man
is lord even of the saboth day.
    And it fortuned in another saboth also, that he entered into the
synagogue and taught. And there was a man, whose right hand was dried
up. The scribes, and pharisees watched him, to see whether he would
heal on the saboth day or not, that they might find an accusation
against him. But he knew their thoughts, and said to the man which
had the withered hand: Rise up, and stand forth in the midst. He
arose, and stepped forth. Then said Iesus unto them: I will ask you a
question: Whether is it lawful on the saboth days to do good, or to
do evil? to save life or for to destroy it? And he beheld them all in
compass, and said unto the man: Stretch forth thy hand. He did so,
and his hand was restored, and made as whole as the other. And they
were filled full of madness, and communed one with another, what they
might do to Iesu.
    It fortuned in those days, he went out into a mountain for to
pray, and continued all night in prayer to God. And as soon as it was
day, he called his disciples, and of them he chose twelve, which also
he called his apostles. Simon, whom also he named Peter: and Andrew
his brother, Iames and Ihon, Philip and Bartlemew, Matthew and
Thomas, Iames the son of Alpheus and Simon called Zelotes, and Iudas
Iames' son, and Iudas Iscariot, which same was the traitor.
    And he came down with them and stood in the plain field with the
company of his disciples, and a great multitude of people out of all
parts of Iury and Ierusalem, and from the sea coast of Tyre and
Sidon, which came to hear him, and to be healed of their diseases,
and they also that were vexed with foul spirits, and they were
healed. And all the people pressed to touch him: for there went
virtue out of him, and healed them all.
    And he lifted up his eyes upon the disciples, and said: Blessed
are ye poor: for yours is the kingdom of God. Blessed are ye that
hunger: for ye shall be satisfied. Blessed are ye that weep: for ye
shall laugh. Blessed are ye when men hate you, and thrust you out of
their company, and rail on you, and abhor your name, as an evil
thing, for the son of man's sake. Rejoice ye then, and be glad: for
behold your reward is great in heaven. After this manner their
fathers entreated the prophets.
    But woe be to you that are rich: for ye have therein your
consolation. Woe be to you that are full: for ye shall hunger. Woe be
to you that now laugh: for ye shall wail, and weep. Woe be to you
when all men praise you: for so did their fathers to the false
prophets.
    But I say unto you which hear: Love your enemies. Do good to them
which hate you. Bless them that curse you. And pray for them which
wrongfully trouble you. And unto him that smiteth thee on the one
cheek, offer also the other. And him that taketh away thy gown,
forbid not to take thy coat also. Give to every man that asketh of
thee. And if any man that take away thy goods, ask them not again.
And as ye would that men should do to you: so do ye to them likewise.
    If ye love them which love you: what thank are ye worthy of?
seeing that the very sinners love their lovers. And if ye do for them
which do for you: what thank are ye worthy of? For the very sinners
do even the same. If ye lend to them of whom ye hope to receive: what
thank shall ye have: for the very sinners, lend to sinners, to
receive as much again. Love ye your enemies, do good, and lend,
looking for nothing again: and your reward shall be great, and ye
shall be the children of the highest: for he is kind unto the unkind,
and to the evil.
    Be ye therefore merciful, as your father is merciful. Judge not
and ye shall not be judged. Condemn not: and ye shall not be
condemned. Forgive, and ye shall be forgiven. Give, and it shall be
given unto you: good measure, pressed down, shaken together, and
running over, shall men give into your bosoms. For with what measure
ye mete, with the same shall men mete to you again.
    And he put forth a similitude unto them: Can the blind lead the
blind? Do they not both then fall into the ditch? The disciple is not
above his master. Every man shall be perfect, even as his master is.
Why seest thou a mote in thy brother's eye, and considerest not the
beam that is in thine own eye? Other how canst thou say to thy
brother: Brother let me pull out the mote that is in thine eye: when
thou perceivest not the beam that is in thine own eye? Hypocrite,
cast out the beam out of thine own eye first, and then shalt thou see
perfectly, to pull out the mote out of thy brother's eye.
    It is not a good tree that bringeth forth evil fruit: Neither is
that an evil tree, that bringeth forth good fruit. For every tree is
known by his fruit. Neither of thorns gather men figs, nor of bushes
gather they grapes. A good man out of the good treasure of his heart
bringeth forth that which is good. And the evil man out of the evil
treasure of his heart, bringeth forth that which is evil. For of the
abundance of the heart, the mought speaketh.
    Why call ye me Master, Master: and do not as I bid you? whosoever
cometh to me, and heareth my sayings, and doth the same, I will shew
you to whom he is like. He is like a man which built an house: which
digged deep, and laid the foundation on a rock. When the waters
arose, the flood beat upon that house, and could not move it. For it
was grounded upon a rock. But he that heareth and doth not, is like a
man, that without foundation built an house upon the earth, against
which, the flood beat: and it fell by and by. And the fall of that
house was great.

The .vij. Chapter.

    When he had ended all his sayings in the audience of the people,
he entered into Capernaum. And the servant of a certain Centurion was
sick, and ready to die, whom he made much of. And when he heard of
Iesu, he sent unto him the seniors of the jewes, beseeching him that
he would come and heal his servant. And they came to Iesus and
besought him instantly, saying: He is worthy that thou shouldest do
this for him. For he loveth our nation, and hath built us a
synagogue. And Iesus went with them.
    And when he was not far from the house, the Centurion sent to him
his friends, saying unto him: lord trouble not thyself, for I am not
worthy that thou shouldest enter into my house. Wherefore I thought
not myself worthy to come unto thee: but say the word and my servant
shall be whole. For I likewise am a man under power, and have under
me soldiers, and I say unto one, go: and he goeth. And to another,
come: and he cometh. And to my servant, do this: and he doeth it.
When Iesus heard this, he marvelled at him, and turned him about and
said to the people that followed him: I say unto you, I have not
found so great faith, no not in Israhel, certainly. And they that
were sent, turned back home again, and found the servant that was
sick whole.
    And it fortuned after that, he went into a city called Naym, and
his disciples went with him, and a great number of people. When he
came nigh to the gate of the city, behold, there was a dead man
carried out, which was the only son of his mother, and she was a
widow, and much people of the city was with her. And the lord saw
her, and had compassion on her, and said unto her: weep not. And went
and touched the coffin, and they that bare him stood still. And he
said: Young man, I say unto thee, arise. And the dead sat up, and
began to speak. And he delivered him to his mother. And there came a
fear on them all. And they glorified God saying: a great prophet is
risen among us, and God hath visited his people. And this rumor of
him went forth throughout all Iewry, and thorowout all the regions
which lie round about.
    And unto Ihon  shewed his disciples of all these things. And Ihon
called unto him two of his disciples, and sent them to Iesus saying:
Art thou he that shall come: or shall we look for another? When the
men were come unto him, they said: Ihon baptist sent us unto thee
saying: Art thou he that shall come: or shall we wait for another? At
that same time, he cured many of their infirmities and plagues, And
of evil spirits, and unto many that were blind, he gave sight. And he
answered, and said unto them: Go your ways and shew Ihon, what things
ye have heard and seen: how that the blind see, the halt go, the
lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead arise: To the poor is
the gospell preached, and happy is he that falleth not, by reason of
me.
    When the messengers of Ihon were departed, he began to speak unto
the people of Ihon: What went ye out for to see into the desert? went
ye to see a reed shaken with the wind? But what went ye out for to
see? A man clothed in soft raiment? Behold they which are gorgeously
apparelled, and live delicately, are in kings' courts. But what went
ye forth to see? A prophet? Yea I say to you, and more than a prophet.
This is he of whom it is written: Behold I send my messenger before
thy face, to prepare thy way before thee. I say unto you: a greater
prophet than Ihon, among women's children, is there none.
Nevertheless one that is less in the kingdom of God, is greater than
he.
    And all the people that heard, and the publicans justified God,
which were baptised in the baptism of Ihon. But the Pharises and
scribes despised the counsel of God, against themselves, and were not
baptised of him.
    And the lord said: Whereunto shall I liken the men of this
generation, and what thing are they like? They are like unto children
sitting in the market place, and crying one to another, and saying:
We have piped unto you, and ye have not danced: We have mourned to
you, and ye have not wept. For Ihon baptist came unto you neither
eating bread, nor drinking wine, and ye say: he hath the devil. The
son of man is come and eateth and drinketh, and ye say: behold a man
which is a glutton, and a drinker of wine, the friend of publicans
and sinners. And wisdom justified of all her children.
    And one of the pharisees desired him that he would eat with him.
And he went into the pharisee's house, and sat down to meat. And
behold a woman in that city, which was a sinner, as soon as she knew
that Iesus sat at meat in the pharisee's house, she brought an
alabaster box of ointment, and she stood at his feet behind him
weeping, and began to wash his feet, with tears, and did wipe them
with the hairs of her head, and kissed his feet, and anointed them
with ointment.
    When the Pharise which bade him to his house, saw that, he spake
within himself: saying: If this man were a prophet, he would surely
have known who and what manner woman this is which toucheth him, for
she is a sinner. And Iesus answered, and said unto him: Simon I have
somewhat to say unto thee. And he said: Master say on. There was a
certain lender, which had two debtors, the one ought five hundred
pence, and the other fifty. When they had nothing to pay, he forgave
them both. Which of them tell me, will love him most? Simon answered,
and said: I suppose that he to whom he forgave most. And he said unto
him: Thou hast truly judged.
    And he turned to the woman, and said unto Simon: Seest thou this
woman? I entered into thy house, and thou gavest me no water to my
feet: but she hath washed my feet with tears, and wiped them with the
hairs of her head. Thou gavest me no kiss: but she, since the time I
came in, hath not ceased to kiss my feet. Mine head with oil thou
didst not anoint: but she hath anointed my feet with ointment.
Wherefore I say unto thee: many sins are forgiven her, because she
loved much. To whom less is forgiven, the same doeth less love.
    And he said unto her thy sins are forgiven thee. And they that
sat at meat with him, began to say within themselves: Who is this
which forgiveth sins also? And he said to the woman: Thy faith hath
saved thee, Go in peace.

The .viij. Chapter.

    And it fortuned after that, he himself went throughout cities and
towns, preaching, and shewing the kingdom of God, and the twelve with
him. And also certain women, which were healed of evil spirits, and
infirmities: Mary called Magdalen, out of whom went seven devils, and
Ioanna the wife of Chusa, Herod's steward, And Susanna, And many
other: which ministered unto him of their substance.
    When much people were gathered together, and were come to him out
of the cities, he spake by a similitude: A sower went out to sow his
seed, and as he sowed, some fell by the way side, and it was trodden
under feet, and the fowls of the air devoured it up. And some fell on
stone, and as soon as it was sprung up, it withered away, because it
lacked moistness. And some fell among thorns, and the thorns sprang
up with it, and choked it. And some fell on good ground, and sprang
up and bare fruit, an hundred fold. And as he said these things, he
cried: He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.
    And his disciples asked him, saying: what manner similitude this
should be. And he said: unto you is it given to know the secrets of
the kingdom of God: but to other in similitudes, that when they see,
they should not see, and when they hear they should not understand.
    The similitude is this. The seed is the word of God. Those that
are beside the way, are they that hear, and afterward cometh the
devil, and taketh away the word out of their hearts, lest they should
believe and be saved. They on the stones, are they which when they
hear the word receive it with joy. And these have no roots, which for
a while believe, and in time of temptation go away. That which fell
among thorns, are they which hear, and go forth, and are choked with
cares and riches, and voluptuous living, and bring forth no fruit.
That in the good ground, are they which with a good and pure heart,
hear the word, and keep it, and bring forth fruit with patience.
    No man lighteth a candle, and covereth it under a vessel, neither
putteth it under the table: but setteth it on a candlestick, that
they that enter in, may see light. No thing is in secret, that shall
not come abroad: Neither any thing hid, that shall not be known, and
come to light. Take heed therefore how ye hear. For whosoever hath,
to him shall be given: And whosoever hath not, from him shall be
taken, even that same which he supposeth that he hath.
    Then came to him his mother and his brethren, and could not come
at him for press. And they told him saying: Thy mother and thy
brethren, stand without, and would see thee. He answered, and said
unto them: my mother and my brethren are these which hear the word of
God, and do it.
    It chanced on a certain day that he went into a ship, and his
disciples also, and he said unto them: Let us go over unto the other
side of the lake. And they launched forth. And as they sailed, he
fell asleep, and there arose a storm of wind in the lake, and they
were filled with water, and were in jeopardy. And they went to him
and awoke him, saying: Master, Master, we are lost. He arose and
rebuked the wind, and the tempest of water, and they ceased, and it
waxed calm. And he said unto them: where is your faith? They feared
and wondered, saying one to another: what fellow is this? for he
commandeth both the winds and water, and they obey him? And they
sailed unto the region of the Gaderens, which is over against Galile.
    As he went out of the ship to land, there met him a certain man
out of the city, which had a devil long time, and ware no clothes,
neither abode in any house: but among graves. When he saw Iesus, he
cried, and fell down before him, and with a loud voice said: What
have I to do with thee Iesus the son of the God most highest? I
beseech thee torment me not. Then he commanded the foul spirit to
come out of the man. For often times he caught him, and he was bound
with chains, and kept with fetters: and he brake the bonds, and was
carried of the fiend, into wilderness.
    Iesus asked him saying: what is thy name? And he said: Legion,
because many devils were entered into him. And they besought him,
that he would not command them to go out into the deep. There was
there by an herd of many swine, feeding on an hill, and they prayed
him, that he would suffer them to enter into them. And he suffered
them. Then went the devils out of the man, and entered into the
swine: And the herd took their course, and ran headlong into the
lake, and were choked. When the herdsmen saw what had chanced, they
fled, and told it in the city and in the villages.
    And they came out to see what was done. And came to Iesus, and
found the man, out of whom the devils were departed, sitting at the
feet of Iesus clothed, and in his right mind, and they were afraid.
They also which saw it told them by what means he that was possessed
of the devil, was healed. And all the whole multitude of the
Gaderens, besought him, that he would depart from them: for they were
taken with great fear. And he gat him into the ship and returned back
again. Then the man out of whom the devils were departed, besought
him, that he might be with him: But Iesus sent him away, saying: Go
home again into thine own house, and shew what things God hath done
to thee. And he went his way, and preached thorowout all the city
what things Iesus had done unto him.
    It fortuned that when Iesus was come again, the people received
him. For they all longed for him. And behold there came a man named
Iairus (and he was a ruler of the synagogue) and he fell down at
Iesus' feet, and besought him that he would come into his house, for
he had but a daughter only, of twelve year of age, and she lay a
dying. As he went the people thronged him.
    And a woman having an issue of blood twelve year (which had
spent all her substance among Physicians, neither could be helped of
any) came behind him, and touched the hem of his garment, and
immediately her issue of blood staunched. And Iesus said: Who is it
that touched me? when every man denied, Peter and they that were with
him, said: Master, the people thrust thee and vex thee: and thou
sayest, who touched me? And Iesus said: Somebody touched me. For I
perceive that virtue is gone out of me. When the woman saw, that she
was not hid from him, she came trembling, and fell at his feet, and
told him before all the people, for what cause she had touched him,
and how she was healed immediately. And he said unto her: Daughter be
of good comfort. Thy faith hath made the safe, go in peace.
    While he yet spake, there came one from the rulers of the
synagogue's house, which said to him: Thy daughter is dead, disease
not the master. When Iesus heard that, He answered to the maidens
father saying: Fear not, believe only, and she shall be made whole.
And when he came to the house, he suffered no man to go in with him,
save Peter, Iames and Ihon, and the father and the mother of the
maiden. Every body wept and sorrowed for her. And he said Weep not:
for she is not dead, but sleepeth. And they laughed him to scorn. For
they knew that she was dead. And he thrust them all out at the doors,
and caught her by the hand, and cried saying: Maid arise. And her
spirit came again, and she rose straightway. And he commanded to give
her meat. And the father and the mother of her were astonied. But he
warned that they should tell no man, what was done.

The .ix. Chapter.

    Then called he the xij. together, and gave them power, and
authority, over all devils. And that they might heal diseases. And he
sent them to preach the kingdom of God, and to cure the sick. And he
said to them: Take no thing to succor you by the way: neither staff,
nor scrip, neither bread neither money, neither have two coats. And
whatsoever house ye enter into there abide, and thence depart. And
whosoever will not receive you, when ye depart from that city, shake
off the very dust from your feet, for a testimony against them. They
went forth, and went thorow the towns, preaching the gospel, and
healing everywhere.
    Herod the tetrarch heard of all that by him was done, and doubted
because that it was said of some, that Ihon was risen again from
death. And of some that Helias had appeared. And of other that one of
the old prophets was risen again. And Herod said: Ihon have I
beheaded: who is this of whom I hear such things? And he desired to
see him.
    And the Apostles returned, and told him all that they had done.
And he took them and went aside into a solitary place, nigh to a city
called Bethsaida. The people knew of it, and followed him. And he
received them, and spake unto them of the kingdom of God. And healed
them that had need to be healed. The day began to wear away. Then
came the twelve, and said unto him: send the people away, that they
may go into the towns, and villages roundabout, and lodge, and get
meat, for we are here in a place of wilderness. Then said he unto
them: Give ye them to eat. And they said: We have no more but five
loaves and two fishes, except we should go and buy meat for all this
people. And they were about a five thousand men. He said unto his
disciples: Cause them to sit down by fifties in a company. And they
did so, and made them all sit down. He took the five loaves, and the
two fishes, and looked up to heaven, and blessed them, and brake, and
gave to his disciples, to set before the people. And they all ate,
and were satisfied. And there was taken up of that remained to them,
twelve baskets full of broken meat.
    It fortuned as he was alone praying, his disciples were with him,
and he asked them saying: Who say the people that I am? They answered
and said: Ihon baptist. Some say Helias. And some say, one of the old
prophets is risen again. He said unto them: Who say ye that I am?
Peter answered and said: thou art the Christ of God. He warned and
commanded them, that they should tell no man that thing, saying: That
the son of man must suffer many things, and be reproved of the
seniors, and of the high priests and scribes, and be slain, and the
third day rise again.
    And he said to them all, if any man will come after me, let him
deny himself, and take his cross on him daily, and follow me.
Whosoever will save his life, shall lose it. And whosoever shall lose
his life, for my sake, the same shall save it. For what shall it
advantage a man, to win the whole world, if he lose himself: or run
in damage of himself? For whosoever is ashamed of me, and of my
sayings: of him shall the son of man be ashamed, when he cometh in
his own majesty, and in the majesty of his father, and of the holy
angels. I tell you of a surety: Some there are of them that here
stand, which shall not taste of death till they see the kingdom of
God.
    And it followed about an viij. days after those sayings, he took
Peter, Iames, and Ihon, and went up into a mountain to pray. And as
he prayed, the fashion of his countenance was changed, and his
garment was white and shone. And behold, two men talked with him, and
they were Moses and Helias, which appeared gloriously, and spake of
his departing, which he should end at Ierusalem. Peter and they that
were with him, were heavy asleep. And when they woke, they saw his
majesty, and two men standing with him.
    And it chanced as they departed from him, Peter said unto Iesus:
Master, it is good being here for us. Let us make three tabernacles,
one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Helias. And wist not
what he said. While he thus spake there came a cloud and shadowed
them and they feared when they entered into the cloud. And there came
a voice out of the cloud saying: This is my dear son, hear him. And
as soon as the voice was past, Iesus was found alone. And they kept
it close: and told no man in those days any of those things, which
they had seen.
    It chanced on the next day as they came down from the hill, much
people came and met him. And behold a man of the company cried out
saying: Master, I beseech thee behold my son, for he is all that I
have: and see, a spirit taketh him, and suddenly he crieth, and he
teareth him that he foameth again, and uneth departeth he from him,
when he hath rent him: And I have besought thy disciples to cast him
out, and they could not. Iesus answered, and said: O generation
without faith, and crooked: how long shall I be with you? And shall
suffer you? Bring thy son hither. As he yet was a coming, the fiend
rent him, and tare him. Iesus rebuked the unclean spirit, and healed
the child, and delivered him to his father. And they were all amazed
at the mighty power of God.
    While they wondered every one at all things which he did: He said
unto his disciples: Let these sayings sink down into your ears. The
time will come, when the son of man shall be delivered into the hands
of men. But they wist not what that word meant, and it was hid from
them that they understood it not. And they feared to ask him of that
saying.
    Then there arose a disputation among them, who should be the
greatest. When Iesus perceived the thoughts of their hearts, he took
a child, and set him hard by him, and said unto them: Whosoever
receiveth this child in my name, receiveth me. And whosoever
receiveth me, receiveth him that sent me. For he that amongst you, is
the least, the same shall be great.
    Ihon answered and said: Master we saw one casting out devils in
thy name, and we forbade him, because he followeth not with us. And
Iesus said unto him: forbid ye him not. For he that is not against
you, is with you. {us}
    And it followed when the time was come that he should be received
up and that he determined himself to go to Ierusalem: and sent
messengers before him. And they went, and entered into a city of the
Samaritans to make ready for him. And they would not receive him,
because his face was as though he would go to Ierusalem. When his
disciples, Iames, and Ihon, saw that, they said: lord, wilt thou that
we command, that fire come down from heaven, and consume them, even
as Helias did? Iesus turned about, and rebuked them saying: ye wot
not what manner spirit ye are of. The son of man is not come to
destroy men's lives, but to save them. And they went to another town.
    It chanced as he went on their journey, a certain man said unto
him: I will follow thee whithersoever thou go. Iesus said unto him:
foxes have holes, and birds of the air have nests: but the son of man
hath not whereon to lay his head.
    And he said unto another: follow me. And the same said: lord
suffer me first to go and bury my father. Iesus said unto him. Let
the dead, bury their dead: but go thou and preach the kingdom of God.
    And another said: I will follow thee lord: But let me first go
bid them farewell, which are at home at my house. Iesus said unto
him: No man that putteth his hand to the plough, and looketh back, is
apt to the kingdom of God.

The .x. Chapter.

    After that, the lord appointed other seventy also, and sent them,
two and two, before his face, into every city, and place, whither he
himself would come. And said unto them: the harvest is great: but the
laborers are few. Pray therefore the lord of the harvest, to send
forth laborers into his harvest. Go your ways. Behold, I send you
forth as lambs among wolves. Bear no wallet, neither scrip, nor
shoes, and salute no man by the way. In whatsoever house ye enter in,
first say: Peace be to this house. And if the son of peace be there,
your peace shall rest upon him, if not, it shall return to you again.
And in the same house tarry still eating and drinking, such as they
have. For the laborer is worthy of his reward.
    Go not from house to house: and into whatsoever city ye enter, if
they receive you, eat whatsoever is set before you, and heal the sick
that are there, and say unto them: the kingdom of God is come nigh
upon you. But into whatsoever city ye shall enter, if they receive
you not, go your ways out into the streets of the same, and say: even
the very dust, which cleaveth on us of your city, we wipe off against
you: Notwithstanding, mark this, that the kingdom of God was come
nigh upon you. Yea and I say unto you: that it shall be easier in that
day, for Sodom than for that city.
    Woe be to thee Chorazin: woe be to thee Bethsaida. For if the
miracles had been done in Tyre and Sidon, which have been done in
you, they had a great while agone repented, sitting in hair and
ashes. Nevertheless it shall be easier for Tyre and Sidon, at the
judgement, than for you. And thou Capernaum which art exalted to
heaven, shalt be thrust down to hell. whosoever heareth you, heareth
me: And whosoever despiseth you, despiseth me. And he that despiseth
me, despiseth him that sent me.
    The seventy returned again with joy saying: lord even the very
devils are subdued to us thorow thy name. And he said unto them: I
saw sathan, as it had been lightning, fall down from heaven. Behold I
give unto you power to tread on serpents, and scorpions, and upon all
manner power of the enemy, and nothing shall hurt you. Nevertheless,
in this rejoice not, that the spirits are under your power: But
rejoice because your names are written in heaven.
    That same time rejoiced Iesus in the spirit, and said: I praise
{confess} thee father lord of heaven and earth, because thou hast hid 
these things from the wise and prudent, and hast opened them to the
foolish. Even so father, for so pleased it thee. All things are given
me of my father. And no man knoweth who the son is, but the father:
neither who the father is, save the son, and he to whom the son will
shew him.
    And he turned to his disciples, and said secretly: Happy are the
eyes, which see that ye see. For I tell you that many prophets and
kings have desired to see those things which ye see, and have not
seen them: And to hear those things which ye hear, and have not heard
them:
    And mark, A Certain Lawyer stood up, and tempted him saying:
Master what shall I do, to inherit eternal life? He said unto him:
What is written in the law? How readest thou? And he answered and
said: Thou shalt love thy lord God, with all thy heart, and with all
thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind: and thy
neighbor as thyself. And he said unto him: Thou hast answered right.
This do and thou shalt live. He willing to justify himself, said unto
Iesus: Who is then my neighbor?
    Iesus answered and said: A certain man descended from Ierusalem
into Ierico, And fell into the hands of thieves, which robbed him of
his raiment and wounded him, and departed leaving him half dead. And
it chance that there came a certain priest that same way, and saw
him, and passed by. And like wise a levite, when he was come nigh to
the place, went and looked on him, and passed by. Then a certain
Samaritan, as he journeyed, came nigh unto him, and beheld him, and
had compassion on him, and came to hime, and bound up his wounds, and
poured in wine, and oil, and laid him on his beast, and brought him
to a common hostry, and drest him. And on the morrow when he
departed, he took out two pence, and gave them to the host and said
unto him: Take care of him, and whatsoever thou spendest above this,
when I come again I will recompense thee. Which now of these three,
thinkest thou was neighbor unto him that fell into the thieves hands?
And he answered: he that shewed mercy on him. Then said Iesus unto
him. Go and do thou likewise.
    It fortuned as they went, that he entered into a certain town.
And a certain woman named Martha, received him into her house. And
this woman had a sister called Mary, which sat at Iesus' feet, and
heard Iesus preaching: Martha was cumbered about much serving, and
stood and said: Master, dost thou not care, that my sister hath left
me to minister alone? Bid her therefore, that she help me. And Iesus
answered, and said unto her: Martha, Martha, thou art busied, and
troublest thyself, about many things: verily one is needful, Mary
hath chosen her a good part, which shall not be taken away from her.

The .xj. Chapter.

    And it fortuned as he was praying in a certain place: when he
ceased, one of his disciples said unto him: Master teach us to pray,
As Ihon taught his disciples. And he said unto them: When ye pray,
say: Our father which art in heaven, hallowed by thy name. Let thy
kingdom come. Thy will, be fulfilled, even in earth as it is in
heaven. Our daily bread give us this day. And forgive us our sins:
For even we forgive every man that trespasseth us, and lead us not
into temptation, But deliver us from evil Amen.
    And he said unto them: which of you shall have a friend and shall
go to him at midnight, and say unto him: friend lend me four loaves
for a friend of mine is come out of the way to me, and I have nothing
to set before him: And he within should answer and say: Trouble me
not, now is the door is shut, and my servants are with me in the
chamber, I cannot rise and give them to thee. I say unto you: though
he would not arise and give him, because he is his friend: Yet
because of his importunity he would rise and give him as many as he
needeth.
    And I say unto you: ask, and it shall be given you. Seek, and ye
shall find. Knock, and it shall be opened unto you. For every one
that asketh, receiveth: and he that seeketh, findeth: and to him that
knocketh shall it be opened. If the son shall ask bread of any of you
which is his father: will he proffer him a stone? Or if he ask fish,
will he give him a serpent? Or if he ask an egg: will he proffer him
a scorpion? If ye then which are evil, know how to give good gifts
unto your children? How much more shall your father celestial, give a
good spirit to them, that desire it of him.
    And he was a casting out a devil, which was dumb. And it followed
when the devil was gone out, the dumb spake, and the people wondered.
Some of them said: he casteth out devils by the power of Belzebub,
the chief of the devils. And other tempted him seeking of him a sign
from heaven. He knew their thoughts, and said unto them: Every
kingdom, at debate within itself shall be desolate: and one house
shall fall upon another. So if Satan be at variance within himself:
how shall his kingdom endure? Be cause ye say that I cast out devils
by the power of Belzebub? If I by the power of Belzebub cast out
devils: by whose power, do your children cast them out? Therefore
shall they be your judges. But if I with the finger of God cast out
devils, no doubt, the kingdom of God is come upon you.
    When a strong man armed watcheth his house: That he possesseth,
is in peace. But when a stronger than he cometh upon him, and
overcometh him: he taketh from him, his harness, wherein he trusted,
and divideth his goods. He that is not with me is against me. And he
that gathereth not with me scattereth.
    When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walketh through
waterless places seeking rest. And when he findeth none, he sayeth: I
will return again unto my house whence I came out. And when he
cometh, he findeth it swept and garnished. Then goeth he and taketh
seven other spirits with him worse than himself, and they enter in,
and dwell there. And the end of that man, is worse than the
beginning.
    It fortuned as he thus spake, a certain woman of the company
lifted up her voice, and said unto him: Happy is the womb that bare
thee and the paps, which gave thee suck. But he said: Happy are they
that hear the word of God, and keep it.
    When the people were gathered thick together: He began to say:
This is an evil nation. They seek a sign, and there shall no sign be
given them, but the sign of Ionas the prophet. For as Ionas was a
sign to the Ninivites, so shall the son of man be to this nation. The
queen of the south shall rise at the judgement, with the men of this
generation, and condemn them. For she came from the end of the world,
to hear the wisdom of Salomon: and behold a greater than Salomon is
here. The men of Nineveh shall rise at the judgement, with this
generation, and shall condemn them: for they repented at the
preaching of Ionas: And behold, a greater than Ionas is here.
    No man lighteth a candle, and putteth it in a privy place,
neither under a bushel: But on a candlestick, that they that come in,
may see the light. The light of thy body is the eye. Therefore, when
thine eye is single: then is all thy body full of light. But if thine
eye be evil: then shall all thy body also be full of darkness. Take
heed therefore that the light which is in thee, be not darkness. For
if all thy body shall be light, having no part dark: then shall all
be full of light, even as when a candle doeth light thee with his
brightness.
    And as he spake, a certain Pharisee besought him to dine with
him: and Iesus went in, and sat down to meat. When the Pharisee saw
that he marvelled that he had not first washed before dinner. And the
lord said to him: Now do ye, O pharisees, make clean the outside of
the cup, and of the platter: but your inward parts are full of
ravening and wickedness. Ye fools did not he that made that which is
without: make that which is within also? Nevertheless ye give of that
ye have, and behold all is clean to you.
    But woe be to you pharisees, for ye tithe the mint, and rue, and
all manner herbs, and pass over judgement, and the love of God. These
ought ye to have done, and not to have left the other undone.
    Woe be to you pharisees: for ye love the uppermost seats in the
synagogues, and greetings in the markets.
    Woe be to you scribes and pharisees hypocrites, for ye are as
graves which appear not, And men that walk over them, are not ware of
them.
    Then answered one of the lawyers, and said unto him: Master, thus
saying, thou puttest us to rebuke also. Then he said: Woe be to you
also ye lawyers: for ye lade men with burdens grievous to be born,
and ye yourselves touch not the packs with one of your fingers.
    Woe be to you that build the sepulchers of the prophets: for your
fathers killed them: Truly ye bear witness, that ye allow the deeds
of your fathers: for they killed them, and ye build their sepulchers.
    Therefore said the wisdom of God: I will send them prophets and
Apostles, and of them they shall slay and persecute: That the blood
of all prophets, which was shed from the beginning of the world, may
be required of this generation, from the blood of Abel unto the blood
of Zacary, which perished between the altar and the temple. Verily I
say unto you: it shall be required of this nation.
    Woe be to you lawyers: for ye have taken away the key of
knowledge, ye entered not in yourselves, and them that came in ye
forbade.
    When he thus spake unto them, the lawyers, and the pharisees,
began to wax busy about him and to stop his mouth with many
questions, Laying wait for him, and seeking to catch something of his
mought, whereby they might accuse him.

The .xij. Chapter.

    As there gathered to gether an innumerable multitude of people
(insomuch that they trod one another) he began to say unto his
disciples: First of all beware of the leaven of the pharisees, which
is hypocrisy. For there is nothing covered, that shall not be
uncovered: neither hid, that shall not be known. Wherefore whatsoever
ye have spoken in darkness: that same shall be heard in light. And
that which ye have spoken in the ear, even in secret places, shall be
preached even on the top of the houses.
    I say unto you my friends: fear ye not them that kill the body,
and after that have nothing that he can more do. I will shew you,
whom ye shall fear. Fear him which after he hath killed, hath power
to cast into hell. Yea I say unto you, him fear. Are not five sparrows
bought for two farthings? and none of them is forgotten of God. Yea
the very hairs of your heads are numbered. Fear not therefore: Ye are
more of value, than many sparrows.
    I say unto you: Whosoever confesseth me before men, even him
shall the son of man confess also before the angels of God. And he
that denieth me before men: shall be denied before the angels of God.
And whosoever speaketh a word against the son of man it shall be
forgiven him. But unto him that blasphemeth the holy ghost, it shall
not be forgiven.
    When they bring you unto their synagogues, and unto their rulers,
and officers, take no thought how or what thing ye shall answer, or
what ye shall speak. For the holy ghost shall teach you in the same
hour, what ye ought to say.
    One of the company said unto him: Master, bid my brother divide
the inheritance with me. And he said unto him: Man, who made me a
judge, or a divider over you? Wherefore he said unto them: take heed,
and beware of covetousness. For no man's life standeth in the
abundance of the things which he possesseth. And he put forth a
similitude unto them saying:     The lands of a certain man brought
forth fruits plenteously, and he thought in himself saying: what
shall I do? because I have no room where to bestow my fruits? And he
said: This will I do. I will destroy my barns, and build greater, and
therein will I gather all my fruits, and my goods: and I will say to
my soul: Soul thou hast much goods laid up in store for many years,
take thine ease: eat, drink and be merry. But God said unto him: Thou
fool, this night will they fetch away thy soul again from thee. Then
whose shall those things be which thou hast provided? So is it with
him that gathered riches, and is not rich in God.
    And he spake unto his disciples: Therefore I say unto you: Take
no thought for your life, what ye shall eat: Neither for your body,
what ye shall put on. The life is more than meat, and the body is
more than raiment. Mark well the ravens, for they neither sow, nor
reap, which neither have storehouse nor barn, and yet God feedeth
them. How much are ye better then the fowls.
    Which of you with taking thought can add to his stature one
cubit? If ye then be not able to do that thing which is least: why
take ye thought for the remnant? Consider the lilies how they grow:
They labor not: They spin not: and I say unto you, Salomon in all
his royalty was not clothed like unto one of these.
    If God then so clothe the grass which is to day in the fields,
and tomorrow shall be cast into the furnace: how much more will he
clothe you, o ye endued with little faith? And ask not what ye shall
eat, or what ye shall drink, neither climb ye up on high: for all
such things the heathen people of the world seek for. Your father
knoweth that ye have need of such things. Wherefore seek ye after the
kingdom of heaven, and all these things shall be ministered unto you.
    Fear not little flock, for it is your father's pleasure, to give
you a kingdom. Sell that ye have, and give alms. And make you bags,
which wax not old, and treasure that faileth not in heaven, where no
thief cometh, neither moth corrupteth. For where your treasure is,
There will your hearts be also.
    Let your loins be girded about, and your lights burning, and ye
yourselves, like unto men, that watch for their master when he will
return from a wedding: that as soon as he cometh and knocketh, they
may open unto him. Happy are those servants, which their lord, when
he cometh, shall find walking, Verily I say unto you, he will gird
himself about, and make them sit down to meat, and walk by them, and
minister unto them. And if he come in the second watch, ye if he come
in the third watch, and shall find them so, happy are those servants.
    This shall ye understand, that if the good man of the house, had
known what hour the thief would have come, he would surely have
watched: and not have suffered his house to have been broken up. Be
ye prepared therefore for the son of man will come at an hour when ye
think, not.
    Then Peter said unto him: Master tellest thou this similitude
unto us, or to all men? And the lord said: who is a faithful steward,
and a discreet, whom his lord shall make ruler over his household, to
give them their duetie of meat, at due season. Happy is that servant,
whom his master when he cometh shall find so doing. Of a truth I say
unto you: that he will make him ruler over all that he hath. But and
if the evil servant shall say in his heart: My master will defer his
coming, and shall begin to smite the servants, and maidens, and to
eat and drink, and to be drunken: the lord of that servant will come
in a day, when he thinketh not, and at an hour when he is not ware,
and will divide him, and will give him his reward, with the
unbelievers.
    The servant that knew his master's will, and prepared not
himself, neither did according to his will, shall be beaten with many
stripes. But he that knew not, and hath committed things worthy of
stripes, shall be beaten with few stripes. For unto whom much is
given: of him shall be much required. And to whom men much commit,
the more of him will they ask.
    I am come to send fire on earth: and what is my desire but that
it were al ready kindled? Notwithstanding I must be baptised with a
baptism. And how am I pained till it be ended? Suppose ye that I am
come to send peace on earth? I tell you, nay: but rather debate. For
henceforth there shall be five in one house divided, three against
two, and two against three. The father shall be divided against the
son, and the son against the father. The mother against the daughter,
and the daughter against the mother. The motherinlaw against the
daughterinlaw, and the daughter in law against the motherinlaw. Then
said he to the people: when ye see a cloud rise out of the west
straightway ye say: we shall have a shower, and so it is. And when ye
se the south wind blow, ye say: we shall have heat, and it cometh to
pass. Hypocrites, ye can skill of the fashion of the earth, and of
the sky: but what is the cause, that ye cannot skill of this time? 
Yea and why judge ye not of yourselves, that which is rightwise?
    While thou goest with thine adversary to the ruler: as thou art
in the way, give diligence that thou mayest be delivered from him,
least he bring thee to the judge, and the judge deliver thee to the
jailer, and the jailer cast thee into prison. I tell thee thou
departest not thence, till thou have made good the utmost farthing.

The .xiij. Chapter.

    There were present at the same season, that shewed him of the
Galileans, whose blood Pilate mingled with their own sacrifice. And
Iesus answered, and said unto them: Suppose ye that these Galileans,
were greater sinners than all the other Galileans because they
suffered such punishment? I tell you nay: but except ye repent, ye
shall all likewise perish. Or think ye that those xviij. upon whom
the tower in Siloe fell and slew them, were sinners above all men
that dwell in Ierusalem? I tell you nay: But except ye repent, ye all
shall likewise perish.
    He put forth this similitude, A certain man had a fig tree in his
vineyard, and he came and sought fruit thereon, and found none. Then
said he to the dresser of his vineyard: Behold this three year have I
come and sought fruit in this fig tree, and find none, cut it down:
why cumbereth it the ground? And he answered and said unto him: lord
let it alone this year also, till I dig round about it, and dung it,
to see whether it will bear fruit: if not, then after that, cut it
down.
    He taught in one of their synagogues on the saboth days. And
behold there was a woman which had a spirit of infirmity xviij.
years: and was bowed together, and could not well lift up herself.
When Iesus saw her, he called her to him, and said to her: woman,
thou art delivered from thy disease. And he laid his hands on her,
and immediately she was made straight, and glorified God. The ruler
of the synagogue answered with indignation (because that Iesus had
healed on the saboth day) And said unto the people: There are six
days in the week, in which men ought to work, in them come and be
healed, and not on the saboth day.
    Then answered him the lord and said: Hypocrite, doth not each one
of you on the saboth day, loose his ox, or his ass, from the stall,
and lead him to the water? And ought not this daughter of Abraham, be
loosed from this bond on the saboth day, whom Sathan hath bounde lo,
xviij. years?
    And when he thus said, all his adversaries were ashamed, and all
the people rejoiced on all the excellent deeds, that were done by
him.
    Then said he: What is the kingdom of God like? or whereto shall I
compare it? It is like a grain of mustard seed, which a man took and
sowed in his garden: and it grew, and waxed a great tree, and the
fowls of the air built in the branches of it.
    And again he said: whereunto shall I liken the kingdom of , God?
It is like leaven, which a woman took, and hid in three bushels of
flour, till all was thorow leavened. And he went thorow cities and
towns teaching, and took his journey towards Ierusalem.
    Then said one unto him: lord, are there few that shall be saved?
And he said unto them: strive with your selves to enter in at the
strait gate: For many I say unto you, will seek to enter in, and
shall not be able. When the goodman of the house is risen up, and
hath shut fast the door, and ye begin to stand without, and to knock
at the door saying: lord, lord, open unto us: and he shall answer and
say unto you: I know not whence ye are. Then shall ye begin to say:
We have eaten, and drunk in thy presence, and thou hast taught in our
streets. And he shall say: I tell you, I know you not whence ye are:
depart from me all ye workers of iniquity. There shall be weeping,
and gnashing of teeth: when ye shall see Abraham, and Isaac, and
Iacob, and all the prophets in the kingdom of God, and yourselves
thrust out a doors. And they shall come from the east, and from the
west, and from the north, and from the south, and shall rest in the
kingdom of God. And behold, there are last, which shall be first: And
there are first which shall be last.
    The same day there came certain of the pharisees, and said unto
him: Get thee out of the way, and depart hence: for Herod will kill
thee. And he said unto them: Go ye and tell that fox, behold I cast
out devils, and heal the people to day and tomorrow, and the third
day I make an end. Nevertheless, I must walk today and tomorrow, and
the day following: For it cannot be, that a prophet perish any other
where, save at Ierusalem. O Ierusalem, Ierusalem, which killest
prophets, and stonest them that are sent to thee: how often would I
have gathered thy children together, as the hen her nest under her
wings, but thou wouldest not. Behold your habitation shall be left
unto you desolate. For I tell you, ye shall not see me until the time
come that ye shall say, blessed is he that cometh in the name of the
lord.

The .xiiij. Chapter.

    And it chanced that he went into the house of one of the chief
pharisees to eat bread, on a saboth day: and they watched him. And
behold there was a man before him, which had the dropsy. And Iesus
answered and spake unto the lawyers and pharisees, saying: is it
lawful to heal on the saboth day? And they held their peace. He took
the man and healed him, and let him go: And answered them saying:
which of you shall have an ass, or an ox, fallen into a pit, and will
not straightway pull him out on the saboth day? And they could not
answer him again to that.
    He put forth a similitude to the guests, when he marked how they
pressed to the highest rooms, and said unto them: When thou art
bidden to a wedding of any man, sit not down in the highest room,
lest a more honorable man than thou be bidden of him, and he that
bade both him and thee, come and say to thee: give this man room. And
thou then begin with shame to take the lowest room. But rather when
thou art bidden, go and sit in the lowest room, that when he that
bade thee cometh, he may say unto thee: friend sit up higher. Then
shalt thou have praise in the presence of them that sit at meat with
thee. For whosoever exalteth himself, shall be brought low. And he
that humbleth himself, shall be exalted.
    Then said he also to him that had desired to him to dinner: When
thou makest a dinner, or a supper: call not thy friends, nor thy
brethren, neither thy kinsmen, nor yet rich neighbours: lest they bid
thee again, and make thee recompense. But when thou makest a feast,
call the poor, the maimed, the lame, and the blind, and thou shalt be
happy: For they cannot recompense thee. But thou shalt be recompensed
at the resurrection of the just men.
    When one of them that sat at meat also heard that, he said unto
him: happy is he that eateth bread in the kingdom of God. Then said
he to him: A certain man ordained a great supper, and bade many, and
sent his servant at supper time, to say to them that were bidden,
come: for all things are now ready. And they all at once began to
make excuse. The first said unto him: I have bought a farm, and I
must needs go and see it, I pray thee have me excused. And another
said: I have bought five yoke of oxen, and I must go to prove them, I
pray thee have me excused. The third said: I have married a wife, and
therefore I cannot come. And the servant went again, and brought his
master word thereof.
    Then was the good man of the house displeased, and said to his
servant: Go out quickly into the streets and quarters of the city,
and bring in hither the poor, and the maimed, and the halt, and the
blind. And the servant said: lord it is done as thou commandedst, and
yet there is room. And the lord said to the servant: Go out into the
highways and hedges, and compel them to come in, that my house may be
filled. For I say unto you, that none of those men which were bidden,
shall taste of my supper.
    There went a great company with him, and he turned and said unto
them: If a man come to me, and hate not his father and mother, and
wife, and children, and brethren, and sisters, moreover and his own
life, he cannot be my disciple. And whosoever bear not his cross, and
come after me cannot be my disciple.
    Which of you is he that is disposed to build a tower, and sitteth
not down before and counteth the cost: Whether he have sufficient to
perform it? lest after he hath laid the foundation, and is not able
to perform it, all that behold it, begin to mock him saying: This man
began to build, and was not able to make an end. What king goeth to
make battle against another king, and sitteth not down first, and
casteth in his mind, whether he be able with ten thousand to meet him
that cometh against him with twenty thousand, or else while the other
is yet a great way off, he will send ambassadors, and desire peace.
So likewise, none of you that forsaketh not all that he hath, can be
my disciple.
    Salt is good, but if salt be corrupt, what shall be seasoned
therewith? It is neither good for the land, nor yet for the dunghill,
men cast it out at the doors. He that hath ears to hear, let him
hear.

The .xv. Chapter.

    Then resorted unto him all the publicans and sinners, for to hear
him. And the pharisees, and scribes grudged saying: He received to
his company sinners, and eateth with them. Then put he forth this
similitude to them saying: What man of you having an hundred sheep,
if he lose one of them doth not leave ninety and nine in the
wilderness, and go after him which is lost, until he find him? And
when he hath found him, he putteth him on his shoulders with joy: And
as soon as he cometh home he calleth together his lovers, and
neighbours saying unto them: rejoice with me for I have found my
sheep which was lost. I say unto you, that likewise joy shall be in
heaven over one sinner that repenteth, more than over ninety and nine
just persons, which need no repentance. Other what woman having x.
grotes, if she lose one, doth not light a candle, and sweep the
house, and seek diligently, till she find it? And when she hath found
it she calleth her lovers, and her neighbours saying: Rejoice with
me, for I have found the grote which I had lost. Likewise I say unto
you, joy shall be in the presence of the angels of God over one
sinner that repenteth.
    And he said: a certain man had two sons, and the younger of them
said to his father: father give me my part of the goods that to me
belongeth. And he divided unto them his substance. And not long
after, the younger son gathered all that he had together, and took
his journey into a far country, and there he wasted his goods with
riotous living. And when he had spent all that he had, there rose a
great dearth thorowout all that same land. And he began to lack. And
he went, and clave to a citizen of that same country, which sent him
to his field, to keep his swine. And he would fain have filled his
belly with the cods, that the swine ate: and no man gave him.
    Then he came to himself and said: how many hired servants at my
father's have bread enough, and I die for hunger. I will arise, and
go to my father, and will say unto him: father, I have sinned against
heaven and before thee, now am I not worthy to be called thy son,
make me as one of thy hired servants. And he arose, and came to his
father. When he was yet a great way off, his father saw him, and had
compassion, and ran unto him, and fell on his neck, and kissed him.
And the son said unto him: father I have sinned against heaven, and
in thy sight, neither am I worthy henceforth to be called thy son.
Then said the father to his servants: bring forth that best garment,
and put it on him, and put a ring on his hand, and shoes on his feet.
And bring hither that fatted calf, and kill him, and let us eat and
be merry: for this my son was dead, and is alive again. He was lost,
and is now found. And they began to make good chear.
    The elder brother was in the field, and when he came and drew
nigh to the house, he heard minstrelsy, and dancing, and called one
of his servants, and asked what those things meant. He said unto him:
thy brother is come, and thy father had killed the fatted calf,
because he hath received him safe and sound. And he was angry, and
would not go in. Then came his father out, and entreated him, he
answered and said to his father: Lo these many years have I done thee
service, neither brake at any time thy commandment, and yet gavest
thou me never so much as a kid to make merry with my lovers: but as
soon as this thy son was come, which hath devoured thy goods with
harlots, thou hast for his pleasure killed the fatted calf. And he
said unto him: Son, thou wast ever with me, and all that I have is
thine: it was meet that we should make merry and be glad: for this
thy brother was dead, and is alive again: and was lost, and is found.

The .xvj. Chapter.

    He said also unto his disciples. There was a certain rich man,
which had a steward, that was accused unto him that he had wasted his
goods. And he called him, and said unto him: How is it, that I hear
this of thee? Give accounts of thy stewardship. For thou mayest be no
longer my steward. The steward said within himself: what shall I do?
for my master will take away from me the stewardship. I cannot dig,
and to beg, I am ashamed. I wot what to do, that when I am put out of
my stewardship, they may receive me into their houses.
    Then called he all his master's debtors, and said unto the first:
how much owest thou unto my master? And he said: an hundred tuns of
oil, and he said to him: take thy bill, and sit down quickly, and
write fifty. Then said he to another: what owest thou? And he said:
an hundred quarters of wheat. He said to him: Take thy bill, and
write fourscore. And the lord commended the unjust steward, because
he had done wisely. For the children of this world, are in their
kind, wiser than the children of light. And I say also unto you: make
you friends of the wicked mammon, that when ye shall have need they
may receive you into everlasting habitations.
    He that is faithful in that which is least: the same is faithful
in much. [And he that is unfaithful in the least: is unfaithful also
in much.] So then if ye have not been faithful in the wicked mammon?
who will believe you in that which is true? and if ye have not been
faithful in another man's business: who shall give you your own? No
servant can serve two masters, for either he shall hate the one and
love the other, or else he shall lean to the one, and despise the
other. Ye cannot serve God, and mammon.
    All these things heard the pharisees also which were covetous.
And they mocked him, and he said unto them: Ye are they, which
justify yourselves before men: but God knoweth your hearts. For that
which men magnify, is abominable in the sight of God.
    The law, and the prophets reigned until the time of Ihon: Since
that time, the kingdom of God is preached, and every man striveth to
go in.
    Sooner shall heaven and earth perish, than one tittle of the law
shall perish. Whosoever forsaketh his wife, and marrieth another,
breaketh matrimony. And every man which marrieth her that is divorced
from her husband committeth advoutry also.
    There was a certain rich man, which was clothed in purple, and
fine rayons, and fared deliciously every day. And there was a certain
beggar, named Lazarus, which lay at his gate full of sores desiring
to be refreshed with the crumbs which fell from the rich man's board.
Nevertheless, the dogs came, and licked his sores. And it fortuned
that the beggar died, and was carried by the angels into Abraham's
bosom: The rich man also died, and was buried in hell.
    When he lift up his eyes, as he was in torments, and he saw 
Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his bosom, And cried and said: father
Abraham, have mercy on me, and send Lazarus that he may dip the tip
of his finger in water, and cool my tongue, for I am tormented in
this flame. Abraham said unto him: Son remember, that thou in thy
lifetime receivedst thy pleasure, and contrariwise Lazarus pain. Now
therefore is he comforted, and thou art punished. Beyond all this
between you and us there is a great space set, so that they which
would go from hence to you, cannot: neither from thence come hither.
    And he said: I pray thee therefore father, send him to my
father's house. For I have five brethren: for to warn them, lest they
also come into this place of torment. Abraham said unto him: they
have Moses and the prophets, let them hear them. And he said: nay
father Abraham, but if one from the dead came unto them they would
repent. He said unto him: If they hear not Moses and the prophets,
neither will they believe, though one rose from death again.

The .xvij. Chapter.

    Then said he to his disciples, it cannot be avoided, but that
occasions of evil come. Nevertheless woe be to him thorow whom they
come. It were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his
neck, and that he were cast into the sea, rather than he should
offend one of these little ones. Take heed to your selves, if thy
brother trespass against thee, rebuke him: and if he repent, forgive
him. And though he sin against thee seven times in one day, and seven
times in a day turn again to thee saying: it repenteth me, forgive
him.
    And the Apostles said unto the lord: increase our faith. The lord
said: if ye had faith like a grain of mustard seed, and should say
unto this sycamine tree, pluck thyself up by the roots, and plant
thyself in the sea: he should obey you.
    Which of you having a servant a plowing, or feeding cattle, would
say unto him when he were come from the field: Go quickly and sit
down to meat. And rather sayeth not to him, dress wherewith I may
sup, and appoint thyself and serve me, till I have eaten and drunk:
and afterward, eat thou, and drink thou? Doeth he thank that servant
because he did that which was commanded unto him? I trow not. So
likewise ye, when ye have done all those things which are commanded
unto you: say, we are unprofitable servants. We have done that which
was our duty to do.
    And it chanced as he went to Ierusalem, that he passed thorow
Samaria and Galile. And as he entered into a certain town, there met
him ten men, that were lepers, which stood afar off, and put forth
their voices, and said: Iesu master, have mercy on us. When he saw
them, he said unto them: Go and shew yourselves to the priests. And
it chanced as they went, they were cleansed. And one of them, when he
saw that he was cleansed, turned back again, and with a loud voice
praised God, and fell down on his face at his feet, and gave him
thanks. And the same was a Samaritan. Iesus answered and said: Are
there not ten cleansed? But where are those nine? There are not found
that returned again, to give God praise, save only this stranger. And
he said unto him: Arise, and go thy way, thy faith hath saved thee.
    When he was demanded of the pharisees, when the kingdom of God
should come: he answered them and said: The kingdom of God cometh not
with waiting for. Neither shall men say, Lo here, lo there. For
behold, the kingdom of God is within you.
    And he said unto the disciples: The days will come, when ye shall
desire to see one day of the son of man, and ye shall not see it. And
they shall say to you: See here, See there. Go not after them, nor
follow them, for as the lightning that appeareth out of the one part
of the heaven, and shineth unto the other part of heaven. So shall
the son of man be in his days. But first must he suffer many things,
and be reproved of this nation.
    As it happened in the time of Noe So shall it be in the time of
the son of man. They ate, they drank, they married wives and were
married even unto the same day that Noe went into the ark, and the
flood came, and destroyed them all. Likewise also, as it chanced in
the days of Lot. They ate, they drank, they bought, they sold, they
planted, they built. And even the same day that Lot went out of
Zodom, it rained fire and brimstone from heaven, and destroyed them
all. After these ensamples, shall the day be, when the son of man
shall appear. At that day he that is on the house top, and his stuff
in the house: let him not come down to take it out. And likewise let
not him that is in the fields, turn back again to that he left
behind. Remember Lot's wife. Whosoever will go about to save his
life, shall lose it: And whosoever shall lose his life, shall quicken
it.
    I tell you: In that night, there shall be two in one bed, the one
shall be received, and the other shall be forsaken. Two shall be also
a grinding together: the one shall be received, and the other
forsaken. And they answered, and said to him: where lord? And he said
unto them: wheresoever The body shall be, thither will the eagles
resort.

The .xviij. Chapter.

    He put forth a similitude unto them, signifying that men ought
always to pray, and not to be weary, saying: There was a Judge in a
certain city, which feared not God neither regarded man. And there
was a certain widow in the same city, which came unto him saying:
Avenge me of mine adversary. And a great while he would not.
Afterward he said unto himself: Though I fear not God, nor care for
man, yet because this widow troubleth me, I will avenge her, lest at
the last she come, and rail on me.
    And the lord said: hear what the unrighteous judge sayeth. And
shall not God avenge his elect, which cry night and day unto him? 
Yea though he defer them: I tell you, he will avenge them, and that
quickly. Nevertheless, when the son of man cometh, suppose ye, that
he shall find faith on earth.
    And he put forth this similitude, unto certain which trusted in
themselves, that they were perfect, and despised other. Two men went
up into the temple to pray: the one a pharisee, and the other a
publican. The pharise stood and prayed thus with himself. God I thank
thee that I am not as other are, extortioners, unjust, advoutrers,
and even as the publican is. I fast twice in the week. I give tithe
of all that I possess. And the publican stood afar off, and would not
lift up his eyes to heaven, but smote his breast, saying: God be
mercyfull to me a sinner. I tell you: this man departed home to his
house justified more than the other. For every man that exalteth
himself, shall be brought low: And he that humbleth himself, shall be
exalted.
    They brought unto him also babes, that he should touch them. When
his disciples saw that, they rebuked them. But Iesus called them unto
him, and said: Suffer children to come unto me, and forbid them not.
For unto such, belongeth the kingdom of God. Verily I say unto
you: whosoever receiveth not the kingdom of God, as a child: he shall
not enter therein.
    And a certain ruler asked him: saying: Good Master: what ought I
to do, to obtain eternal life? Iesus said unto him: Why callest thou
me good? No man is good, save God only. Thou knowest the
commandments: Thou shalt not commit advoutry, thou shalt not kill,
thou shalt not steal, thou shalt not bear false witness, Honour thy
father, and thy mother. And he said: All these have I kept from my
youth. When Iesus heard that, he said unto him: Yet lackest thou one
thing. Sell all that thou hast, and distribute it unto the poor, and
thou shalt have treasure in heaven, and come, and follow me. When he
heard that, he was heavy, for he was rich.
    When Iesus saw him mourn, he said: with what difficulty shall
they that have riches, enter into the kingdom of God: Easier it is
for a camel to pass thorow a needles eye, than for a rich man to
enter into the kingdom of God. Then said they that heard that: And
who shall then be saved? He said: Things which are unpossible with
men: are possible with God.
    Then Peter said: Lo we have forsaken all, and have followed thee.
He said unto them: Verily I say unto you, there is no man that
forsaketh house, other father and mother, other brethren, or wife, or
children, for the kingdom of God's sake, which same shall not receive
much more in this world: and in the world to come, life everlasting.
    He took unto him twelve, and said unto them: Lo we go up to
Ierusalem, and all shall be fulfilled that are written by the
prophets of the son of man. He shall be delivered unto the gentiles,
and shall be mocked, and shall be despitefully entreated, and shall
be spitted on: and when they have scourged him, they will put him to
death, and the third day, shall he arise again. They understood none
of these things. And this saying was hid from them. And they
perceived not the things which were spoken.
    It came to pass, as they were come nigh unto Iericho, a certain
blind man sat by the way side begging. And when he heard the people
pass by, he asked what it meant. They said unto him that Iesus of
Nazareth, went by. And he cried, saying: Iesus the son of David, have
mercy on me. And they which went before rebuked him, because he
should hold his peace. And he much the more cried, The son of David,
have mercy on me. Iesus stood still, and commanded him, to be brought
unto him. And when he was come near, he asked him saying: What wilt
thou, that I do unto thee? And he said: lord, that I may receive my
sight. Iesus said unto him: Receive thy sight: Thy faith hath saved
thee. And immediately he saw, and followed him, praising God. And all
the people, when they saw it, gave laud to God.

The .xix. Chapter.

    And he entered in, and went thorow Iericho. And behold, there was
a man named Zacheus, which was a ruler among the publicans, and rich
also. And he made means to see Iesus, what he should be: and he could
not for the press, because he was of a low stature. And he ran
before, and ascended up, into a sycomore tree, to see him. For he
would come that same way. And when Iesus came to the place, he looked
up, and saw him, and said unto him: Zache, come down at once, for today
I must abide at thy house. And hastily he came down, and received him
joyfully. And when they saw that, they all grudged saying: He is
gone, into tarry with a man that is a sinner.
    Zache stood forth and said unto the lord: Behold lord, the half
of my goods I give to the poor, and if I have done any man wrong, I
will restore him four fold. Iesus said to him: This day is health
come unto this house, forasmuch as it also is become the child of
Abraham. For the son of man is come to seek, and to save that which
was lost.
    As they heard these things, he added thereto a similitude,
because he was nigh to Ierusalem, And because also, they thought that
the kingdom of God should shortly appear. He said therefore: A
certain noble man, went into a far country, to receive a kingdom, and
then to come again. He called his ten servants, and delivered them
ten pounds saying unto them: Buy and sell till I come: But his
citizens hated him, and sent messengers after him, saying: We will
not have this man to reign over us.
    And it came to pass, when he was come again and had received his
kingdom, he commanded his servants, to be called to him (to whom he
gave his money) to wit what every man had done. Then came the first
saying: lord, thy pound hath increased ten pounds. And he said unto
him: Well good servant, because thou wast faithful in a very little
thing, Take thou authority over ten cities. And the other came
saying: lord thy pound, hath increased five pounds. And to the same
he said: And be thou also ruler over five cities. And the third came,
and said: lord, behold here thy pound, which I have kept in a napkin,
for I feared thee, because thou art a strait man: thou takest up that
thou laidst not down, And reapest that thou didst not sow. And he
said unto him: Of thine own mouth judge I thee thou evil servant.
Knewest thou that I am a strait man, taking up that I laid not down,
and reaping that I did not sow? Wherefore then gavest not thou my
money into the bank? And then at my coming should I have required
mine own, with vantage. And he said to them that stood by: Take from
him that pound, and give it him that hath ten pounds. And they said
unto him: lord he hath ten pounds. I say unto you, that unto all them
that have, it shall be given: and from him that hath not, even that
he hath shall be taken away. Moreover those mine enemies, which would
not, that should reign over them, bring hither, and slay them before
me. And when he had thus spoken, he proceeded forth before them, and
went up to Ierusalem.
    And it fortuned, when he was come nigh to Bethphage and Bethany,
besides mount Olivete, he sent two of his disciples saying: Go ye in
to the town which is over against you. In the which as soon as ye are
come, ye shall find a colt tied, whereon, yet never man sat. Loose
him and bring him hither. And if any man ask you, why that ye loose
him: thus say unto him, The lord hath need of him.
    They that were sent went their way, and found, even as he had
said unto them. And as they were a loosing the colt, the owners said
unto them: why loose ye the colt? And they said: for the lord hath
need of him. And they brought him to Iesus. And they cast their
raiment on the colt, and set Iesus thereon. And as he went they spread
their clothes in the way.
    When he was come where he should go down from the mount Olivete,
the whole multitude of the disciples began to rejoice, and to laud
God with a loud voice, for all the miracles that they had seen,
saying: Blessed be the king that cometh in the name of the lord:
Peace in heaven, and glory in the highest. And some of the pharisees
of the company, said unto him: Master rebuke thy disciples. He
answered, and said unto them: I tell you, if these hold their peace,
the stones will cry.
    And when he was come near, he beheld the city, and wept on it
saying: If thou hadst known those things which belong unto thy peace,
even at this day? But now are they hid from thine eyes. For the days
shall come upon thee, And thine enemies shall compass thee about with
a bank. And shall besiege thee round about, and keep thee in on every
side, And make thee even with the ground, with thy children which are
in thee. And they shall not leave in thee one stone upon another,
because thou knewest not the time of thy visitation.
    And he went into the temple, and began to cast out them that sold
therein, and them that bought saying unto them, It is written, my
house is the house of prayer: But ye have made it a den of thieves.
And he taught daily in the temple. The high priests and the scribes
and the chief of the people, went about to destroy him: But could not
find what to do. For all the people stuck by him. And gave him
audience.

The .xx. Chapter.

    And it fortuned in one of those days, As he taught the people in
the temple, And preached the gospel. The high priests and the scribes
came unto him with the seniors, And spake unto him, saying: Tell us
by what authority thou doest these things? Other who is he that gave
thee this authority? He answered and said unto them: I also will ask
you a question, and answer me: was the baptism of Ihon, from heaven,
or of men? They thought within themselves saying: If we shall say
from heaven: he will say: Why then believed ye him not? But and if we
shall say of men, all the people will stone us. For they surely
believe that Ihon was a prophet. And they answered that they could
not tell whence it was. And Iesus said unto them: Neither tell I you
by what authority I do these things.
    Then began he to put forth to the people, this similitude: A
certain man planted a vineyard, and let it forth to farmers, and went
himself into a strange country for a great season. And when the time
came, he sent a servant to his tenants that they should give him of
the fruits, of the vineyard. The tenants beat him: and sent him away
empty. And he ceased not thereby but sent yet another servant. And
they beat him, and foul entreated him also, and sent him away empty.
Moreover, he sent the third Also, And him they wounded, and cast him
out. Then said the lord of the vineyard: what shall I do? I will send
my dear son, him peradventure they will reverence, when they see him.
    When the farmers saw him, they thought in themselves, saying:
this is the heir, come let us kill him, that the inheritance may be
ours. And they cast him out of the vineyard, and killed him. Now what
shall the lord of the vineyard do unto them? He will come and destroy
those farmers, and will let out his vineyard to other. When they
heard that, they said: God forbid.
    He beheld them and said: what meaneth this then that is written:
The stone that the builders refused, is made the head cornerstone?
whosoever stumble at that stone, shall be bruised: but on whosoever
it fall, it will also break him. And the high priests and the
scribes, the same hour went about to lay hands on him, but they
feared the people. For they perceived that he had spoken this
similitude against them.
    And they watched him, and sent forth spies, which should feign
themselves perfect, to take him in his words, and to deliver him unto
the power, and authority of the president. And they asked him saying:
Master, we know that thou sayest, and teachest right, neither
considerest thou any man's degree, but teachest the way of God truly.
Is it lawful for us to give Cesar tribute, or no? He perceived their
craftiness, and said unto them: Why tempt ye me? Shew me a penny.
Whose image and superscription hath it? They answered and said:
Cesar's. And he said unto them: Give then unto Cesar, that which
belongeth unto Cesar: And to God, that which pertaineth to God. And
they could not reprove his saying before the people. And they
marvelled at his answer, and held their peace.
    Then came to him certain of the Sadduces which deny that there is
any resurrection. And they asked him saying: Master Moses wrote unto
us, if any man's brother die having a wife, And the same die without
issue: that then his brother should take his wife, and raise up seed
unto his brother. There were seven brethren, and the first took a
wife, and died without children. And the second took the wife, and he
died childless. And the third took her, and in like wise the residue
of the seven, And left no children behind them, and died. Last of all
the woman died also. Now at the resurrection whose wife of them shall
she be? for vij had her to wife.
    Iesus answered and said unto them: The children of this world
marry wives, and are married, but they which shall be worthy of that
world, and the resurrection from death, neither marry wives, neither
are married, nor yet can die any more. For they are equal unto the
angels: and are the sons of God, inasmuch as they are the children of
the resurrection. And that the dead shall rise again, even Moses
signified besides the bush, when he said: the lord God of Abraham,
and the God of Isaac, and the God of Iacob. For he is not the God of
the dead, but of them which live. For all live in him. Certain of the
pharisees answered and said: Master, thou hast well said. And after
that durst they not ask him any question at all.
    Then said he unto them: how say they that Christ is David's son?
And David him self saith in the book of the Psalms: The lord said
unto my lord, Sit on my right hand, till I make thine enemies thy
foot stool. David then calleth him lord: How is he also his son?
    Then in the audience of all the people, he said unto his
disciples, beware of the scribes, which desire to go in long
clothing: and love greetings in the markets, and the highest seats in
the synagogues, and chief rooms at feasts, which devour widows'
houses, and pray long under a colour: The same shall receive greater
damnation.

The .xxj. Chapter.

    As he beheld, he saw the rich men, how they cast in their
offerings into the treasury. He saw also a certain poor widow, which
cast in thither two mites. And he said: of a truth I say unto you,
this poor widow hath put in more than they all. For they all have of
their superfluity added unto the offering of God: But she, of her
penury, hath cast in all the substance that she had.
    As some spake of the temple, how it was garnished with goodly
stones, and jewels, he said. The days will come, when of these things
which ye see, shall not be left stone upon stone that shall not be
thrown down. And they asked him, saying: Master when shall these
things be. And what signs will there be, when such things shall come
to pass.
    And he said: take heed, that ye be not deceived. For many will
come in my name, saying of themselves, I am he. And the time draweth
near. Follow ye not them therefore. But when ye hear of war, and of
dissension: be not afraid, for these things must first come: but the
end followeth not by and by. Then said he unto them: Nation shall
rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom, and great
earthquakes shall be in all quarters, and hunger, and pestilence, and
fearful things. And great signs shall there be from heaven.
    But before all these, they shall lay their hands on you, and
persecute you, delivering you up, to the synagogues, and into prison,
and bring you before kings, And rulers for my name's sake. And this
shall chance you for a testimonial. Let it stick therefore fast in
your hearts, not once to study before, what ye shall answer for
yourselves: For I will give you a mouth and wisdom, where against,
all your adversaries shall not be able to speak nor resist. Yea and ye
shall be betrayed of your fathers and mothers, and of your brethren,
and kinsmen, and lovers. And some of you shall they put to death. And
hated shall ye be of all men for my name's sake. Yet there shall not
one hair of your heads perish. With your patience, possess your
souls.
    And when ye see Ierusalem besieged with an host, then understand,
that the desolation of the same is nigh. Then let them which are in
jewry fly to the mountains. And let them which are in the midst of
it, depart out. And let not them that are in other countries, enter
there in. For these be the days of vengeance, to fulfil all that are
written. But woe be to them that be with child, and to them that give
suck in those days, for there shall be great trouble in the land: and
wrath over all this people. And they shall fall on the edge of the
sword. And they shall be led captive into all nations. And Ierusalem
shall be trodden underfoot of the gentiles, until the time of the
gentiles be fulfilled.
    And there shall be signs, in the sun, and in the moon, and in the
stars: and in the earth the people shall be in such perplexity, that
they shall not tell which way to turn themselves. The sea and the
waves shall roar, and men's hearts shall fail them for fear, and for
looking after those things which shall come on the earth. For the
powers of heaven shall move. And then shall they see the son of man
come in a cloud with power and great glory. When these things begin
to come to pass: then look up, and lift up your heads, for your
redemption draweth nigh.
    And he shewed them a similitude: behold the fig tree, and all
other trees, when they shoot forth their buds, ye see and know of
your own selves that summer is then nigh at hand. So likewise ye
(when ye see these things come to pass) understand, that the kingdom
of God is nigh. Verily I say unto you: this generation shall not
pass, till all be fulfilled. Heaven and earth shall pass: but my
words shall not pass.
    Take heed to yourselves, lest your hearts be overcome, with
surfeiting and drunkenness, and cares of this world: and that, that
day come on you unawares. For as a snare shall it come on all them
that sit on the face of the earth. Watch therefore continually and
pray, that ye may scape all this that shall come. And that ye may
stand before the son of man. In the day time taught he in the temple,
and at night, he went out, and had abiding in the mount olivete. And
all the people came in the morning to him in the temple, for to hear
him.

The .xxij. Chapter.

    The feast of sweet bread drew nigh which is called ester, and the
high priests, and scribes sought how to kill Iesus, but they feared
the people. Then entered Satan into Iudas, whose sur name was
Iscariot (which was of the number of the twelve) and he went his way,
and communed with the high priests and officers, how he would betray
him to them. And they were glad: and promised to give him money. And
he consented, and sought opportunity to betray him unto them, when
the people were away.
    Then came the day of sweet bread, when of necessity the ester
lamb must be offered. And he sent Peter, and Ihon saying: Go and
prepare us the ester lamb, that we may eat. They said to him. Where
wilt thou, that we prepare? And he said unto them. Behold as ye be
entered into the city, there shall a man meet you bearing a pitcher
of water, him follow into the same house that he entereth in, and ye
shall say unto the good man of the house. The master sayeth: Where is
the guest chamber, where I shall eat mine ester lamb with my
disciples? And he shall shew you a great parlour paved. There make
ready. They went and found, as he had said unto them: and made ready
the ester lamb.
    And when the hour came, he sat down and the twelve Apostles with
him. And he said unto them: I have inwardly desired to eat this ester
lamb with you before that I suffer. For I say unto you: henceforth, I
will not eat of it any more, until it be fulfilled in the kingdom of
God. And he took the cup, and gave thanks, and said: Receive this,
and divide it among you. For I say unto you: I will not drink of the
fruit of the vine, until the kingdom of God be come.
    And he took bread, gave thanks, and brake it, and gave it unto
them, saying: This is my body which is given for you. This do in the
remembrance of me. Likewise also, when they had supped, he took the
cup saying: This is the cup, the new testament, in my blood, which
shall for you be shed.
    Yet behold, the hand of him that betrayeth me, is with me on the
table. And the son of man goeth as it is appointed: But woe be to
that man by whom he is betrayed. And they began to enquire among
themselves, which of them it should be, that should do that.
    And there was a strife among them, which of them should seem
greatest. And he said unto them: The kings of the gentiles reign over
them, And they that bear rule over them, are called gracious lords.
But ye shall not be so. But he that is greatest among you, shall be
as the youngest: And he that is chief, shall be as the minister. For
whether is greater, he that sitteth at meat: or he that serveth? Is
not he that sitteth at meat? And I am among you, as he that
ministereth. Ye are they which have bidden with me in my temptations.
And I appoint unto you a kingdom, as my father hath appointed to me:
that ye may eat, and drink at my table in my kingdom and sit on
seats, and judge the twelve tribes of Israell. And the lord said:
Simon, Simon, behold Satan hath desired you, to sift you, as it were
wheat: But I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not. And when
thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren. And he said unto him.
lord, I am ready to go with thee into prison, and to death. And he
said: I tell thee Peter, the cock shall not crow this day, till thou
have thrice denied that thou knewest me.
    And he said unto them: when I sent you without wallet, and scrip,
and shoes, lacked ye anything? And they said, nothing. And he said to
them: But now he that hath a wallet let him take it, and likewise his
scrip. And he that hath no sword, let him sell his coat and buy one.
I say unto you that yet, that which is written must be performed in
me (Even with the wicked was he numbered) for those things which are
written of me have an end. And they said: lord, behold here are two
swords. And he said unto them: it is enough.
    And he came out, and went as he was wont to mount Olivete. And
the disciples followed him. And when he came to the place, he said to
them: Pray lest ye fall into temptation.
    And he gat himself from them, about a stone's cast, and kneeled
down, and prayed, saying: Father if thou wilt, withdraw this cup from
me. Nevertheless, not my will, But thine be fulfilled. And there
appeared an angel unto him from heaven, comforting him. And he was in
agony, and prayed somewhat longer. And his sweat was like drops of
blood, trickling down to the ground. And he rose up from prayer, and
came to his disciples, and found them sleeping for sorrow, and said
unto them: Why sleep ye? Rise, and pray lest ye fall into temptation.
    While he yet spake: behold, there came a company, and he that was
called Iudas, one of the twelve, went before them, and pressed nigh
unto Iesus to kiss him. Iesus said unto him: Iudas betrayest thou the
son of man with a kiss? When they which were about him saw what would
follow, they said unto him. lord, shall we smite with a sword. And
one of them smote a servant of him which was the chief priest of all,
and smote off his right ear. Iesus answered and said: Suffer ye thus
far forth. And he touched his ear, and healed him.
    Iesus said unto the high priests and rulers of the temple and the
seniors which were come to him. Be ye come out, as unto a thief with
swords and staves? When I was daily with you in the temple, ye
stretched not forth hands against me. But this is even your very
hour, and the power of darkness. Then took they him, and led him, and
brought him to the high priest's house. And Peter followed afar off.
    When they had kindled a fire in the midst of the palace, and were
set down together, Peter also sat down among them. And one of the
wenches, as he sat, beheld him by the light and set good eyesight on
him, and said: This same was also with him. Then he denied him
saying: Woman I know him not. And after a little while, another saw
him and said: Thou art also of them. And Peter said: Man I am not.
And about the space of an hour after another affirmed saying: Verily
even this fellow was with him, for he is of Galile, Peter said: Man I
wot not what thou sayest. And immediately while he yet spake, the
cock crew. And the lord turned back and looked upon Peter. And Peter
remembered the words of the lord, how he said unto him, before the
cock crow thou shalt deny me thrice. And Peter went out, and wept
bitterly.
    And the men that stood about Iesus, mocked him, and smote him,
and blindfolded him, and smote his face. And asked him saying: Areed
who it is that smote thee? And many other things despitefully said
they against him.
    And as soon as it was day, the seniors of the people, and the
high priests and scribes, came together, and led him into their
council saying: Art thou very Christ? tell us. And he said unto them:
if I shall tell you, ye will not believe. And if also I ask you, ye
will not answer me. Neither let me go. Hereafter shall the son of man
sit on the right hand of the power of God. Then said they all: Art
thou then the son of God? He said: Ye say that I am. Then said they:
What need we any further witness? We ourselves have heard of his own
mouth.

The .xxiij. Chapter.

    And the whole multitude of them arose, and led him unto Pilate.
And they began to accuse him saying: We have found his fellow,
perverting the people, and forbidding to pay tribute to Cesar: And
sayeth that he is Christ a king. And Pilate opposed him saying: Art
thou the king of the jewes? He answered him, and said: thou sayest.
Then said Pilate to the high priests, and to the people: I find no
fault in this man. And they were the more fierce, saying: He moveth
the people teaching thoroout jewry, and began at Galile, even to this
place.
    When Pilate heard mention of Galile, he asked whether the man
were of Galilee. And as soon as he knew that he was of Herode's
jurisdiction, he sent him to Herode, which was at that time in
Ierusalem also. When Herode saw Iesus, he was marvelously glad. For
he was desirous to see him of a long season, because he had heard
many things of him, and trusted to have seen some miracle done by
him. Then questioned he with him of many things: But he answered him
not one word. The high priests and scribes, stood forth and accused
him straitly. And Herod, with his men of war, despised him, and
mocked him, And arrayed him in white, and sent him again to Pilate.
And the same day Pilate, and Herod were made friends together. For
before, they were at variance.
    Pilate called together the high priests, and rulers, and the
people, and said unto them: Ye have brought this man unto me, as one
that perverted the people. And lo I examined him before you, and have
found no fault in this man, of those things whereof ye accuse him. No
nor yet Herode. For I sent you to him: and lo no thing worthy of
death is done to him. I will therefore chasten him and let him loose.
For of necessity, he must have let one loose unto them at that feast.
    And all the people cried at once, saying: away with him, and
deliver to us Barabbas. (which for insurrection made in the city, and
murder, was cast into prison) Pilate spake again to them willing to
let Iesus loose. And they cried, saying: Crucify him, Crucify him. He
said unto them the third time: What harm hath he done? I find no
cause of death in him. I will therefore chasten him, and let him go
loose. And they cried with loud voice, and required that he might be
crucified. And the crying of the high priests prevailed.
    And Pilate gave sentence that it should be as they required, and
let loose unto them, him that for insurrection, and murder was cast
into prison, whom they desired: and delivered Iesus to do with him
what they would. And as they led him away, they caught one Simon of
Syrene, coming out of the field: And on him laid they the cross to
bear it after Iesus.
    There followed him a great company of people, and of women, which
women bewailed, and lamented him. Iesus turned back unto them, and
said: Daughters of Ierusalem, weep not for me: but weep for
yourselves, and for your children. For mark, the days will come, when
men shall say: happy are the barren and the wombs that never bare,
and the paps which never gave suck. Then shall they begin to say to
the mountains: fall on us. and to the hills cover us. For if they do
this to a green tree: what shall be done, to the dry?
    There were two evil doers led with him to be slain. And when they
were come to the place, which is called Calvary, there they crucified
him, and the evil doers, one on right hand, and the other on the left
hand. Then said Iesus: Father forgive them, for they wot not what
they do. And they parted his raiment, and cast lots. And the people
stood and beheld.
    And the rulers mocked him with them saying: He help other men,
let him help himself if he be Christ the chosen of God. The soldiers
also mocked him, and came and gave him vinegar and said: if thou be
that king of the jewes, save thyself. His superscription was written
over him, in greek, latin, and hebreu letters: This is the king of
the jewes.
    The one of the malefactors which hanged, railed on him, saying:
If thou be Christ save thyself and us. The other answered and rebuked
him saying: Neither fearest thou God because thou art in the same
damnation? We are righteously punished, for we receive according to
our deeds: But this man hath done no thing amiss. And he said unto
Iesus: lord remember me when thou comest into thy kingdom. And Iesus
said unto him: Verily I say unto thee, today shalt thou be with me in
paradise.
    And it was about the sixth hour. And there came a darkness over
all the land, until the ninth hour, and the sun was darkened. And the
veil of the temple rent even thorow the midst. And Iesus cried with a
great voice and said: Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit. And
when he thus had said, he gave up the ghost. When the Centurion saw,
what had happened, he glorified God saying: Of a surety this man was
perfect. And all the people that came together to that sight,
beholding the things which were done: smote their breasts, and
returned home. And all his acquaintance stood afar off, and the
women, which followed him from Galile, beholding these things.
    And behold there was a man named Ioseph a senator, which was a
good man and a just, He did not consent to their counsel and deed,
which was of Aramathia, a city of the jews. Which same also, waited
for the kingdom of God: he went unto Pilate, and begged the body of
Iesus. And took it down, and wrapped it in a linen cloth, and laid it
in an hewn tomb, wherein was never man before laid. And that day was
the saboth even, And the saboth drew on. The women that followed
after which came with him from Galile, beheld the sepulchre and how
his body was laid. And they returned, and prepared odours, and
ointments, And the saboth day they rested, according to the
commandment.

The .xxiiij. Chapter.

    On the morrow after the saboth, early in the morning, they came
unto the tomb and brought the odours which they had prepared, and
other women with them. And they found the stone rolled away from the
sepulchre, and went in: but found not the body of the lord Iesu. And
it happened, as they were amazed thereat: lo two men stood by them,
in shining vestures. And as they were afraid, and bowed down their
faces to the earth: they said to them: why seek ye the living among
the dead? He is not here: but is risen. Remember how he spake unto
you, when he was yet with you in Galile, saying: that the son of man
must be delivered into the hands of sinful men, and be crucified, and
the third day rise again. And they remembered his words, and returned
from the sepulchre, and told all these things unto the eleven, and to
all other. It was Mary Magdalene and Ioanna, and Mary Iacobi, And
other that were with them, which told these things unto the Apostles,
and their words seemed unto them feigned things, neither believed
they them. Then arose Peter and ran unto the sepulchre, and stooped
in, And saw the linen clothes laid by them self. And departed
wondering in himself at that which had happened.
    And behold, two of them went that same day to a town, which was
from Ierusalem about three score furlongs, called Emaus: and they
talked together of all these things that had happened. And it
chanced, as they communed together, and reasoned, that Iesus himself
drew near, and went with them. But their eyes were holden, that they
could not know him. And he said unto them: What manner of
communications are these that ye have one to another as ye walk, and
are sad? And the one of them named Cleopas, answered, and said unto
him: art thou only a stranger in Ierusalem, and hast not known the
things which have chanced therein in these days? To whom he said:
what things? And they said unto him: of Iesus of Nazareth which was a
prophet, mighty in deed, and word, before God, and all the people.
And how the high priests, and our rulers delivered him to be
condemned to death: and have crucified him. We trusted that it should
have been he that should have delivered Israhell. And as touching all
these things, today is even the third day, that they were done.
    Yea and certain women also of our company made us astonied, which
came early unto the sepulchre, and found not his body. And came
saying, that they had seen visions of angels which said that he was
alive. And certain of them which were with us, went their way to the
sepulchre, and found it even so as the women had said: but him they
saw not.
    And he said unto them: O fools, and slow of heart to believe all
that the prophets have spoken. Ought not Christ to have suffered
these things, and to enter into his glory? And he began at Moses, and
at all the prophets, and interpreted unto them, in all scriptures
which were written of him. And they drew nigh unto the town which
they went to. And he made, as though he would have gone further. And
constrained him, saying: Abide with us for it draweth towards night,
and the day is far passed. And he went in to tarry with them.
    And it came to pass as he sat at meat with them, he took bread
and blessed it, and brake it and gave it unto them. And their eyes
were opened. And they knew him. And he vanished out of their sight,
and they said between themselves: did not our hearts burn within us,
while he talked with us by the way, and opened to us the scriptures?
And they rose up the same hour, and returned again to Ierusalem, and
found the eleven gathered together, and them that were with them,
saying: The lord is risen in deed, and hath appeared to Simon. And
they told what things was done in the way, and how they knew him, by
the breaking of bread.
    As they thus spake, Iesus himself stood in the midst of them, and
said unto them: peace be with you. And they were abashed, and afraid,
supposing that they had seen a spirit. And he said unto them: Why are
ye troubled? and why do thoughts arise in your hearts? Behold my
hands and my feet. For it is even I myself. Handle me and see. For
spirits have not flesh and bones, as ye see me have. And when he had
thus spoken, he shewed them his hands, and his feet. And while they
yet believed not for joy, and wondered, he said unto them: Have ye
here any meat? and they gave him a piece of a broiled fish, and of an
honeycomb. And he took it, and ate it before them.
    And he said unto them: These are the words, which I spake unto
you, while I was yet with you: that all must be fulfilled which were
written of me in the law of Moses, and in the prophets, and in the
psalmes. Then opened he their wits, that they might understand the
scriptures, and said unto them: Thus is it written, and thus it
behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise again from death the third day.
And that repentance, and remission of sins, should be preached in his
name among all nations. And the beginning must be at Ierusalem. And
ye are witnesses of these things. And behold, I will send the promise
of my father upon you. But tarry ye in the city of Ierusalem, until
ye be endued with power from on high.
    And he led them out into Bethany, and lift up his hands, and
blest them. And it came to pass, as he blessed them, he departed from
them, and was carried up into heaven. And they worshipped him, and
returned to Ierusalem with great joy. And were continually in the
temple, praising, and lauding God.

Here endeth the Gospell off Sainct Luke.


The gospell of S. Ihon

The first Chapter.

    In the beginning was that word, and that word was with God: and
God was that word. The same was in the beginning with God. All things
were made by it, and without it, was made no thing, that made was. In
it was life, And life was the light of men, And the light shineth in
the darkness, and darkness comprehended it not.
    There was a man sent from God, whose name was Ihon. The same came
as a witness, to bear witness of the light, that all men through him
might believe. He was not that light: but to bear witness of the
light. That was a true light, which lighteneth all men that come into
the world. He was in the world, and the world by him was made: and
the world knew him not.
    He came among his own, and his received him not. Unto as many as
received him, gave he power to be the sons of God: in that they
believed on his name: which were born not of blood nor of the will of
the flesh, nor yet of the will of man: but of God.
    And that word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, and we saw the
glory of it, as the glory of the only begotten son of the father,
which word was full of grace, and verity.
    Ihon bare witness of him saying: This was he of whom I spake, he
that cometh after me, was before me because he was yer than I. And of
his fullness have all we received, even favour for favour. For the
law was given by Moses, but favour and verity came by Iesus Christ.
No man saw God at any time. The only begotten son, which is in the
father's bosom, hath declared him.
    And this is the record of Ihon: When the jewes sent priests, and
levites from Ierusalem, to ask him, what art thou? And he confessed,
and denied not, and said plainly: I am not Christ. And they asked
him: what then? art thou Helias? And he said: I am not. Art thou a
prophet? And he answered no. Then said they unto him: what art thou?
That we may give an answer to them that sent us? what sayest thou of
thy self? he said: I am the voice of a crier in the wilderness, make
straight the way of the lord, as said the prophet Esayas.
    And they which were sent, were of the pharisees. And they asked
him, and said unto him: why baptisest thou then, if thou be not
Christ, nor Helias, neither a prophet? Ihon answered them saying: I
baptise with water: but one is come among you, whom ye know not, he
it is that cometh after me, which was before me, whose shoe latchet I
am not worthy to unloose. These things were done in Bethabara beyond
Iordan, where Ihon did baptise.
    The next day, Ihon saw Iesus coming unto him, and said: behold
the lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world. This is he
of whom I spake: After me cometh a man, which was before me. For he
was yer than I, and I knew him not: but that he should be declared to
Israhell, therefore came I baptising with water.
    And Ihon bare record, saying: I saw the spirit descend from
heaven, like unto a dove, and it abode upon him, and I knew him not:
But he that sent me to baptise in water, said unto me: Upon whom thou
shalt see the spirit descend, and tarry still on him, the same is he
which baptiseth with the holy ghost. And I saw it, and bare record,
that this is the son of God.
    The next day after Ihon stood again, and two of his disciples,
and he beheld Iesus as he walked by, and said: behold the lamb of
God. And the two disciples heard him speak, and they followed Iesus.
Iesus turned about, and saw them follow, and said unto them: What
seek ye? They said unto him: Rabbi (which is to say by
interpretation, Master) where dwellest thou? He said unto them: come
and see. They came and saw where he dwelt: and abode with him that
day. For it was about the tenth hour.
    One of the two which heard Ihon speak, and followed Iesus, was
Andrew Simon Peter's brother. The same found his brother Simon first,
and said unto him: we have found Messias, which is by interpretation
anointed: And brought him to Iesus. And Iesus beheld him and said:
thou art Simon the son of Ionas, thou shalt be called Cephas: which
is by interpretation a stone.
    The day following Iesus would go into Galile, and found Philip,
and said unto him, follow me. Philip was of Bethsaida the city of
Andrew and Peter. Philip found Nathanael, and said unto him: We have
found him of whom Moses wrote in the law, and the prophets: Iesus the
son of Ioseph of Nazareth. And Nathanael said unto him: Can there any
good thing come out of Nazareth? Philip said to him: Come and see.
    Iesus saw Nathanael coming to him, and said of him: Behold a
right Israelite, in whom is no guile. Nathanael said unto him: From
whence knewest thou me? Iesus answered and said unto him: Before that
Philip called thee, when thou wast under the fig tree, I saw thee.
Nathanael answered and said unto him: Rabbi, thou art the son of God,
Thou art the king of Israhel. Iesus answered and said unto him:
Because I said unto thee, I saw thee under the fig tree, thou
believest. Thou shalt see greater things than these. And he said unto
him: Verily, verily, I say unto you: hereafter shall ye see heaven
open, and the angels of God ascending, and descending over the son of
man.

The second Chapter.

    And the third day, was there a marriage in Cana a city of Galile.
And Iesus mother was there. Iesus was called also and his disciples
unto the marriage. And when the wine failed, Iesus mother said unto
him: they have no wine. Iesus said unto her: woman, what have I to do
with thee? mine hour is not yet come. His mother said unto the
ministers: whatsoever he sayeth unto you, do it. And there were
standing six waterpots of stone after the manner of the purifying of
the jewes, containing two or three firkins apiece.
    Iesus said unto them: fill the water pots with water, and they
filled them up to the harde brim. And he said unto them: Draw out
now, and bear unto the governor of the feast. And they bare it. When
the ruler of the feast had tasted the water that was turned unto
wine, nother knew whence it was (But the ministers which drew the
water knew). He called the bridegroom, and said unto him: all men at
the beginning set forth good wine, And when men be drunk, then that
which is worse: But thou hast kept back the good wine hitherto.
    This beginning of miracles did Iesus in Cana of Galile, and
shewed his glory, and his disciples believed on him. After that
descended he into Capernaum, and his mother, and his brethren, and
his disciples: But continued not long there.
    And the jewes' ester was even at hand, And Iesus went up to
Ierusalem, and found sitting in the temple those that sold oxen and
sheep, and doves, and changers of money sitting. And he made a
scourge of small cords, and drave them all out of the temple, both
sheep and oxen, and poured down the changers' money, and overthrew
their tables. And said unto them that sold doves: Have these things
hence, and make not my father's house, an house of merchandise. His
disciples remembered, how that it was written: The zeal of thine
house, hath even eaten me.
    Then answered the jewes and said unto him: what token shewest
thou unto us, seeing that thou dost these things? Iesus answered, and
said unto them: destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise
it up again. Then said the jewes: In xlvj. years this temple was
built: and wilt thou raise it up in three days? But he spake of the
temple of his body. As soon therefore as he was risen from death
again, his disciples remembered that he thus said unto them. And they
believed the scripture, and the words which Iesus had said.
    When he was at Ierusalem, at ester in the feast, many believed on
his name: when they saw the signs which he did: but Iesus put not
himself in their hands, because he knew all men, and needed not, that
any man should testify of man. For he knew what was in man.

The .iij. Chapter.

    There was a man of the pharisees named Nicodemus a ruler among
the jewes. He to Iesus by night, and said unto him: Master, we know
that thou art, a teacher which art come from God. For no man could do
such miracles as thou doest, except God were with him: Iesus
answered, and said unto him: Verily verily I say unto thee: except a
man be born a new, he cannot see the kingdom of God.
    Nicodemus said unto him: how can a man be born, when he is old?
can he enter into his mother's body and be born again? Iesus
answered: verily, verily I say unto thee: except that a man be born
of water, and of the spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God.
That which is born of the flesh, is flesh. And that which is born of
the spirit, is spirit. Marvel not that I said to thee, ye must be
born a new. The wind bloweth where he listeth, and thou hearest his
sound: but canst not tell whence he cometh and whither he goeth. So
is every man that is born of the spirit. And Nicodemus answered and
said unto him: how can these things be? Iesus answered and said unto
him: Art thou a master in Israhell, and knowest not these things?
Verily verily, I say unto thee, we speak that we know, and testify
that we have seen: And ye receive not our witness. If I have told you
earthly things and ye have not believe: How should ye believe if I
shall tell you of heavenly things?
    And no man ascendeth up to heaven, but he that came down from
heaven, that is to say, the son of man which is in heaven.
    And as Moses lift up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must
the son of man be lift up, that none which believeth in him perish:
but have eternal life.
    God so loved the world, that he gave his only son for the intent,
that none that believe in him, should perish: But should have
everlasting life. For God sent not his son into the world, to condemn
the world: But that the world through him, might be saved. He that
believeth on him shall not be condemned. But he that believeth not,
is condemned all ready, because he believeth not in the name of the
only son of God. And this is the condemnation: Light is come into the
world, and the men have loved darkness more than light, because their
deeds were evil. For every man that evil doeth, hateth the light:
neither cometh to light, lest his deeds should be reproved. But he
that doth truth, cometh to the light, that his deeds might be known,
how that they are wrought in God.
    After that came Iesus and his disciples into the jewes land, and
there abode with them and baptised, and Ihon also baptised in Enon
besides Salim, because there was much water there, and they came, and
were baptised. For Ihon was not yet cast into prison.
    There arose a question between Ihon's disciples and the jewes
about purifying. And they came unto Ihon, and said unto him: Master,
behold he that was with thee beyond Iordan, to whom thou barest
witness, baptiseth, and all men come to him. Ihon answered, and said:
A man can receive nothing at all except it be given him from heaven.
Ye yourselves are witnesses, how that I said: I am not Christ: but am
sent before him. He that hath the bride is the bridegroom: But the
friend of the bridegroom which standeth by and heareth him, rejoiceth
greatly of the bridegroom's voice. Therefore this my joy is
fulfilled. He must increase: and I must decrease.
    He that cometh from on high is above all: he that is of the earth
is of the earth, and speaketh of the earth. He that cometh from
heaven, is above all: And testifieth that he hath seen, and heard:
and his testimony no man receiveth. Whosoever receiveth his witness,
the same hath sealed that God is true. For he whom God hath sent,
speaketh the words of God. For God giveth not the spirit by measure.
The father loveth the son, and hath given all things into his hand.
He that believeth on the son, hath everlasting life. And he that
beloveth not the son, shall not see life, but the wrath of God
abideth on him.

The .iiij. Chapter.

    As soon as the lord had knowledge, how that it was come to the
ears of the pharisees, that Iesus made and baptised more disciples
then Ihon (though that Iesus himself baptised not: but his disciples)
he left jewry, and departed again in to Galile. And it was so that he
must needs go thorow Samaria. Then came he to a city of Samaria
called Sichar besides the possession that Iacob gave to his son
Ioseph, and there was Iacob's well. Iesus then wearied in his
journey, sat thus on the well.
    It was about the sixth hour: There came a woman of Samaria to
draw water. Iesus said unto her: Give me drink. (for his disciples
were gone away unto the town to buy meat.) The woman of Samaria said
unto him: how is it, that thou being a jewe askest drink of me, which
am a Samaritan? (for the jewes meddle not with the Samaritans.) Iesus
answered and said unto her: if thou knewest the gift of God, and who
it is, that sayeth to thee give me drink: thou wouldest have asked of
him, and he would have given thee water of life. The woman said unto
him: Sir thou hast no thing to draw it withall, and the well is deep:
from whence then hast thou that water of life? Art thou greater than
our father Iacob, which gave us the well, and he himself drank
thereof and his children and his cattle?
    Iesus answered and said unto her: whosoever drinketh of this
water, shall thirst again. But whosoever shall drink of the water
that I shall give him, shall never be more a thirst: But the water
that I shall give him, shall be in him a well of water springing up
into everlasting life. The woman said unto him: Sir give me of that
water, that I thirst not, neither come hither to draw. Iesus said
unto her: Go and call thy husband, and come hither. The woman
answered and said to him: I have no husband. Iesus said to her: Thou
hast well said, I have no husband. For thou hast had five husbands,
and he whom thou now hast, is not thy husband. That saidst thou
truly.
    The woman said unto him: Sir I perceive that thou art a prophet.
Our fathers worshipped in this mountain: and ye say that in Ierusalem
is the place where men ought to pray. Iesus said unto her: woman
trust me, The hour cometh, when ye shall neither in this mountain,
nor yet at Ierusalem, worship the father. Ye worship ye wot nere
what: we know what we worship. For salvation cometh of the jewes. But
the hour cometh, and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship
the father in spirit, and in verity. For verily such the father
requireth to worship him. God is a spirit, and they that worship him,
must honour him, in spirit and verity.
    The woman said unto him: I wot well Messias shall come, which is
called Christ. When he is once come, he will tell us all things.
Iesus said unto her: I that speak unto thee, am he. And even at that
point, came his disciples, and marvelled that he talked with the
woman. Yet no man said unto him: what meanest thou, or why talkest
thou with her? The woman left her water pot behind her, and went her
way into the city, and said to the men there: Come see a man which
told me all things that ever I did. Is not he Christ? Then they went
out of the city, and came unto him.
    In the meanwhile his disciples prayed him saying: Master eat. He
said unto them: I have meat to eat, that ye know not of. Then said
the disciples between themselves: hath any man brought him meat?
Iesus said unto them: My meat is to fulfill the will of him that sent
me. And to finish his work. Say not ye: There are yet four months,
and then cometh harvest? Behold I say unto you, lift up your eyes,
and look on the regions: For they are white already unto harvest. And
he that reapeth receiveth reward, and gathereth fruit unto life
eternal: That both he that soweth, might rejoice also, and he that
reapeth. And herein is the saying true, that one soweth, And another
reapeth. I sent you to reap that whereon ye bestowed no labor. Other
men laboured, And ye are entered into their labors.
    Many of the Samaritans of that city believed on him, For the
woman's saying, which testified: He told me all things that ever I
did. Then when the Samaritans were come unto him, They besought him,
that he would tarry with them. And he abode there two days. And many
more believed because of his own words. And said unto the woman: Now
we believe not because of thy saying: for we have heard him
ourselves, and know that this is even indeed Christ the saviour of
the world.
    After two days, he departed thence, and went away into Galile.
And Iesus himself testified, that a prophet hath none honour in his
own country. Then as soon as he was come into Galile, the Galileans
received him which had seen all things, that he did at Ierusalem on
the feast. For they went also unto the feast day. And Iesus came
again into Cana of Galile, where he turned water into wine.
    And there was a certain ruler, whose son was sick at Capernaum.
As soon as the same heard that Iesus was come out of jewry into
Galilee he went unto him, and besought him, that he would descend,
and heal his son: For he was even ready to die. Then said Iesus unto
him: Except ye see signs and wonders, ye believe not. The ruler said
unto him: Sir come away or ever that my child die. Iesus said unto
him go thy way, thy son liveth. And the man believed the words that
Iesus had spoken unto him, and went his way. And anon as he went on
his way, his servants met him, and told him, saying: thy child
liveth, Then enquired he of them the hour when he began to amend. And
they said unto him: Yesterday the seventh hour, the fever left him.
And the father knew that it was the same hour in which Iesus said
unto him: Thy son liveth. And he believed, and all his household.
This is again the second miracle, that Iesus did, after he was come
out of jewry into Galilee.

The .v. Chapter.

    After that there was a feast of the jewes, and Iesus went up to
Ierusalem. There is at Ierusalem, by the slaughterhouse a pool called
in the Hebrew tongue, bethesda, having five porches, in them lay a
great multitude of sick folk, of blind, halt, and withered, waiting
for the moving of the water. For an angel went down at a certain
season into the pool and stirred the water. Whosoever then first
after the stirring of the water stepped in, was made whole of
whatsoever disease he had. And a certain man was there, which had
been diseased xxxviij. years. When Iesus saw him lie, and knew that
he now long time had been diseased, he said unto him, Wilt thou be
whole? The sick answered him: Sir I have no man when the water is
moved, to put me into the pool. But in the mean time, while I am
about to come, another steppeth down before me.
    Iesus said unto him: rise, take up thy bed, and walk. And
immediately the man was made whole, and took up his bed, and went.
And the same day was the saboth day. The jewes therefore said unto
him that was made whole: It is the saboth day, it is not lawful for
thee to carry thy bed. He answered them: he that made me whole, said
unto me: Take up thy bed, and get thee hence. Then asked they him:
what man is that which said unto thee, take up thy bed and walk? And
he that was healed, wist not who it was. For Iesus had gotten himself
away, because that there was press of people in the place.
    After that, Iesus found him in the temple, and said unto him:
Behold thou art made whole, see thou sin no more, lest a worse thing
happen unto thee. The man departed, and told the jewes that it was
Iesus, the which had made him whole. And therefore the jewes did
persecute Iesus, and sought the means to slay him, because he had
done these things on the saboth day. Iesus answered them: My father
worketh hitherto, and I work. Therefore the jewes sought the more to
kill him, not only because he had broken the saboth: but said also
that God was his father and made himself equal with God.
    Then answered Iesus and said unto them: verily, verily, I say
unto you: the son can do no thing of himself: but that he seeth the
father do. For whatsoever he doeth, that doeth the son also. For the
father loveth the son, and sheweth him all things, whatsoever he
himself doeth. And he will shew him greater works than these, because
ye should marvel. For likewise as the father raiseth up the dead, and
quickeneth them, even so the son quickeneth whom he will. Neither
judgeth the father any man: but hath committed all judgement unto the
son, because that all men should honour the son, even as they honour
the father. He that honoureth not the son, the same honoureth not the
father which hath sent him. Verily verily I say unto you: He that
heareth my words, And believeth on him that sent me, hath everlasting
life, and shall not come into damnation: but is scaped from death
unto life.
    Verily, verily I say unto you: the time shall come, and now is,
when the dead shall hear the voice of the son of God. And they that
hear, shall live. For as the father hath life in himself, so likewise
hath he given to the son to have life in himself. And hath given him
power also to judge in that he is the son of man. Marvel not at this,
that the hour shall come, in the which all that are in the graves,
shall hear his voice, and shall come forth, they that have done good
unto the resurrection of life. And they that have done evil, unto the
resurrection of damnation.
    I can of mine own self do nothing at all. As I hear I judge, and
my judgement is just, because I seek not mine own will: But the will
of the father which hath sent me. If I bear witness of myself, my
witness is not true. There is another that beareth witness of me. And
I am sure that the witness which he beareth of me is true. Ye sent
unto Ihon, and he bare witness unto the truth: but I receive no
record of man. Nevertheless, these things I say, that ye might be
safe. He was a burning, and a shining light, and ye would for a
season have rejoiced in his light. But I have greater witness, than
the witness of Ihon. For the works which my father hath given me to
finish: the same works which I do, bear witness of me, that my
father sent me. And my father himself, which hath sent me, beareth
witness of me. Ye have not heard his voice at any time, Nor yet have
seen his shape. And his words have ye not abiding in you: For ye
believe not him whom he hath sent.
    Search the scriptures, for in them, ye think ye have eternal
life: And they are they which testify of me. And yet will ye not come
to me that ye might have life. I receive not praise of men: But I
know you, that ye have not the love of God in you. I am come in my
father's name, and ye receive me not. If another shall come in his
own name, him will ye receive. How can ye believe, which receive
praise one of another, and seek not the praise which cometh of God
only?
    Suppose not, that I will accuse you to my father. There is one
that accuseth you, verily Moses in whom ye trust. For had ye believed
Moses, ye would have believed me: For he wrote of me. But when ye
believe not his writing: how shall ye believe my words.

The .vj. Chapter.

    After that went Iesus his way over the sea of Galile nigh to a
city called Tiberias. And a great multitude followed him, because
they had seen his miracles that he did on them that were diseased.
Iesus went up into a mountain, and there he sat with his disciples.
(And ester a feast of the jewes, was nigh.) Then Iesus lift up his
eyes, and saw a great company come unto him, and said unto Philip:
whence shall we buy bread that these might eat: This he said to prove
him. For he himself knew what he would do.
    Philip answered him, two hundred pennyworth of bread are not
sufficient for them, that every man have a little. Then said unto
him, one of his disciples (Andrew Simon Peter's brother.) There is a
lad here, which hath five barley loaves, and two fishes: but what is
that among so many? Iesus said: Make the people to sit down. (There
was much grass in the place.) And the men sat down, in number, about
five thousand. Iesus took the bread, and gave thanks, and gave to his
disciples, and his disciples, to them that were set down. And
likewise of the fishes, as much as they would.
    When they had eaten enough, he said unto his disciples: gather up
the broken meat that remaineth: that nothing be lost. They gathered
it together, and filled twelve baskets with the broken meat, of the
five barley loaves, which broken meat remained unto them that had
eaten. Then those men, when they had seen the miracle that Iesus did,
said: This is of a truth the same prophet which shall come into the
world. Iesus knew well enough, that they would come, and take him up,
to make him king: and therefore departed he again, into a mountain,
himself alone.
    When even was come his disciples went unto the sea, and entered
into a ship. And went over the sea unto Capernaum. And anon it was
dark, and Iesus was not come to them. And the sea arose with a great
wind. When they had rowed about a xxv. or a xxx. furlongs, they saw
Iesus walk on the sea, and to draw nigh unto the ship, and they were
afraid. And he said unto them: It is I, be not afraid. Then would
they have received him into the ship, and the ship was by and by at
the land whither they went.
    The day following, the people which stood on the other side of
the sea, saw that there was none other ship there save that one
wherein his disciples were entered, and that Iesus went not in with
his disciples into the ship: but that his disciples were gone away
alone. (There came other ships from Tiberias nigh unto the place,
where they ate bread, when the lord had blessed.) Then when the
people saw that Iesus was not there neither his disciples, they also
took shipping and came to Capernaum seeking for Iesus.
    And when they had found him on the other side of the sea, they
said unto him: Master when camest thou hither? Iesus answered them
and said: verily verily I say unto you: ye seek me, not because ye
saw the miracles: but because ye ate of the loaves, and were filled.
Labor not for the meat which perisheth, but for the meat that
endureth unto everlasting life, which meat the son of man shall give
unto you. For him hath God the father sealed.
    Then said they unto him: what shall we do that we might work the
works of God? Iesus answered and said unto them: This is the work of
God, that ye believe on him, whom he hath sent. They said unto him:
what sign shewest thou then? that we may see and believe thee? What
dost thou work? our fathers did eat manna in the desert, as it is
written: He gave them bread from heaven to eat. Iesus said unto them:
verily, verily I say unto you: Moses gave you not bread from heaven:
but my father giveth you the true bread from heaven. For he is the
bread of God, which cometh down from heaven, and giveth life unto the
world.
    Then said they unto him: Master ever more give us this bread. And
Iesus said unto them: I am that bread of life. He that cometh to me,
shall not hunger: and he that believeth on me shall never thirst. But
I said unto you: that ye have seen me, and yet believe ye not. All
that my father giveth me, cometh to me: and him that cometh to me,
cast I not out at the doors. For I came down from heaven: not to do
mine own will: but his will which hath sent me. And this is my
father's will which hath sent me, that of all which he hath given me,
I shall loose no thing: but should raise it up again at the last day.
And this is the will of him that sent me: That every man which seeth
the son, And believeth on him, have everlasting life. And I will
raise him up at the last day.
    The jewes murmured at it, because he said: I am that bread which
is come down from heaven. And they said: Is not this Iesus the son of
Ioseph, whose father, and mother we know? How is it then that he
sayeth, I came down from heaven? Iesus answered and said unto them.
Murmur not between yourselves. No man can come to me except my father
which hath sent me, draw him. And I will raise him up at the last
day. It is written in the prophets: And they shall all be taught of
God. Every man which hath heard, and learned of the father, cometh
unto me, not that any man hath seen the father, save he which is of
God. The same hath seen the father.
    Verily verily I say unto you, he that believeth on me hath
everlasting life. I am that bread of life. Your fathers did eat manna
in the wilderness, and are dead? This is that bread which cometh from
heaven, that he which of it eateth, should also not die. I am that
living bread which came down from heaven. If any man eat of this
bread, he shall live forever. And the bread that I will give, is my
flesh, which I will give for the life of the world.
    The jewes strove among themselves saying: How can this fellow
give us his flesh to eat? Iesus said unto them: Verily, verily I say
unto you, except ye eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his
blood, ye shall not have life in you. Whosoever eateth my flesh, and
drinketh my blood, the same hath eternal life: And I will raise him
up at the last day. For my flesh is meat indeed: and my blood is
drink indeed. He that eateth my flesh and drinketh my blood, dwelleth
in me and I in him. As my living father hath sent me, even so live I
by my father: and he that eateth me, shall live by me. This is the
bread which came from heaven: not as your fathers have eaten manna
and are dead. He that eateth of this bread, shall live ever.
    These things said he in the synagogue as he taught in Capernaum.
Many of his disciples, when they had heard this, said: this is an
hard saying. Who can abide the hearing of it? Iesus knew in himself,
that his disciples murmu red at it, and said unto them: Doth this
offend you? what and if ye shall see the son of man ascend up where
he was before? It is the spirit that quickeneth, the flesh profiteth
nothing. The words that I speak unto you are spirit and life. But
there are some of you that believe not. For Iesus knew from the
beginning, which they were that believed not. And who should betray
him. And he said: Therefore said I unto you: that no man can come
unto me, except it were given unto him of my father.
    From that time many of his disciples went away from him, and
companied no more with him. Then said Iesus to the twelve: will ye
also go away? Simon Peter answered him: Master to whom shall we go?
Thou hast the words of eternal life, And we have believed, and known,
that thou art Christ the son of the living God. Iesus answered them:
Have not I chosen you twelve? And yet one of you is the devil? He
spake it of Iudas Iscariot the son of Simon. For he it was that
should betray him, and was one of the twelve.

The .vij. Chapter.

    After that Iesus went about into Galile, and would not go about
in jewry, for the jewes sought to kill him. The jewes' tabernacle
feast was at hand. His brethren therefore said unto him: Get thyself
hence and go into jewry that thy disciples may see thy works that
thou doest. There is no man that doeth any thing secretly, and he
himself seeketh to be known. If thou do such things, shew thyself to
the world. For as yet his brethren believed not in him.
    Then Iesus said unto them: My time is not yet come, your time is
alway ready. The world cannot hate you. Me it hateth: Because I
testify of it, that the works of it are evil. Go ye up unto this
feast, I will not go up yet unto this feast, for my time is not yet
full come. These words he said unto them, and abode still in Galile.
As soon as his brethren were gone up, then went he also up unto the
feast, not openly: but as it were privily. Then sought him the jewes
at the feast, and said: Where is he? And much murmuring was there of
him among the people. Some said: He is good. Other said nay, but he
deceiveth the people. No man spake openly of him, for fear of the
jewes.
    In the midst of the feast, Iesus went up into the temple, and
taught. And the jewes marvelled, saying: How knoweth he the
scriptures? seeing that he never learned. Iesus answered them, and
said: My doctrine is not mine: but his that sent me. If any man will
do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God: or
whether I spake of myself. He that speaketh of himself, seeketh his
own praise. But he that seeketh his praise that sent him, he is true,
and no unrighteousness is in him.
    Did not Moses give you a law? And yet none of you keepeth the
law? Why go ye about to kill me? The people answered and said: Thou
hast the devil. Who goeth about to kill thee? Iesus answered, and
said unto them, I have done one work, and ye all marvel. Moses
therefore gave unto you circumcision, not because it is of Moses, but
of the fathers. And yet ye on the saboth day circumcise a man. If a
man on the saboth day receive circumcision without breaking of the
law of Moses: Disdain ye at me, because I have made a man every whit
whole on the saboth day? Judge not after the utter appearance: but
judge righteous judgement.
    Then said some of them of Ierusalem: Is not this he whom they go
about to kill? behold he speaketh boldly, and they say nothing to
him. Do not our rulers know indeed, that this is very Christ? But we
know this man whence he is, but when Christ cometh, no man shall know
whence he is.
    Then cried Iesus in the temple as he taught saying: And me ye
know, and whence I am ye know: and I am not come of myself. But he
that sent me is true, whom ye know not. I know him: For I am of him,
and he hath sent me. Then sought the jews to take him, but no man
laid hands on him, because his time was not yet come. Many of the
people believed on him, and said: When Christ cometh: Will he do more
miracles than this man hath done?
    The pharisees heard that the people murmured such things about
him: and the pharisees and scribes sent ministers forth to take him.
Then said Iesus unto them: Yet am I a little while with you, and then
go I unto him that sent me. Ye shall seek me, and shall not find me:
And where I am, thither can ye not come. Then said the jewes between
themselves: Whither will he go? that we shall not find him. Will he
go among the gentiles, which are scattered all abroad, and teach the
gentiles? What manner of saying is this that he said: ye shall seek
me, and shall not find me: And where I am, thither can ye not come?
    In the last day, that great day of the feast: Iesus stood and
cried saying: If any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink.
Whosoever believeth on me, as sayeth the scripture, out of his belly
shall flow rivers of water of life. This spake he of the spirit,
which they that believed on him should receive. For the holy ghost
was not yet there, because that Iesus was not yet glorified. Many of
the people, when they heard this saying said: This is, no doubt, a
prophet. Other said: this is Christ. Some said: shall Christ come out
of Galilee? Saith not the scripture that Christ shall come of the
seed of David: and out of the town of Bethlehem where David was? So
was there dissension among the people for his sake. And some of them
would have taken him: but no man laid hands on him.
    Then came the ministers to the high priests, and pharisees. And
they said unto them: why have ye not brought him? The servants
answered: never man spake as this man speaketh. Then answered them
the pharisees: are ye also deceived? Doth any of the rulers, or of
the pharisees believe on him? But the common people which know not
the law are a cursed. Nicodemus said unto them (He that came to Iesus
by night which was one of them.) Doth our law judge any man, before
it be heard, and known, what he hath done? They answered, and said
unto him: Art thou also of Galile? Search and look, for out of Galile
ariseth no prophet. And every man went unto his own house.

The .viij. Chapter.

    Iesus went unto mount olivet, and early in the morning came again
into the temple, and all the people came unto him, And he sat down,
and taught them. The scribes and pharisees brought unto him a woman
taken in advoutry, and set her in the midst and said unto him: Master
this woman was taken in advoutry, even as the deed was a doing. Moses
in the law commanded us that such should be stoned: What sayest thou
therefore? And this they said to tempt him: that they might have,
whereof to accuse him. Iesus stooped down, and with his finger wrote
on the ground. And while they continued asking him, he lifted himself
up, And said unto them: let him that is among you without sin, cast
the first stone at her. And again he stooped down and wrote on the
ground. As soon as they heard that, they went out one by one the
eldest first. And Iesus was left alone, and the woman standing in the
midst. When Iesus had lifted up himself again, and saw no man, but
the woman, He said unto her: Woman, where are those thine accusers?
Hath no man condemned thee? She said: Sir no man. Iesus said: Neither
do I condemn thee. Go hence and sin no more.
    Then spake Iesus again unto them saying: I am the light of the
world. He that followeth me shall not walk in darkness: but shall
have the light of life. The pharisees said unto him: thou bearest
record of thyself, thy record is not true. Iesus answered and said
unto them: And if I bear record of myself, my record is true for I
know whence I come, and whither I go. Ye cannot tell whence I come,
and whither I go. Ye judge after the flesh, I judge no man, and if I
judge, then is my judgement true. For I am not alone: but I and my
father that sent me. It is also written in your law, that the
testimony of two men is true. I am one that bear witness of myself,
and my father that sent me beareth witness of me.
    Then said they unto him: where is thy father? Iesus answered: ye
neither know me, nor yet my father. If ye had known me, ye should
have known my father also. These words spake Iesus in the treasury,
as he taught in the temple. And no man laid hands on him, For his
time was not yet come. Then said Iesus again unto them: I go my way,
and ye shall seek me, and shall die in your sins. Whither I go
thither can ye not come. Then spake the jewes: will he kill himself,
because he saith: whither I go, thither can ye not come? And he said
unto them: ye are from beneath, I am from above. Ye are of this
world, I am not of this world. I said therefore unto you, that ye
shall die in your sins. For except ye believe that I am he, ye shall
die in your sins.
    Then said they unto him, who art thou? And Iesus said unto them:
Even the very same thing that I say unto you. I have many things to
say, and to judge of you. But he that sent me is true. And I speak in
the world, those things which I have heard of him. They understood
not that he spake of his father.
    Then said Iesus unto them: When ye have lift up on high the son
of man then shall ye know that I am he, and that I do nothing of
myself, But as my father hath taught me, even so I speak. And he that
sent me is with me. My father hath not left me alone, For I do always
those things that please him. As he spake these words, many believed
on him.
    Then said Iesus to those jewes which believed on him: If ye
continue in my saying, then are ye my very disciples: and ye shall
know the truth: And the truth shall make you free. They answered him:
We be Abraham's seed, and were never bond to any man: why sayest thou
then, ye shall be made free?
    Iesus answered them: verily verily I say unto you, that whosoever
committeth sin, is the servant of sin. And the servant abideth not in
the house for ever: But the son abideth ever. If the son therefore
shall make you free, then are ye free in deed. I know that ye are
Abraham's seed: but ye seek means to kill me because my sayings have
no place in you. I speak that I have seen with my father: and ye do
that which ye have seen with your father.
    They answered and said unto him: Abraham is our father. Iesus
said unto them. If ye were Abraham's children, ye would do the deeds
of Abraham. But now ye go about to kill me, a man that have told you
the truth, which I have heard of my father. This did not Abraham. Ye
do the deeds of your father. Then said they unto him: we were not
born of fornication. We have one father that is God. Iesus said unto
them: if God were your father, then would ye have loved me. For I
proceeded forth and come from God. Neither came I of myself, but he
sent me. Why do ye not know my speech? Because ye cannot abide the
hearing of my words.
    Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts of your father, ye
will follow: He was a murderer from the beginning, And abode not in
the truth, because there is no truth in him. When he speaketh a lie,
then speaketh he of his own. For he is a liar, and the father
thereof. And because I tell you the truth, therefore believe ye not
me.
    Which of you can rebuke me of sin? If I say the truth, why do not
ye believe me? He that is of God, heareth God's words. Ye therefore
hear them not, because ye are not of God. Then answered the jewes and
said unto him: Say we not well that thou art a Samaritan and hast the
devil? Iesus answered: I have not the devil: but I honour my father,
and ye have dishonored me. I seek not mine own praise: There is one
that seeketh it and judgeth.
    Verily verily I say unto you, if a man keep my sayings, he shall
never see death. Then said the jewes to him: Now know we that thou
hast the devil. Abraham is dead, and also the prophets, and yet thou
sayest: if a man keep my saying he shall never taste of death. Art
thou greater than our father Abraham? which is dead? and the prophets
are dead. Whom makest thou thyself?
    Iesus answered: If I praise myself, mine praise is nothing worth.
It is my father that praiseth me, which ye say is your God. And yet
have ye not known him: but I know him. And if I should say, I know
him not, I should be a liar like unto you, But I know him, and keep
his saying.
    Your father Abraham was glad to see my day, and he saw it and
rejoiced. Then said the jewes unto him: Thou art not yet fifty years
old, and hast thou seen Abraham? Iesus said unto them: Verily verily
I say unto you: yer Abraham was I am. Then took they up stones, to
cast at him. But Iesus hid himself, and went out of the temple.

The .ix. Chapter.

    And as Iesus passed by, he saw a man which was blind from his
birth, And his disciples asked him saying. Master, who did sin: this
man, or his father and mother, that he was born blind? Iesus
answered: Neither this man hath sinned, nor yet his father and
mother: but that the works of God should be shewed on him. I must
work the works of him that sent me, while it is day. The night
cometh, when no man can work. As long as I am in the world, I am the
light of the world.
    As soon as he had thus spoken, he spat on the ground, and made
clay of the spittle, and rubbed the clay on the eyes of the blind,
and said unto him: Go wash thee in the pool of Siloe (which by
interpretation, signifieth sent.) He went his way and washed, and
came again seeing. The neighbours, and they that had seen him before
how that he was a beggar said: Is not this he that sat and begged?
Some said: this is he. Other said: he is like him. He himself said: I
am even he. They said unto him: How are thine eyes opened then? He
answered and said: The man that is called Iesus, made clay, and
anointed mine eyes, and said unto me: Go to the pool Siloe, and wash.
I went and washed and received my sight. They said unto him: where is
he? He said: I cannot tell.
    Then brought they to the pharisees, him that a little before was
blind. (It was the saboth day when Iesus made the clay, and opened
his eyes.) Then again the pharisees also asked him how he had
received his sight. He said unto them: He put clay upon mine eyes,
And I washed, and I see. Then said some of the pharisees: this man is
not of God, because he keepeth not the saboth day. Other said: how
can a man that is a sinner do such miracles? And there was strife
among them. Then spake they unto the blind again: What sayest thou of
him, because he hath opened thine eyes? And he said: He is a prophet.
    The jewes did not believe of the fellow, how that he was blind,
and received his sight: until they had called the father and mother
of him that had received his sight. And they asked them saying: Is
this your son, whom ye say was born blind? How doth he now see then?
His father and mother answered them and said: we wot well that this
is our son, and that he was born blind: But by what means he now
seeth, that can we not tell or who hath opened his eyes can we not
tell. He is old enough, ask him, let him answer for himself, of
things that pertain to himself. Such words spake his father, and
mother, because they feared the jewes, for the jewes had conspired
already that if any man did confess that he was Christ, he should be
excommunicate out of the Synagogue. Therefore said his father and
mother: he is old enough, ask him.
    Then again called they the man that was blind, and said unto him:
Give God the praise, we know that this man is a sinner. He answered
and said: Whether he be a sinner or no, I cannot tell: One thing I am
sure of, that I was blind, and now I see. Then said they to him
again: What did he to thee? How opened he thine eyes? He answered
them, I told you yerwhile, And ye did not hear. Wherefore would ye
hear it again? Will ye also be his disciples? Then rated they him,
and said: Thou art his disciple. We are Moses' disciples. We are sure
that God spake with Moses. This fellow we know not from whence he is.
    The man answered, and said unto them: this is a marvelous thing
that ye wot nere whence he is, and yet hath he opened mine eyes. We
know well enough that God heareth no sinners: But if any man be a
worshipper of God: and do what his will is, him heareth he. Since the
world began was it not heard that any man opened the eyes of one that
was born blind. If this man were not of God, he could have done no
thing. They answered and said unto him: thou art altogether born in
sin: and dost thou teach us? And they cast him out.
    Iesus heard that they had excommunicated him: and as soon as he
had found him he said unto him: dost thou believe on the son of God?
He answered and said: And who is it lord, that I might believe on
him? And Iesus said unto him: Thou hast seen him, and he it is that
talketh with thee. And he said: lord I believe: And worshipped him.
Iesus said: I am come unto judgement, into this world: that they
which see not, might see, and they which see might be made blind. And
some of the pharisees which were with him, heard these words and said
unto him: Are we then blind? Iesus said unto them, if ye were blind,
ye should have no sin: but now ye say we see, therefore your sin
remaineth.

The .x. Chapter.

    Verily verily I say unto you: Whosoever entereth not in by the
door, into the sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way: he is a
thief and a robber. He that goeth in by the door, is the shepherd of
the sheep. To this man the porter openeth the door, and the sheep
hear his voice, And he calleth his own sheep by name, and leadeth
them out, and when he hath sent forth his own sheep, he goeth before
them, and the sheep follow him: For they know his voice. A stranger
they will not follow, but will fly from him. For they know not the
voice of strangers. This manner of saying spake Iesus unto them. And
they understood not, what things they were, which he spake unto them.
    Then said Iesus unto them again: Verily verily I say unto you:
that I am the door of the sheep. All even as many as came before me,
are thieves and robbers: but the sheep did not hear them. I am the
door: by me, if any man enter in, he shall be safe, and shall go in
and out, and find pasture. The thief cometh not but for to steal and
kill, and destroy. I am come that they might have life, and have it
more abundantly.
    I am a good shepherd, a good shepherd giveth his life for his
sheep. An hired servant which is not the shepherd, neither the sheep
are his own, seeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and
flyeth, and the wolf catcheth them, and scattereth the sheep. The
hired servant flyeth because he is an hired servant, and careth not
for the sheep. I am that good shepherd, and know my sheep, and am
known of mine. As my father knoweth me: even so know I my father. And
I give my life for my sheep, and other sheep I have, which are not
of this fold. Them also must I bring, that they shall hear my voice.
And there shall be one flock, and one shepherd.
    Therefore doth my father love me, because I put my life from me,
that I might take it again. No man taketh it from me: but I put it
away of myself. I have power to put it from me, and power I have to
take it again. This commandment have I received of my father. Again
there was dissension among the jewes for these sayings, and many of
them said: He hath the devil, and is mad: why hear ye him? other
said, these are not the words of him that hath the devil: Can the
devil open the eyes of the blind?
    It was at Ierusalem the feast of the dedication, and it was the
winter: And Iesus walked in Solomon's hall. Then came the jewes round
about him, and said unto him: How long dost thou make us doubt? If
thou be Christ, tell us plainly. Iesus answered them: I told you and
ye believe not: The works that I do in my father's name, bear witness
of me: but ye believe not, because ye are not of my sheep. As I said
unto you: my sheep, hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow
me, and I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish,
neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand. My father which gave
them me, is greater than all men, and no man is able to take them out
of my father's hand. And I and my father are one.
    Then the jewes again took up stones, to stone him withall. Iesus
answered them: many good works have I shewed you from my father: for
which of them will ye stone me? The jewes answered him saying: For
thy good works' sake we stone thee not: but for thy blasphemy, and
because that thou being a man, makest thyself God. Iesus answered
them: Is it not written in your law: I have said, ye are gods? If he
called them gods unto whom the word of God was spoken (and the
scripture cannot be broken) say ye then to him, whom the father hath
sanctified, and sent into the world: Thou blasphemest, because I said
I am the son of God? If I do not the works of my father, believe me
not. But though ye believe not me, yet believe the works, that ye may
know and believe that the father is in me, and I in him.
    Again they went about to take him, but he escaped out of their
hands, and went away again beyond Iordan, into the place where Ihon
before had baptised, and there abode. And many resorted unto him, and
said: Ihon did no miracle: But all things that Ihon spake of this man
are true.. And there many believed on him there.

The .xj. Chapter.

    A certain man was sick, named Lazarus of Bethania the town of
Mary and her sister Martha. It was that Mary which anointed Iesus
with ointment, and wept his feet with her hair, whose brother Lazarus
was sick, and his sister sent unto him saying: lord behold, he whom
thou lovest is sick. When Iesus that heard he said: this infirmity is
not unto death: But for the laud of God, that the son of God might be
praised by the reason of it. Iesus loved Martha and her sister, and
Lazarus. After he heard that he was sick, then abode he two days
still in the same place where he was.
    Then after that said he to his disciples: let us go into jewry
again. His disciples said unto him: Master, the jewes lately sought
means to stone thee, and wilt thou go thither again? Iesus answered:
are there not twelve hours in the day? If a man walk in the day he
stumbleth not, because he seeth the light of this world. If a man
walk in the night he stumbleth, because there is no light in him.
This said he. And after that he said unto them: our friend Lazarus
sleepeth, but I go to wake him out of sleep. Then said his disciples:
lord if he sleep, then shall he do well enough. Iesus spake of his
death: but they thought that he had spoken of the natural sleep. Then
said Iesus unto them plainly, Lazarus is dead, and I am glad for your
sakes, that I was not there, because ye may believe. Nevertheless let
us go unto him. Then said Thomas (which is called Didymus,) unto the
disciples: let us also go, that we may die with him.
    Then went Iesus, and found, that he had lain in his grave four
days already. Bethanie was nigh unto Ierusalem, about xv. furlongs
off, And many of the jewes came to Martha and Mary, to comfort them
over their brother. Martha as soon as she heard that Iesus was
coming, went and met him. Mary sat still at home.
    Then said Martha unto Iesus: lord if thou hadst been here, my
brother had not been dead: but nevertheless, I know that whatsoever
thou askest of God, God will give it thee. Iesus said unto her: Thy
brother shall rise again. Martha said unto him: I know well, he shall
rise again in the resurrection at the last day. Iesus said unto her:
I am the resurrection and the life. Whosoever believeth on me, Yea
though he were dead, yet shall he live: and whosoever liveth, and
believeth on me, shall never die. Believest thou this? She said unto
him: yea lord: I believe that thou art Christ the son of God, which
shall come into the world. And as soon as she had so said she went
her way, and called Mary her sister secretly saying: The master is
come and calleth for thee. She as soon as she heard that, arose
quickly, and came unto him. Iesus was not yet come into the town: but
was in the place where Martha met him. The jewes then which were with
her in the house, and comforted her (when they saw Mary that she rose
up hastily, and went out) followed her saying: She goeth unto the
grave, to weep there. Then when Mary was come, where Iesus was and
saw him she fell down at his feet, saying unto him: lord if thou
hadst been here, my brother had not been dead. When Iesus saw her
weep, and the jewes also weep, which came with her. He groaned in the
spirit, and vexed himself and said: Where have ye laid him? They said
unto him: lord come and see. And Iesus wept. Then said the jewes:
Behold how he loved him. Some of them said: Could not he which opened
the eyes of the blind, have made also, that this man should not have
died? Iesus again groaned in himself came to the grave, it was a
cave, and a stone laid on it.
    Iesus said: Take ye away the stone. Martha (the sister of him
that was dead) said unto him: lord by this time he stinketh. For he
hath been dead four days. Iesus said unto her: Said I not unto thee,
that if thou didst believe, thou shouldest see the glory of God. Then
they took away the stone from the place where the dead was laid.
Iesus lift up his eyes and said: Father I give thee thanks because
that thou hast heard me, I knew well that thou hearest me always: but
because of the people that stand by I said it, that they might
believe, that thou hast sent me.
    And when he thus had spoken, he cried with a loud voice, Lazarus
come forth, and he that was dead, came forth bound hand and foot,
with bonds after the manner as they were wonte to bind their dead
with all. And his face was bound with a napkin. Iesus said unto them:
loose him, and let him go. Then many of the jewes which came to Mary,
and had seen the things which Iesus did, believed on him. But some of
them went their ways to the pharisees, and told them what Iesus had
done.
    Then gathered the high priests and the pharisees a council and
said: what do we? This man doeth many miracles. If we let him scape
thus all men will believe on him. And the Romans shall come and take
away our country and people. And one of them named Caiphas: which was
the high priest that same year, said unto them: Ye perceive nothing
at all nor yet consider that it is expedient for us, that one man die
for the people, and not that all the people perish. This spake he not
of himself: but being high priest that same year, prophesied he that
Iesus should die for the people, and not for the people only: but
that he should gather together in one the children of God which were
scattered abroad. From that day kept they a counsel together for to
put him to death.
    Iesus therefore walked no more openly among the jewes: but went
his way thence unto a country nigh to a wilderness into a city called
Ephraim, and there haunted with his disciples. The jewes' ester was
nigh at hand, and many went out of the country up to Ierusalem before
the ester to purify themselves. Then sought they for Iesus, and spake
between themselves as they stood in the temple: What think ye, seeing
he cometh not to the feast. The high priests and pharisees had given
a commandment that if any man knew where he were, he should shew it
that they might take him.

The .xij. Chapter.

    Then Iesus before six days of ester, came to Bethany where
Lazarus (which was dead) was,  whom Iesus raised from death. There
they made him a supper, and Martha served: but Lazarus was one of
them that sat at the table with him. Then took Mary a pound of
ointment called nardus, perfect and precious, and anointed Iesus'
feet, and wept his feet with her hair, and all the house smelled of
the savour of the ointment. Then said one of his disciples named
Iudas Iscarioth, Simon's son, which afterward betrayed him: why was
not this ointment sold for three hundred pence, and given to the
poor? This said he, not that he cared for the poor: but because he
was a thief, and kept the bag, and bare that which was given. Then
said Iesus: Let her alone, against the day of my burying she kept it.
The poor allways shall ye have with you, but me shall ye not allways
have.
    Much people of the jewes had knowledge that he was there. And
they came not for Iesus' sake only, but that they might see Lazarus
also whom he raised from death. The high priests therefore held a
council that they might put Lazarus to death also, because that for
his sake many of the jewes went away, and believed on Iesus.
    On the morrow much people that were come to the feast (when they
heard that Iesus should come to Ierusalem,) took branches of palm
trees and went and met him, and cried: Hosanna, blessed is he that in
the name of the lord cometh, king of Israhell. Iesus got a young ass
and sat thereon, according to that which was written: fear not
daughter of Sion: behold thy king cometh sitting on an asse's colt.
These things understood not his disciples at the first: but when
Iesus was glorified, then remembered they that such things were
written of him, and that such things they had done unto him.
    The people that was with him, when he called Lazarus out of his
grave, and raised him from death, bare record. Therefore met him the
people, because they heard that he had done such a miracle. The
pharisees therefore said among themselves: Ye see that we prevail
nothing: lo all the world goeth away after him.
    There were certain greeks among them, which came to pray at the
feast, the same came to Philip which was of Bethsaida a city in
Galile, and desired him saying: Sir we would fain see Iesus. Philip
came and told Andrew. And again Andrew and Philip told Iesus. And
Iesus answered them saying: the hour is come that the son of man must
be glorified.
    Verily verily I say unto you, except the wheat corn fall into the
ground and die, it bideth alone. If it die, it bringeth forth much
fruit. He that loveth his life shall destroy it: And he that hateth
his life in this world, shall keep it unto life eternal. If any man
minister unto me, let him follow me and where I am there shall also
my minister be. And if any man minister unto me, him will my father
honour.
    Now is my soul troubled, and what shall I say? Father deliver me
from this hour: but therefore came I unto this hour. Father glorify
thy name. Then came there a voice from heaven, I have glorified it,
and will glorify it again. Then said the people that stood by and
heard, it thundereth. Other said: an angel spake to him. Iesus
answered and said: this voice came not because of me: but for your
sakes.
    Now is the judgement of this world: now shall the prince of this
world be cast out a doors. And I (if were lifted up from the earth,)
will draw all men unto me. This said Iesus signifying what death he
should die. The people answered him: We have heard of the law that
Christ bideth ever: and how sayest thou then that the son of man must
be lifted up? who is that son of man? Then Iesus said unto them: yet
a little while is the light with you: walk while ye have light, lest
the darkness come on you. He that walketh in the dark, wotteth not
whither he goeth. While ye have light, believe on the light that ye
may be the children of light.
    These things spake Iesus and departed, and hid himself from them.
And though he had done so many miracles before them, yet believed not
they on him, that the saying of Esaias the prophet might be
fulfilled, that he spake. lord who shall believe our saying? And to
whom is the arm of the lord declared? Therefore could they not
believe, because that Esaias saith again: He hath blinded their eyes,
and hardened their hearts, that they should not see with their eyes,
and understand with their hearts, and should be converted and I
should heal them. Such things said Esaias when he saw his glory, and
spake of him. Nevertheless among the chief rulers many believed on
him, but because of the pharisees they would not be a known of it,
lest they should be excommunicated. For they loved the praise that is
given of men, more than the praise, that cometh of God.
    Iesus cried and said: he that believeth on me believeth not on
me, but on him that sent me. And he that seeth me, seeth him that
sent me. I am come a light into the world that whosoever believeth on
me should not bide in darkness, and if any man hear my words and
believe not, I judge him not. For I came not to judge the world: but
to save the world. He that putteth me away, and receiveth not my
words, hath one that judgeth him. The words that I have spoken shall
judge him in the last day. For I have not spoken of myself: but the
father which sent me gave me a commandment what I should say, and
what I should speak. And I know well that his commandment is life
everlasting. Whatsoever I speak therefore, even as my father bade me,
so I speak.

The .xiij. Chapter.

    Before the feast of ester when Iesus knew that his hour was come,
that he should depart out of this world unto the father. When he
loved his which were in the world, unto the end he loved them. And
when supper was ended, after that the devil had put in the heart of
Iudas Iscariot Simon's son, to betray him. Iesus knowing that the
father had given all things into his hands: And that he was come from
God, and went to God, he rose from supper, and laid aside his upper
garments, and took a towel, and gird himself. After that poured he
water into a basin, and began to wash his disciples' feet, and to
wipe them with the towel, wherewith he was gird.
    Then came he to Simon Peter. And Peter said to him: lord shalt
thou wash my feet? Iesus answered and said unto him: what I do thou
wettest not now, thou shalt know here after. Peter said unto him:
Thou shalt not wash my feet while the world standeth. Iesus answered
him: if I wash not thy feet, thou shalt have no part with me. Simon
Peter said unto him: lord not my feet only: but also my hands and my
head. Iesus said to him: he that is washed, needeth not but to wash
his feet, but is clean every whit. And ye are clean: but not all. For
he knew his betrayer. Therefore said he: ye are not all clean.
    After he had washed their feet, and received his clothes, and was
set down again, he said unto them: wot ye what I have done to you? ye
call me master and lord, and ye say well, for so am I. If I then your
lord and master have washed your feet, ye also ought to wash one
another's feet. For I have given you an example, that ye should do as
I have done to you. Verily verily I say unto you, the servant is not
greater than his master. Neither the messenger greater than he that
sent him.
    If ye understand these things, happy are ye if ye do them. I
speak not of you all, I know whom I have chosen. But that the
scripture be fulfilled: he that eateth bread with me, Hath lifted up
his heel against me. Now tell I you before it come: that when it is
come to pass ye might believe that I am he. Verily verily I say unto
you. He that receiveth whomsoever I send, receiveth me. And he that
receiveth me, receiveth him that sent me.
    When Iesus had thus said, he was troubled in the spirit, and
testified saying: verily verily I say unto you, that one of you shall
betray me. Then the disciples looked one on another doubting of whom
he spake. There was one of his disciples which leaned on Iesus'
bosom, whom Iesus loved. To him beckoned Simon Peter that he should
ask who it was of whom he spake. He then as he leaned on Iesus'
breast said unto him: lord who is it? Iesus answered, he it is to
whom I give a sop, when I have dept it. And he wet a sop, and gave it
to Iudas Iscarioth Simon's son. And after the sop Satan entered into
him.
    Then said Iesus unto him: that thou dost do quickly. That wist no
man at the table, for what intent he spake unto him. Some of them
thought, because Iudas had the bag, that Iesus had said unto him, buy
those things that we have need of against the feast: or that he
should give something to the poor. As soon then as he had received
the sop, he went immediately out. And it was night. When he was gone
out, Iesus said: now is the son of man glorified. And God is
glorified by him. If God be glorified by him, God shall also glorify
him, in himself: and shall straightway glorify him.
    Dear children, yet a little while am I with you. Ye shall seek
me, and as I said unto the jewes whither I go, thither can ye not
come. Also to you say I now. A new commandment give I unto you, that
ye love together, as I have loved you, that even so ye love one
another. By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye
shall have love one to another. Simon Peter said unto him: lord
whither goest thou? Iesus answered him: whither I go thou canst not
follow me now, thou shalt follow me afterwards. Peter said unto him
lord why cannot I follow thee now? I will give my life for thy sake.
Iesus answered him: Wilt thou give thy life for my sake? Verily
verily I say unto thee, the cock shall not crow, till thou have
denied me thrice.

The .xiiij. Chapter.

    And he said unto his disciples: Let not your hearts be troubled,
believe in God, and believe in me. In my father's house are many
mansions. If it were not so, I would have told you. I go to prepare a
place for you. I will come again, and receive you even unto myself,
that where I am, there may ye be also. And whither I go ye know, and
the way ye know.
    Thomas said unto him: lord we know not whither thou goest. Also
how is it possible for us to know the way? Iesus said unto him I am
the way, the verity, and life. No man cometh unto the father, but by
me. If ye had known me ye had known my father also. And now ye know
him. And ye have seen him.
    Philip said unto him: lord shew us thy father and it sufficeth
us. Iesus said unto him: have I been so long time with you: and yet
hast thou not known me? Philip, he that hath seen me, hath seen the
father. And how sayest thou then: shew us the father? Believest thou
not that I am in the father, and the father in me? The words that I
speak unto you, I speak not of myself: but the father dwelling in me
is he that doeth the works. Believe that I am in the father, and the
father in me. At the least believe me for the very works' sake.
    Verily verily I say unto you whosoever believeth on me, the works
that I do, the same shall he do, and greater works then these shall
he do, because I go unto my father. And whatsoever ye ask in my name,
that will I do, that the father might be glorified by the son. If ye
shall ask any thing in my name I will do it.
    If ye love me keep my commandments, and I will pray the father,
and he shall give you another comforter, that he may bide with you
ever, which is the spirit of truth whom the world cannot receive,
because the world seeth him not, neither knoweth him. But ye know
him. For he dwelleth with you, and shall be in you. I will not leave
you comfortless: I will come unto you.
    It is yet a little while and the world seeth me no more: but ye
shall see me. For I live, and ye shall live. That day shall ye know
that I am in my father, and my father in me, and I in you.
    He that hath my commandments and keepeth them, the same is he
that loveth me, and he that loveth me shall be loved of my father,
and I will love him, and will shew mine own self unto him. Iudas said
unto him (not Iudas Iscarioth) lord what is the cause that thou wilt
shew thyself unto us, and not unto the world? Iesus answered and said
unto him: if a man love me and will keep my sayings, my father also
will love him, and we will come unto him, and will dwell with him. He
that loveth me not, keepeth not my sayings. And the words which ye
hear are not mine, but my father's, which sent me.
    This have I spoken unto you being yet present with you. But that
comforter which is the holy ghost (whom my father will send in my
name) shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your
remembrance whatsoever I have told you.
    Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you. Not as the
world giveth, give I unto you. Let not your hearts be grieved,
neither fear ye. Ye have heard how I said unto you: I go and come
again unto you. If ye loved me, ye would verily rejoice, because I
said, I go unto the father. For the father is greater than I. And now
have I shewed you, before it come, that when it is come to pass, ye
might believe.
    Here after will I not talk many words unto you. For the chief
ruler of this world cometh, and hath nought in me. But that the world
may know that I love my father, And as the father gave me
commandment, even so do I. Rise let us go hence.

The .xv. Chapter.

    I am the true vine, and my father is an husbandman. Every branch
that beareth not fruit in me, He will take away. And every branch
that beareth fruit will he purge that it may bring more fruit. Now
are ye clean, be that means of the words which I have spoken unto
you. Bide in me, and I in you. As the branch cannot bear fruit of
itself, except it bide in the vine: no more can ye except ye abide in
me.
    I am the vine, and ye are the branches. He that abideth in me,
and I in him, the same bringeth forth much fruit. For without me can
ye do nothing. If a man bide not in me, he is cast forth as a branch,
and is withered: and men gather them, and cast them into the fire,
and they burneth. If ye bide in me, and my words also bide in you:
ask what ye will, and it shall be given you. Here in is my father
glorified, that ye bear much fruit, and be made my disciples.
    As the father hath loved me, even so have I loved you. Continue
in my love. If ye shall keep my commandments, ye shall bide in my
love, even as I have kept my father's commandments, and bide in his
love. These things have I spoken unto you, that my joy might remain
in you, and that your joy might be full. This is my commandment, that
ye love together as I have loved you. Greater love than this hath no
man, than that a man bestow his life for his friends. Ye are my
friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you. Henceforth call I you not
servants: For the servant knoweth not what his lord doeth. But you
have I called friends: For all things that I have heard of my father,
I have opened to you.
    Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you and ordained you
that ye go, and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit remain, that
whatsoever ye shall ask of my father in my name he should give it
you.
    This command I you, that ye love together. If the world hate you,
ye know that he hated me before he hated you. If ye were of the
world, the world would love his own. Because ye are not of the world,
but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore hateth you the
world. Remember the saying, that I said unto you: the servant is not
greater than the lord. If they have persecuted me, so will they
persecute you. If they have kept my saying, so will they keep yours.
    But all these things will they do unto you for my name's sake,
because they have not known him that sent me. If I had not come and
spoken unto them, they should have no sin: but now have they nothing
to cloak their sin with all. He that hateth me, hateth my father. If
I had not done works among them which none other man did, they should
be without sin. But now have they seen, and yet have hated both me
and my father: Even that the saying might be fulfilled that is
written in their law: they hated me without a cause. But when the
comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from the father, which
is the spirit of verity, which proceedeth of the father, he shall
testify of me. And ye shall bear witness also, because ye have been
with me from the beginning.

The .xvj. Chapter.

    These things have I said unto you because ye should not be hurt
in your faith. They shall excommunicate you: yea the time shall come,
that whosoever killeth you, will think that he doth God true service.
And such things will they do unto you, because they have not known
the father neither yet me. These things have I told you, that when
that hour is come, ye might remember then, that I told you so. These
things said I not unto you at the beginning, because I was present
with you.
    But now go I my way to him that sent me, and none of you asketh
me: whither goest thou? but because I have said such things unto you,
your hearts are full of sorrow. Nevertheless I tell you the truth it
is expedient for you that I go away. For if I go not away, that
comforter will not come unto you. But if I depart, I will send him
unto you. And when he is come, he will rebuke the world of sin, and
of righteousness, and of judgement. Of sin, because they believe not
on me: Of righteousness, because I go to my father, and ye shall see
me no more: And of judgement, because the chief ruler of this world,
is judged all ready.
    I have yet many things to say unto you: but ye cannot bear them
away now. When he is once come (I mean the spirit of verity,) he will
lead you into all truth. He shall not speak of himself: but
whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak, and he will shew you
things to come. He shall glorify me, for he shall receive of mine,
and shall shew unto you. All things that my father hath are mine.
Therefore said I unto you that he shall take of mine and shew unto
you.
    After a while ye shall not see me, and again after a while ye
shall see me: For I go to my father. Then said some of his disciples
between themselves: what is this that he saith unto us, after a while
ye shall not see me, and again after a while ye shall see me: and
that I go to my father. They said therefore: what is this that he
saith after a while? we cannot tell what he saith. Iesus perceived,
that they would ask him, and said unto them: This is it that ye
enquire of between yourselves, that I said, after a while ye shall
not see me, and again after a while ye shall see me. Verily verily I
say unto you: ye shall weep and lament, and the world shall rejoice.
Ye shall sorrow: but your sorrow shall be turned to joy.
    A woman when she travaileth hath sorrow, because her hour is
come: but as soon as she is delivered of her child she remembereth no
more the anguish, for joy that a man is born into the world. And ye
now are in sorrow: but I will see you again, and your hearts shall
rejoice, and your joy shall no man take from you. And in that day
shall ye ask me no question. Verily verily I say unto you, whatsoever
ye shall ask the father in my name, he will give it you. Hitherto
have ye asked nothing in my name. Ask and ye shall receive it: that
your joy may be full.
    These things have I spoken unto you in proverbs. The time will
come when I shall no more speak to you in proverbs: but I shall shew
you plainly from my father. At that day shall ye ask in mine name.
And I say not unto you that I will speak unto my father for you. For
my father himself loveth you, because ye have loved me, and have
believed that I came out from God. I went out from the father, and
came into the world: and I leave the world again, and go to the
father.
    His disciples said unto him: lo now speakest thou plainly, and
thou usest no proverb. Now know we that thou understandest all
things, and needest not that any man should ask thee any question.
Therefore believe we that thou camest from God. Iesus answered them:
Now ye do believe. Behold the hour draweth nigh, and is already come,
that ye shall be scattered every man his ways, and shall leave me
alone. And yet am I not alone. For my father is with me. These words
have I spoken unto you that in me ye might have peace. In the world
shall ye have tribulation: but be of good cheer, I have overcome the
world.

The .xvij. Chapter.

    These words spake Iesus and lift up his eyes to heaven, and said:
father the hour is come glorify thy son that thy son may glorify
thee. As thou hast given him power over all flesh, that he should
give eternal life to as many as thou hast given him. This is life
eternal that they might know thee that only very God: and whom thou
hast sent Iesus Christ.
    I have glorified thee on the earth. I have finished the work
which thou gavest me to do. And now glorify me thou father in thine
own presence, with the glory which I had with thee yer the world was.
I have declared thy name unto the men which thou gavest me out of the
world. Thine they were, and thou gavest them me, and they have kept
thy sayings. Now have they known that all things whatsoever thou hast
given me, are of thee. For I have given unto them the words which
thou gavest me, and they have received them, and know surely that I
came out from thee: and do believe that thou didst send me.
    I pray for them. I pray not for the world: but for them which
thou hast given me, for they are thine, and all mine are thine, and
thine are mine, and I am glorified in them. And now am I no more in
the world, but they are in the world, and I come to thee. Wholly
father keep in thine own name them which thou hast given me, that
they may be one as we are. While I was with them in the world, I kept
them in thy name. Those that thou gavest me, have I kept, and none of
them is lost, but that lost child, that the scripture might be
fulfilled.
    Now come I to thee, and these words speak I in the world, that
they might have my joy full in them. I have given them thy doctrine,
and the world hath hated them, because they are not of the world,
even as I am not of the world. I desire not that thou shouldest take
them out of the world: but that thou keep them from evil. They are
not of the world, as I am not of the world. Sanctify them in thy
truth. {with thy trueth} Thy saying is verity. As thou didst sent me 
into the world, even so have I sent them into the world, And for their
 sakes sanctify I myself, that they also might be sanctified thorow 
 the truth.
    I pray not for them alone: but for them also which shall believe
on me thorow their preaching, that they all may be one, as thou
father art in me, and I in thee, that they may be also one in us,
that the world may believe that thou hast sent me. And that glory
that thou gavest me, I have given them, that they may be one, as we
are one. I am in them and thou art in me, that they may be made
perfect in one, and that the world may know that thou hast sent me,
and hast loved them, as thou hast loved me.
    Father I will that they which thou hast given me, be with me
where I am, that they may see my glory which thou hast given me. For
thou lovedest me before the making of the world. O righteous father
the very world hath not known thee: but I have known thee, and these
have known that thou hast sent me. And I have declared unto them thy
name, and will declare it, that the love wherewith thou hast loved
me, be in them, and that I be in them.

The .xviij. Chapter.

    When Iesus had spoken these words, he went forth with his
disciples over the brook Cedron, where was a garden into the which he
entered with his disciples.
    (Iudas also which betrayed him knew the place, for Iesus
oftentimes resorted thither with his disciples.) Iudas then after he
had received a bond of men, and ministers of the high priests, and of
the pharisees came thither with lanterns, and firebrands, and
weapons. Then Iesus knowing all things that should come on him, went
forth and said unto them: whom seek ye? They answered him: Iesus of
Nazareth. Iesus said unto them: I am he.
    Iudas also which betrayed him, stood with them. As soon as he had
said unto them I am he, they went backwards and fell to the ground.
And he asked them again: whom seek ye? They said: Iesus of Nazareth.
Iesus answered, I said unto you, I am he. If ye seek me, let these go
their way. That the saying might be fulfilled which he spake: of them
which thou gavest have I not lost one.
    Simon Peter had a sword, and drew him out, and smote the high
priests servant, and cut off his right ear. The servant's name was
Malchus. Then said Iesus unto Peter: put up thy sword into the
sheath: shall I not drink of the cup which my father had given me?
Then the company, and the Captain, and the ministers of the jewes,
took Iesus and bound him, and led him away to Anna first: For he was
father-in-law unto Caiphas, which was the high priest that same year.
Caiphas was he that gave counsel to the jewes that it was expedient
that one man should die for the people.
    Simon Peter followed Iesus, and another disciple, that disciple
was known of the high priest, and went in with Iesus into the palace
of the high priest. But Peter stood at the door without. Then went
out that other disciple which was known unto the high priest, and
spake to the damsel that kept the door, and brought in Peter. Then
said the damsel that kept the door unto Peter: Art not thou one of
this man's disciples? He said: I am not. The servants and the
ministers stood there, and had made a fire of coals. For it was cold,
and they warmed themselves. Peter also stood among them and warmed
himself.
    The high priest asked Iesus of his disciples, and of his
doctrine. Iesus answered him: I spake openly in the world. I ever
taught in the synagogue and in the temple whither all the jewes
resorted: and in secret have I said nothing: why askest thou me? Ask
them which heard me what I said unto them. Behold they can tell what
I said. When he had thus spoken, one of the ministers which stood by,
smote Iesus on the face saying: Answerest thou the high priest so?
Iesus answered him: If I have evil spoken, bear witness of the evil:
if I have well spoken, why smitest thou me? Annas sent him bound unto
Caiphas the high priest.
    Simon Peter stood and warmed himself, and they said unto him: Art
not thou also one of his disciples? He denied it, and said: I am not.
One of the servants of the high priest (his cousin whose ear Peter
smote off ) said unto him: did not I see thee in the garden with him?
Peter denied it again: and immediately the cock crew. Then led they
Iesus from Caiphas into the hall of judgement. It was in the morning,
and they themselves went not into the judgement house lest they
should be defiled, but that they might eat the Pascha. Pilate then
went out unto them and said: What accusation bring ye against this
man? They answered and said unto him: If he were not an evil doer, we
would not have delivered him unto thee. Then said Pilate unto them:
take him unto you, and judge him after your own law. The jewes said
unto him. It is not lawful for us to put any man to death. That the
words of Iesus might be fulfilled which he spake, signifying what
death he should die.
    Then Pilate entered into the judgement house again, and called
Iesus, and said unto him: Art thou king of the jewes? Iesus answered:
sayest thou that of thyself, or did other tell it thee of me? Pilate
answered: Am I a jew? Thine own nation and high priests have
delivered thee unto me. What hast thou done? Iesus answered: my
kingdom is not of this world. If my kingdom were of this world then
would my ministers surely fight, that I should not be delivered to
the jewes, but now is my kingdom not from hence. Pilate said unto
him: Art thou a king then? Iesus answered: Thou sayest that I am a
king. For this cause was I born, and for this cause came I into the
world, that I should bear witness unto the truth. And all that are of
the truth hear my voice. Pilate said unto him: what is truth?     And
when he had said that, he went out again unto the jewes, and said
unto them: I find in him no cause at all. Ye have a custom among you,
that I should deliver you one loose at ester. Will ye that I loose
unto you the king of the jewes. Then cried they all again saying: Not
him, but Barabas. Barabas was a robber.

The .xix. Chapter.

    Then Pilate took Iesus and scourged him. And the soldiers wound a
crown of thorns and put it on his head. And they did on him a purple
garment, and said: hail king of the jewes. And they smote him on the
face. Pilate went forth again, and said unto them: behold I bring him
forth to you, that ye may know, that I find no fault in him. Then
came Iesus forth wearing a crown of thorns and a robe of purple. And
Pilate said unto them: Behold the man. When the high priests and
ministers saw him, they cried saying: crucify him, crucify him.
Pilate said unto them. Take ye him and crucify him: For I find no
cause in him. The jewes answered him. We have a law, and by our law
he ought to die: because he made himself the son of God.
    When Pilate heard that saying, he was the more afraid, and went
again into the judgement house, and said unto Iesus: whence art thou?
Iesus gave him none answer. Then said Pilate unto him: Speakest thou
not unto me? Knowest thou not that I have power to crucify thee, and
have power to loose thee? Iesus answered: Thou couldest have no power
at all against me, except it were given unto thee from above.
Therefore he that delivered me unto thee, is more in sin. And from
thenceforth sought Pilate means to loose him: but the jewes cried
saying: if thou let him go, thou art not Cesar's friend. Whosoever
maketh himself a king, is against Cesar.
    When Pilate heard that saying he brought Iesus forth, and sat
down to give sentence, in a place called the pavement: But in the
Hebrew tongue, Gabbatha. (It was the saboth even which falleth in the
ester feast, and about the sixth hour) And he said unto the jewes:
Behold your king. They cried, away with him, away with him, Crucify
him. Pilate said unto them: Shall I crucify your king? The high
priests answered: We have no king but Cesar. Then delivered he him
unto them to be crucified.
    And they took Iesus, and led him away. And he bare his cross, and
went forth into a place called the place of dead men's skulls (which
is named in hebrew, Golgotha) where they crucified him. And with him
two other, on either side one, and Iesus in the midst. Pilate wrote
his title, and put it on the cross: The writing was, Iesus of
Nazareth, king of the jewes. This title read many of the jewes. For
the place where Iesus was crucified, was nigh to the city. And it was
written in hebrew, greek and latin. Then said the high priests of the
jewes to Pilate: write not, king of the jewes, but that he said, I am
king of the jewes. Pilate answered: what I have written, that have I
written.
    The soldiers, when they had crucified Iesus, took his garments
and made four parts, to every soldier a part, and also his coat. The
coat was without seam woven upon thorow and thorow. And they said one
to another: Let us not divide it: but cast lots who shall have it.
That the scripture might be fulfilled which saith. They parted my
raiment among them, and on my coat did cast lots. And the soldiers
did such things in deed.
    There stood by the cross of Iesus his mother, and his mother's
sister, Mary the wife of Cleophas, and Mary Magdalene. When Iesus saw
his mother, and the disciple standing whom he loved, he said unto his
mother: Woman behold thy son. Then said he to the disciple: behold
thy mother. And from that hour the disciple took her for his own.
    After that when Iesus perceived that all things were performed,
that the scripture might be fulfilled: he said: I thirst. There stood
a vessel full of vinegar by. They filled a sponge with vinegar, and
wound it about with hyssop, and put it to his mouth. As soon as Iesus
had received of the vinegar, he said: It is finished, and bowed his
head, and gave up the ghost.
    The jewes then because it was the saboth even that the bodies
should not remain upon the cross on the saboth day (For that saboth
day was an high day) besought Pilate that their legs might be broken
and that they might be taken down. Then came the soldiers and brake
the legs of the first, and of the other which was crucified with
Iesus. When they came to Iesus and saw that he was dead already, they
brake not his legs: but one of the soldiers with a spear, thrust him
into the side, and forthwith came there out blood and water.
    And he that saw it bare record, and his record is true. And he
knoweth that he saith true that ye might believe also. These things
were done that the scripture should be fulfilled: Ye shall not break
a bone of him. And again another scripture saith: They shall look on
him, whom they pierced.
    After that, Ioseph of Arimathia (which was a disciple of Iesus:
but secretly for fear of the jewes) besought Pilate that he might
take down the body of Iesus. And Pilate gave him license. And there
came also Nicodemus which at the beginning came to Iesus by night,
and brought of myrrh and aloes mingled together about an hundred
pound weight. Then took they the body of Iesu and wound it in linen
clothes with those confections as the manner of the jewes is to bury.
In the place where Iesus was crucified, was a garden, and in the
garden a new sepulchre, wherein was never man laid. There laid they
Iesus because of the jewes' saboth even, for the sepulchre was nigh
at hand.

The .xx. Chapter.

    The morrow after the saboth day came Mary Magdalene early when it
was yet dark, unto the sepulchre, and saw the stone rolled away from
the tomb. Then she ran, and came to Simon Peter, and to the other
disciple whom Iesus loved, and said unto them: They have taken away
the lord out of the tomb and we cannot tell where they have laid him.
Peter went forth and that other disciple, and came unto the
sepulchre. They ran both together, and that other disciple did outrun
Peter, and came first to the sepulchre. And he stooped down and saw
the linen clothes, yet went he not in. Then came Simon Peter
following him, and went into the sepulchre, and saw the linen clothes
lie, and the napkin that was about his head not lying with the linen
cloth, but wrapped together in a place by itself. Then went in also
that other disciple which came first to the sepulchre, and he saw and
believed. For as yet they knew not the scriptures, that he should
rise again from death. And the disciples went away again unto their
own home.
    Mary stood without at the sepulchre weeping: As she wept, she
bowed herself into the sepulchre and saw two angels clothed in white
sitting the one at the head, and the other at the feet, where they
had laid the body of Iesus. They said unto her: woman why weepest
thou? She said unto them: They have taken away my lord, and I wot not
where they have laid him. When she had thus said, she turned herself
back and saw Iesus standing, and knew not that it was Iesus. Iesus
said unto her: woman why weepest thou? Whom seekest thou? She
supposing that he had been the gardener, said unto him: Sir if thou
have borne him hence tell me where thou hast laid him, that I will
take him away. Iesus said unto her: Mary. She turned herself, and
said unto him: Rabboni which is to say master. Iesus said unto her:
touch me not, for I have not yet ascended to my father. But go to my
brethren and say unto them, I ascend unto my father, and your father:
my God and your god. Mary Magdalene came and told the disciples that
she had seen the lord, and that he had spoken such things unto her.
    The same day at night, which was the morrow after the saboth day,
when the doors were shut (where the disciples were assembled to
gether for fear of the jewes,) came Iesus and stood in the midst, and
said to them: peace be with you. And when he had so said, he shewed
unto them his hands and feet, and his side. Then were the disciples
glad when they saw the lord. He said unto them again: peace be with
you. As my father sent me, even so send I you. And when he had said
that, he blew on them, and said unto them: Receive the holy ghost.
whosoevers sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them: And whosoevers
sins ye retain, they are retained.
    Thomas one of the twelve, called Didymus, was not with them when
Iesus came. The other disciples said unto him: we have seen the lord.
And he said unto them: except I see in his hands the print of the
nails, and put my finger in the holes of the nails, and thrust my
hand into his side, I will not believe.
    And after viij days again, his disciples were with in, and Thomas
was with them. Iesus came when the doors were shut, and stood in the
midst and said: peace be with you:
    Than said he to Thomas: put in thy finger here, and see my hands,
and put forth thy hand and thrust him into my side, and be not
without faith: but believe. Thomas answered and said unto him: my
lord, and my God. Iesus said unto him: Thomas, because thou hast seen
me, therefore hast thou believed: Happy are they that have not seen,
and yet believe.
    And many other signs did Iesus in the presence of his disciples,
which are not written in this book. These are written that ye might
believe that Iesus is Christ the son of God. And that ye in believing
ye might have life thorow his name.

The .xxj. Chapter.

    After that Iesus shewed himself again at the sea of Tiberias. And
on this wise shewed he himself. There were together Simon Peter and
Thomas, which is called Didymus: and Nathanael of Cana a city of
Galilee, and the sons of Zebedee, and two other of the disciples,
Simon Peter said unto them: I go a fishing. They said unto him: we
also will go with thee. They went their way and entered into a ship
straightway, and that night caught they nothing. When the morning was
now come, Iesus stood on the shore, Nevertheless the disciples knew
not that it was Iesus. Iesus said unto them: Sirs, have ye any meat?
They answered him no. And he said unto them: cast out your net on the
right side of the ship, and ye shall find. They cast out, and anon
they were not able to draw it for the multitude of fishes. Then said
the disciple whom Iesus loved unto Peter: It is the lord. When Simon
Peter heard that it was the lord, he gird his mantle to him (for he
was naked) and sprang into the sea. The other disciples came by ship:
For they were not far from land, but as it were two hundred cubits,
And they drew the net with fishes. As soon as they were come to land,
they saw hot coals laid and fish laid thereon, and bread. Iesus said
unto them: bring of the fishes which ye have now caught. Simon Peter
stepped forth and drew the net to land full of great fishes, an
hundred and .liij. And for all there were so many, yet was not the
net broken. Iesus said unto them: come and dine. And none of the
disciples durst ask him: what art thou? For they knew that it was the
lord. Iesus then came and took bread, and gave them, and fish
likewise. And this is now the third time that Iesus appeared to his
disciples, after that he was risen again from death.
    When they had dined, Iesus said to Simon Peter: Simon Ioanna,
lovest thou me more than these? He said unto him: yea lord, thou
knowest, that I love thee. He said unto him: feed my lambs. He said
to him again the second time: Simon Ioanna, lovest thou me? He said
unto him: yea lord thou knowest that I love thee. He said unto him:
feed my sheep. He said unto him the third time: Simon Ioanna, lovest
thou me? Peter sorrowed because he said to him the third time, lovest
thou me, and said unto him: lord, thou knowest all things, thou
knowest that I love thee. Iesus said unto him: feed my sheep.
    Verily verily I say unto thee, when thou wast young, thou
girdedst thyself, and walkedst whither thou wouldest: but when thou
art old, thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird
thee, and lead thee whither thou wouldest not. That spake he
signifying by what death he should glorify God.
    And when he had said thus, he said to him: Follow me. Peter
turned about, and saw that disciple whom Iesus loved following (which
also leaned on his breast at supper) and said: lord which is he that
shall betray thee? When Peter saw him, he said to Iesus: lord what
shall he here do? Iesus said unto him: If I will have him to tarry
till I come, what is that to thee? follow thou me. Then went this
saying abroad among the brethren, that that disciple should not die.
And Iesus said not to him, he shall not die: but if I will that he
tarry till I come, what is that to thee? The same disciple is he,
which testifieth of these things, and wrote these things. And we
know, that his testimony is true. There are also many other things
which Iesus did: the which if they should be written every one, I
suppose the world could not contain the books that should be written.


Here endeth the Gospell off Sainct Ihon.


The acts of the apostles written by S. Luke

The first Chapter.

    In my first treatise (Dear friend Theophilus) I have written of
all that Iesus began to do and teach, until the day in the which he
was taken up, after that he thorow the holy ghost, had given
commandments unto the Apostles, which he chose: to whom also he
shewed himself alive, after his passion by many tokens, appearing
unto them forty days, and spake of the kingdom of God, and gathered
them together, and commanded them, that they should not depart from
Ierusalem: but to wait for the promise of the father, whereof ye have
heard of me. For Ihon baptised with water but ye shall be baptised
with the holy ghost, and that within this few days.
    When they were come together, they asked of him, saying: Master
wilt thou at this time restore again the kingdom to Israhel? He said
unto them: It is not for you to know the times, or the seasons which
the father hath put in his own power: but ye shall receive power of
the holy ghost which shall come on you. And ye shall be witnesses
unto me in Ierusalem, and in all Iewery, and in Samary, and even unto
the world's end.
    And when he had spoken these things, while they beheld he was
taken up, and a cloud received him up out of their sight. And as they
fastened their eyes in heaven, as he went, lo two men stood by them
in white clothing, which also said: ye men of Galile, why stand ye
gazing up into heaven? This same Iesus which is taken up from you
into heaven, shall so come, even as ye have seen him go into heaven.
    Then returned they unto Ierusalem from mount Olivete, which is
nigh to Ierusalem, containing a saboth day's journey. And when they
were come in, they went up into a parlour, where abode both Peter and
Iames, Ihon and Andrew, Philip and Thomas, Bartlemew and Matthew,
Iames the son of Alpheus, and Simon Zelotes, and Iudas Iames' son.
These all continued with one accord, in prayer, and supplication with
the women, and Mary the mother of Iesu. And with his brethren.
    And in those days Peter stood up in the midst of the disciples
and said (The number of names were about an hundred and twenty) Ye
men and brethren, this scripture must needs be fulfilled which the
holy ghost thorow the mouth of David spake before of Iudas, which was
guide to them that took Iesus. For he was now numbered with us and
obtained fellowship in this ministration. And the same hath now
possessed a plot of ground with the reward of iniquity. And when he
was hanged, burst asunder in the midst, and all his bowels gushed
out. And it is known unto all the inhabiters of Ierusalem. Insomuch
that that field is called in their mother tongue, Acheldema, that is
to say the blood field.
    It is written in the book of psalms: His habitation be void, and
no man be dwelling therein: and his bishopricke let another take.
Wherefore of these men which have companied with us (all the time
that the lord Iesus went out and in among us, beginning at the
baptism of Ihon unto that same day that he was taken up from us) must
one be ordained to be a witness with us of his resurrection.
    And they appointed two, Ioseph called Barsabas (whose surname was
Iustus) and Matthias. And they prayed saying: Thou lord which knowest
the hearts of all men, shew whether thou hast chosen of these two,
that the one may take the room of this ministration, and apostleship
from the which Iudas by transgression fell, that he might go to his
own place. And they gave forth their lots, and the lot fell on
Mathias. And he was counted with the eleven apostles.

The second Chapter.

    When the fiftieth day was come, they were all with one accord
gathered together in one place. And suddenly there came a sound from
heaven as it had been the coming of a mighty wind, and it filled all
the house where they sat. And there appeared unto them cloven
tongues, as they had been fire, and it sat upon each of them: and
they were all filled with the holy ghost, and began to speak with
other tongues, even as the spirit gave them utterance.
    There were dwelling at Ierusalem jewes, devout men, which were of
all nations under heaven. When this was noised about, the multitude
came together and were astonied, because that every man heard them
speak his own tongue. They wondered all, and marvelled saying among
themselves: Look, are not all these which speak of Galile? And how
hear we every man his own tongue wherein we were born? Parthians,
Medes, and Elamites and the inhabiters of Mesopotamia, of Iury,
Capadocia, Ponthus, and of Asia, Phrigia, Pamphlia, and of Egypt, and
of the parts of Libia, which is beside Syrene, And strangers of Rome,
Iewes and Proselites, greeks and Arabians: We have heard them speak
with our own tongues the great works of God. They were all amazed,
and wondered saying one to another: what meaneth this? Other mocked
them saying: They are full of new wine.
    Peter stepped forth with the eleven, and lift up his voice, and
said unto them: Ye men of Iewry, and all ye that inhabit Ierusalem:
be this known unto you, and with your ears hear my words. These are
not drunken, as ye wene: For it is yet but the third hour of the day:
but this is that which was spoken by the prophet Ioel: It shall be in
the last days (saith God) of my spirit I will pour out upon all
flesh. And your sons, and your daughters shall prophesy, your young
men shall see visions. And your old men shall dream dreams. And on my
servants, and on my hand maidens I will pour out of my spirit in
those days, And they shall prophesy. And I will shew wonders in
heaven above, and tokens in the earth beneath, blood and fire, and
the vapour of smoke. The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the
moon into blood, before that great, and notable day of the lord come.
And the time shall come that whosoever shall call on the name of the
lord, shall be saved. Ye men of Israhel, hear these words. Iesus of
Nazareth, a man approved of God among you with miracles and wonders,
and signs which God did by him in the midst of you, as ye yourselves
know: him have ye taken by the hands of unrighteous persons, after he
was delivered by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God,
and have crucified and slain him, whom God hath raised up and lowsed
the sorrows of death, because it was impossible that he should be
holden of it. David speaketh of him: Aforehand, saw I God always
before me: For he is on my right hand, that I should not be moved.
Therefore did my heart rejoice, and my tongue was glad. Moreover
also, my flesh shall rest in hope because thou shalt not leave my
soul in hell, neither shalt suffer thy saint to see corruption. Thou
hast shewed me the ways of life, Thou shalt make me full of joy with
thy countenance.
    Men and brethren, let me freely speak unto you of the patriarch
David: For he is both dead and buried, and his sepulchre remaineth
with us unto his day. Therefore since he was a prophet, and knew that
God had sworn with an oath to him, that the fruit of his loins should
sit on his seat: He saw before, and spake of the resurrection of
Christ, that his soul should not be left in hell: neither his flesh
should see corruption. This Iesus hath God raised up, whereof we all
are witnesses.
    Since now that he by the right hand of God exalted is, and hath
received of the father the promise of the holy ghost, he hath shed
forth that which ye now see and hear. For David is not ascended into
heaven, but he said: The lord said to my lord sit on my right hand,
until I make thy foes, thy foot stool. So therefore let all the house
of Israhel know for a surety, that God hath made the same Iesus whom
ye have crucified, lord and Christ.
    When they heard this, they were pricked in their hearts, and said
unto Peter, and unto the other apostles: Ye men and brethren, what
shall we do? Peter said unto them: Repent and be baptised every one
of you in the name of Iesus Christ, For the remission of sins, and ye
shall receive the gift of the holy ghost. For the promise was made
unto you, and to your children, and to all that are afar, even as
many as our lord God shall call. And with many other words bare he
witness, and exhorted them saying: Save yourselves from this untoward
generation. They that gladly received his preaching were baptised,
And the same day, there were added unto them about a three thousand
souls.
    And they continued in the Apostles' doctrine and fellowship, and
in breaking of bread, and in prayer. And fear came over every soul.
And many wonders and signs were shewed by the Apostles. And all that
believed gathered then together, and had all things common. And sold
their possessions and goods, and departed them to all men, as every
man had need. And they continued daily with one accord in the temple,
and brake bread in every house, and ate their meat together with
gladness, and singleness of heart praising God, and had favour with
all the people, and the lord added to the congregation daily them
that should be saved.

The .iij. Chapter.

    Peter and Ihon went up together into the temple at the ninth hour
of prayer: And there was a certain man halt from his mother's womb,
whom they brought and laid at the gate of the temple called
beautiful, to ask his alms of them that entered into the temple. When
he saw Peter and Ihon, that they would into the temple, he desired to
receive an alms, Peter fastened his eyes on him with Ihon and said:
look on us, and he gave heed unto them, trusting to receive something
of them. Then said Peter: Silver and gold have I none, such as I have
give I thee. In the name of Iesus Christ of Nazareth, rise up and
walk. And he took him by the right hand, and lifted him up. And
immediately his feet and anklebones received strength, and he sprang,
stood, and also walked, and entered with them into the temple
walking, and leaping, and lauding God.
    And all the people saw him walk and laud God. And they knew him,
that it was he which sat and begged at the beautiful gate of the
temple. And they wondered, and were sore astonied at that which had
happened unto him. As the halt which was healed held Peter and Ihon,
all the people ran amazed unto them in Solomon's hall.
    When Peter saw that, he answered unto the people: Ye men of
Israhell, why marvel ye at this? Or why look ye so steadfastly on us,
as though by our own power, or holiness we had made this man go? God
of Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, the God of our fathers hath glorified
his son Iesus, whom ye betrayed, and denied in the presence of
Pilate, when he had judged him to be lowsed: but ye denied the holy
and just, and desired that he should give you a murderer, and killed
the lord of life whom God hath raised from death, of the which we are
witnesses: And his name thorow the faith of his name hath made this
man sound whom ye see and know. And the faith which is by him, hath
to this man given this health, in the presence of you all.
    And now brethren I wot well that thorow ignorance ye have done
it, as did also your heads. But God which shewed before by the mouth
of all his prophets that Christ should suffer, hath thuswise
fulfilled it. Repent ye therefore and turn that your sins may be done
away when the time of comfort cometh, which we shall have of the
presence of the lord, and when God shall send him, which before was
preached unto you, that is to wit Iesus Christ, which must heaven
receive until the time that all things be restored again, which God
hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world
began.
    For Moses said unto the fathers: A prophet shall your lord God
raise up unto you, one of your brethren, like unto me, him shall ye
hear in all things whatsoever he shall say unto you. For the time
will come, that every soul which shall not hear that same prophet,
shall be exiled from the people. Also all the prophets from Samuel,
and thenceforth, as many as have spoken, have in likewise told of
these days. Ye are the children of the prophets, and to you
pertaineth the testament that God hath made unto our fathers saying
to Abraham: Even in thy seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be
blessed. First unto you hath God raised up his son Iesus, and him he
hath sent to bless you, that every one of you should turn from his
wickedness.

The .iiij. Chapter.

    As they spake unto the people, the priests and the ruler of the
temple, and the saduces came upon them, taking grievously that they
taught the people and preached in the name of Iesus the resurrection
from death. And they laid hands on them, and put them in hold until
the next day. For it was now eventide. Many of them which heard the
words believed, and the number of the men was about five thousand.
    It chanced on the morrow that their rulers, and seniors, and
scribes, as Annas the chief priest, and Caiaphas, and Ihon and
Alexander, and as many as were of the kindred of the high priest,
were gathered together at Ierusalem, and set them in the midst, and
asked by what power, or in what name have ye done this sirs? Then
Peter full of the holy ghost said unto them. Ye rulers of the people,
and seniors of Israhel, if we this day are examined of the good deed
done to the sick man by what means he is made whole: be it known unto
you all, and to all the people of Israhel, that in the name of Iesus
Christ of Nazareth, whom ye crucified, and whom God raised from death
again, this man standeth here present before you whole. This is the
stone cast aside of you builders which is set in the chief place of
the corner. Neither is there health in any other. Nor yet also is
there any other name given to men wherein we must be saved.
    When they saw the boldness of Peter and Ihon, And knew that they
were unlearned men and lay people, they marvelled, and they knew
them, that they were with Iesu: Seeing also the man which was healed
standing with them, they could not say against it, but commanded them
to go aside out of the council, And communed among themselves
saying: what shall we do to these men? For a manifest sign is done by
them, and is openly known to all them that dwell in Ierusalem, and we
cannot deny it: But that it be noised no farther among the people,
let us threaten and charge them that they speak henceforth to no man
in this name.
    And they called them, and commanded them that in no wise they
should speak or teach in the name of Iesu. But Peter and Ihon
answered unto them and said: whether it be right in the sight of God
to obey you more than God judge ye. For we cannot but speak that
which we have seen and heard. So threatened they them and let them
go, And found no thing how to punish them, because of the people: For
all men lauded God for the miracle which was done. For the man was
above forty year old, on whom this miracle of healing was shewed.
    As soon as they were let go they came to their fellows, and
shewed all that the high priests and seniors had said. When they
heard that, with one mind they lift up their voices to God and said:
lord, thou art God which hast made heaven and earth, the sea and all
that in them is, which by the mouth of thy servant David hast said:
Why did the heathen grudge, and the people imagine vain things. The
kings of the earth stood up and the rulers came together against the
lord, And against his Christ.
    For of a truth against thy holy child Iesus, whom thou hast
anointed, both Herod and also Pontius Pilate with the gentiles, and
the people of Israhel, gathered themselves to gether for to do
whatsoever thy hand and thy counsel determined before to be done. And
now lord behold their threatenings, and grant unto thy servants with
all confidence to speak thy word. So that thou stretch forth thy hand
that healing, and signs, and wonders be done by the name of thy holy
child Iesus. And as soon as they had prayed, the place moved where
they were assembled together, and they were all filled with the holy
ghost, and they spake the word of God boldly.
    The multitude of them that believed, were of one heart, And of
one soul. Also none of them said, that any thing of those which he
possessed was his own: But had all things common. And with great
power gave the Apostles witness of the resurrection of the lord Iesu.
And great grace was with them all. Neither was there any among them
that lacked. For as many as were possessors of lands or houses, sold
them and brought the price of the things that were sold, and laid it
down at the Apostles' feet. And distribution was made unto every man
according as he had need.
    And Ioses which was also called of the Apostles Barnabas (that is
to say the son of consolation, being a Levite, and of the country of
Cipers) had land, and sold it, and laid the price down at the
Apostles' feet.

The .v. Chapter.

    A certain man named Ananias with Saphira his wife sold a
possession, and kept away part of the price (his wife also being of
counsel) and brought a certain part, and laid it down at the
Apostles' feet. Then said Peter: Ananias how is it that Satan hath
filled thine heart, that thou shouldest lie unto the holy ghost, and
keep away part of the price of thy livelihood: Pertained it not unto
thee only? And after it was sold, was not the price in thine own
power? How is it that thou hast conceived this thing in thine heart?
Thou hast not lied unto men, but unto God. When Ananias heard these
words, he fell down and gave up the ghost. And great fear came on all
them that these things heard. And the young men rose up, and put him
apart, and carried him out, and buried him. It fortuned as it were
about the space of iij. hours after, that his wife came in ignorant
of that which was done. Peter said unto her: Tell me, sold ye the
land for so much? And she said: ye for so much. Peter said unto her:
why have ye agreed together, to tempt the spirit of the lord? Lo, the
feet of them which have buried thy husband are at the door, and shall
carry thee out, Then she fell down straightway at his feet and
yielded up the ghost. The young men came in and found her dead, and
carried her out and buried her by her husband. And great fear came on
all the congregation. And on as many as heard it.
    By the hands of the Apostles were many signs and wonders shewed
among the people. And they were all together with one accord in
Solomon's hall. And of other durst no man join himself to them: but
the people magnified them. The number of them that believed in the
lord both of men and women grew more and more insomuch that they
brought their sick into the streets, and laid them on beds and
pallets, that at the leastway the shadow of Peter when he came by,
might shadow some of them. There came also a multitude out of the
cities round about unto Ierusalem, bringing with them sick and them
which were vexed with unclean spirits. And they were healed every
one.
    The chief priest rose up and they that were with him (which is
the sect of the Saduces) and were full of indignation, and laid hands
on the apostles, and put them in the common prison: but the angel of
the lord by night opened the prison door, and brought them forth, and
said: go step forth, and speak in the temple to the people all the
words of this life. When they heard that, they entered into the
temple early in the morning and taught.
    The chief priest came and they that were with him and called a
council together, and all the seniors of the children of Israhel, and
sent to the prison to fetch them. When the ministers came and found
them not in the prison, they came again and told saying: The prison
found we shut with all diligence, and the keepers standing without
before the doors: but when we had opened we found no man within. When
the chief priest of all and the ruler of the temple, and the high
priests heard these things, they doubted of them, whereunto this
would grow.
    Then came one and shewed them: Lo the men that ye put in prison
stand in the temple, and preach to the people. Then went the ruler of
the temple with ministers, and brought them without violence. For
they feared the people lest they should have been stoned. And when
they had brought them, they set them before the council. And the
chief priest asked them saying: did not we straitly command you that
ye should not teach in this name? and behold ye have filled Ierusalem
with your doctrine, and ye intend to bring this man's blood upon us.
    Peter and the other Apostles answered, and said: We ought more to
obey God than men. The God of our fathers raised up Iesus, whom ye
slew and hanged on tree. Him being a ruler and a saviour hath God
exalted with his right hand, for to give repentance to Israhell and
forgiveness of sins. And we are his records as concerning these
things: and also the holy ghost, whom God hath given to them that
obey him. When they heard that they clave asunder, and sought means
to slay them. Then stood there up one in the council, a pharisee
named Gamaliel, a doctor of law, had in authority among the people
and commanded to put the Apostles aside a little space, and said unto
them: Men of Israhell take heed to yourselves what ye intend to do as
touching these men. Before these days rose up one Theudas boasting
himself, to whom resorted a number of men, about a four hundred,
which was slain, and they all which believed him were scattered
abroad, and brought to nought. After this man arose there up one
Iudas of Galile, in the time when tribute began, and drew away much
people after him. He also perished: and all even as many as harkened
to him are scattered a broad.
    And now I say unto you: refrain yourselves from these men, let
them alone: For if this counsel or work be of men, it will come to
nought: but and if it be of God, ye cannot destroy it, lest haply ye
be found to strive against God. And to him they agreed, and called
the apostles, and beat them, and commanded that they should not speak
in the name of Iesu, and let them go.
    And they departed from the council rejoicing that they were
counted worthy to suffer rebuke for his name. And daily in the
temple, and in every house they ceased not, teaching and preaching
Iesus Christ.

The .vj. Chapter.

    In those days as the number of the disciples grew, there arose a
grudge among the greeks against the Hebrews, because their widows
were despised in the daily ministration. Then the twelve called the
multitude of the disciples together and said: it is not meet that we
should leave the word of God and serve at the tables, wherefore
brethren look ye out among you seven men of honest report, and full
of the holy ghost and wisdom, which we may appoint to this needful
business: but we will give ourselves continually to prayer, and to
the ministration of the word. And the saying pleased the whole
multitude well. And they chose Stephen a man full of faith, and of
the holy ghost, and Philip, and Prochorus, and Nichanor, and Timon,
and Permenas, and Nicholas a proselite of Antioch, which they set
before the apostles, and they prayed and laid their hands on them.
    And the word of God increased, and the number of the disciples
multiplied in Ierusalem greatly. And a great company of the priests
were obedient to the faith. Stephen full of faith and power did great
wonders, and miracles among the people. Then there arose certain of
the Synagogue, which are called libertines, and Sirenens, and
Alexandrians, and Cilicilians, and Asians, and disputed with Steven.
And they could not resist the wisdom, and the spirit, with which he
spake. Then sent they in men which said: we have heard him speak
blasphemous words against Moses, and against God, and they moved the
people, and the seniors, and the scribes: and they came upon him and
caught him, and brought him to the council, and brought forth false
witnesses which said: This man ceaseth not to speak blasphemous words
against this holy place and the law, for we heard him say: This Iesus
of Nazareth shall destroy this place, and shall change the ordinances
which Moses gave unto us. And all that sat in the council looked
steadfastly on him, and saw his face as it had been the face of an
angel.

The .vij. Chapter.

    Then said the chief priest: is it even so? And he said: ye men,
brethren, and fathers, hearken to. The God of glory appeared unto our
father Abraham while he was yet in Mesopotamia, before he dwelt in
Charran, and said unto him: come out of thy country, and from thy
kindred, and come into the land which I shall shew unto thee. Then
came he out of the land of Caldey, and dwelt in Charran. And after
that as soon as his father was dead, he brought him into this land,
wherein ye now dwell, and he gave him none inheritance in it, no not
one foot of ground. And promised that he would give it to him and to
his seed after him, when as yet he had no child.
    God verily spake on this wise, thy seed shall be a dweller in a
strange land, and they shall put them in bondage, and entreat them
evil .iiij. C. years. And the nation to whom they shall be in
bondage, will I judge (said God) and after that shall they come
forth, and serve me in this place. And gave him the testament of
circumcision, and he begat Isaac, and circumcised him the viij. day,
and Isaac begat Iacob, and Iacob the twelve patriarchs.
    And the patriarchs having indignation sold Ioseph into Egypt, and
God was with him, and delivered him out of all his adversities, and
gave him favour and wisdom in the sight of Pharao king of Egypt, And
Pharao made him governor over Egypt, and over all his household.
    Then came there a dearth over all the land of Egypt, and Canaan,
and great affliction, that our fathers found no sustenance. When
Iacob heard that there was corn in Egypt, he sent our fathers first,
and when he had sent them the second time, Ioseph was known of his
brethren, and Ioseph's kindred was made known unto Pharao. Then sent
Ioseph and caused his father to be brought and all his kin, three
score and xv. souls. And Iacob descended into Egypt, and died both he
and our fathers, and were translated into Sichem, and were put in the
sepulchre that Abraham bought for money of the sons of Emor, at
Sichem.
    When the time of the promise drew nigh (which God had promised
with an oath to Abraham) the people grew and multiplied in Egypt till
another king arose which knew not of Ioseph. The same dealt subtly
with our kindred, and evil intreated our fathers, and made them to
cast out their children, that they should not remain alive. The same
time was Moses born, and was a proper child in the sight of God,
which was nourished up in his father's house three months. When he
was cast out Pharaoh's daughter took him up, and nourished him up for
her own son. And Moses was learned in all manner wisdom of the
Egyptians, and was mighty in deeds and in words.
    When he was full forty year old, it came into his heart to visit
his brethren, the children of Israhel. And when he saw one of them
suffer wrong, he defended him, and avenged his quarrel that had the
harm done to him, and smote the Egyptian. For he supposed his
brethren would have understood how that God by his hands should give
them health: but they understood not.
    And the next day he shewed himself unto them as they strove, and
would have set them at one again saying: Sirs ye are brethren why
hurt ye one another? But he that did his neighbour wrong, thrust him
away saying: Who made thee a ruler and a judge among us? What wilt
thou kill me, as thou didst the Egyptian yesterday? Then fled Moses
at that word, and was a stranger in the land of Madian, Where he
begat two sons.
    When xl. years were expired, there appeared to him in the
wilderness of mount Sina the angel of the lord in a flame of fire in
a bush. When Moses saw it he wondered at the sight, and as he drew
near to behold it. And the voice of the lord came unto him: I am the
God of thy fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac and the God
of Iacob. Moses trembled and durst not behold. Then said the lord to
him put off thy shoes from thy feet, for the place where thou
standest is holy ground. I have perfectly seen the affliction of my
people which is in Egypt, and I have heard their groaning, and am
come down to deliver them. And now come and I will send thee into
Egypt.
    The same Moses whom they forsook saying: who made the a ruler and
a judge: God sent both a ruler and a deliverer, by the hands of the
angel which appeared to him in the bush. This man brought them out
shewing wonders and signs in Egypt, and in the reed sea, and in the
wilderness xl. years. This is that Moses which said unto the children
of Israhell: A prophet shall your lord God raise up unto you of your
brethren like unto me, him shall ye hear.
    This is he that was in the congregation, in the wilderness with
the angel which spake to him in the mount Sina, and with our fathers.
This man received the word of life to give unto us, to whom our
fathers would not obey: But cast it from them, and in their hearts
turned back again into Egypt, saying unto Aaron: Make us gods to go
before us. For we wot not what is become of this Moses that brought
us out of the land of Egypt. And they made a calf in those days, and
offered sacrifice unto the image, and rejoiced in the works of their
own hands.
    Then God turned himself, and gave them up, that they should
worship the stars of the sky, as it is written in the book of the
prophets: O ye of the house of Israhell: have ye given unto me
offerings or sacrifice, by the space of xl. years in the wilderness?
And ye took unto you the tabernacle of Moloch, and the star of your
god Remphan, figures which ye made to worship them. And I will
translate you beyond Babylon.
    Our fathers had the tabernacle of testimony in the wilderness, as
he had appointed them speaking unto Moses, that he should make it
according to the fashion that he had seen, which tabernacle our
fathers received, and brought it in with Iosue into the possession of
the gentiles, which gentiles God drave out before the face of our
fathers unto the time of David, which found favour before God, and
desired that he might find a tabernacle for the God of Iacob. And
Solomon built him an house.
    But he that is highest of all dwelleth not in temples made with
hands, as saith the prophet: Heaven is my seat, and earth is my foot
stool, what house will ye build for me saith the lord? or what
resting place? hath not my hand made all these things? Ye stiffnecked
and of uncircumcised hearts and ears: ye have allways resisted the
holy ghost: as your fathers did, so do ye. Which of the prophets have
not your fathers persecuted? And they have slain them, which shewed
before of the coming of that Just, whom ye have betrayed and
murdered. And ye also have received a law by the ordinance of angels,
and have not kept it.
    When they heard these things, their hearts clave asunder, and
they gnashed on him with their teeth. He being full of the holy ghost
looked up with his eyes into heaven and saw the majesty of God, and
Iesus standing on the right hand of God, and said: lo, I see the
heavens open, and the son of man stand on the right hand of God. Then
they gave a shout with a loud voice, and stopped their ears and all
ran upon him at once, and cast him out of the city, and stoned him.
And the witnesses laid down their clothes at a young man's feet named
Saul. And they stoned Steven calling on and saying: lord Iesu receive
my spirit. And he kneeled down and cried with a loud voice: lord
impute not this sin unto them, For they wote not what they do. And
when he had thus spoken he fell asleep.

The .viij. Chapter.

    Saul had pleasure in his death. At that time there was a great
persecution against the congregation which was at Ierusalem, and they
were all scattered abroad thorowout the regions of Iury and Samaria,
except the apostles. Then devout men dressed Steven, and made great
lamentation over him. Saul made havoc of the congregation entering
into every house, and drew out both man and woman, and thrust them
into prison. They that were scattered abroad went every where
preaching the word. Then came Philip into a city of Samaria, and
preached Christ unto them. And the people gave heed unto those things
which Philip spake with one accord, in that they heard and saw the
miracles which he did. For unclean spirits crying with loud voice,
came out of many which were possessed of them. Many taken with
palsies, and many that halted were healed. And there was great joy in
that city. And there was a certain man called Simon, which beforetime
in the same city, used witchcraft and bewitched the people, saying
that he was a man that could do great things. Whom they regarded,
from the least to the greatest saying: this is that power of
God, which is called great. Him they set much by, because of long
time with sorcery he had deluded their wits. As soon as they believed
Philips preaching of the kingdom of God and of the name of Iesu
Christ, they were baptised both men and women. Then Simon himself
believed and was baptised. And continued with Philip, and wondered
beholding the miracles and signs, which were shewed.
    When the Apostles which were at Ierusalem heard say that Samaria
had received the word of God: they sent unto them Peter and Ihon,
which when they were come, prayed for them, that they might receive
the holy ghost. For as yet he was come on none of them: But they were
baptised only in the name of Christ Iesu. Then laid they their hands
on them, and they received the holy ghost.
    When Simon saw that thorow laying on of the Apostles' hands on
them, the holy ghost was given: he offered them money saying: Give me
also this power, that on whomsoever I lay hands, he may receive the
holy ghost. Then said Peter unto him: Perish thou and thy money
together. For thou wenest that the gift of God may be obtained with
money? thou hast neither part nor fellowship in this business. For
thy heart is not right in the sight of God. Repent therefore of this
thy wickedness, and pray God that the thought of thine heart may be
forgiven thee. For I perceive that thou art full of bitter gall, and
wrapped in iniquity.
    Then answered Simon and said: Pray ye to the lord for me that
none of these things which ye have spoken fall on me. And they when
they had testified, and preached the word of the lord returned to
Ierusalem and preached the gospel in many cities of the Samaritans.
    Then the angel of the lord spake unto Philip saying: Arise and go
towards midday unto the way which leadeth from Ierusalem unto Gaza,
which is in the desert. He arose and went on, and behold a man of
Ethiopia which was gelded, and of great authority with Candace queen
of the Ethiophians, which had the rule of all her treasure, came to
Ierusalem for to pray. As he returned home again sitting in his
chariot he read Esay the prophet.
    Then the spirit said unto Philip: Go near and join thyself to
yonder chariot. Philip ran to him, and heard him read Esay the
prophet and said: Understandest thou what thou readest? And he said:
how can I, except I had a guide? And he desired Philip that he would
come up and sit with him. The tenor of the scripture which he read
was this. He was led as a sheep to be slain: And like a lamb dumb
before his shearer, so opened he not his mouth, in that he submitted
himself, his judgement was exalted: who shall declare his generation?
for his life is taken from the earth. The gelded man answered Philip
and said: I pray thee of whom speaketh the prophet this? of himself?
or of some other man?
    Philip opened his mouth, and began at the same scripture, and
preached unto him Iesus. And as they went on their way, they came
unto a certain water, and the gelded man said: See here is water,
what shall let me to be baptised? Philip said unto him: If thou
believe with all thine heart, thou mayst. He answered saying: I
believe that Iesus Christ is the son of God. And commanded the
chariot to stand still. And they went down both into the water: both
Philip and also the gelded man. And he baptised him. As soon as they
were come out of the water the spirit of the lord caught away Philip.
And the gelded man saw him no more. And he went on his way rejoicing:
but Philip was found at Azotus. And he walked thorow out the country
preaching in their cities, till he came to Cesarea.

The .ix. Chapter.

    Saul yet breathing out threatenings and slaughter against the
disciples of the lord, went unto the high priest, and desired of him
letters to Damascus, to the synagogues: that if he found any of this
way whether they were men or women, he might bring them bound unto
Ierusalem. As he went on his journey, it fortuned that he drew nigh
to Damascus, and suddenly there shined round about him a light from
heaven. And he fell to the earth, and heard a voice saying to him:
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? And he said what art thou lord?
The lord said, I am Iesus whom thou persecutest, it shall be hard for
thee to kick against the prick. He both trembling and astonied said:
lord what wilt thou have me to do? And the lord said unto him: Arise
and go into the city, and it shall be told thee what thou shalt do.
    The men which accompanied him on his way stood amazed, for they
heard a voice, but saw no man. Saul arose from the earth, And when he
had opened his eyes he saw no man. Then led they him by the hand, and
brought him into Damascus. And he was iij. days without sight, and
neither ate nor drank.
    There was a certain disciple at Damascus named Ananias, to him
said the lord in a vision: Ananias. And he said: I am here lord. And
the lord said to him: arise and go into the street which is called
straight, and seek in the house of Iudas after one called Saul of the
city of Tharsus. For behold he prayeth, And hath seen in a vision a
man named Ananias coming in unto him, And putting his hands on him,
that he might receive his sight.
    Ananias answered: lord I have heard by many of this man, how much
hurt he hath done to thy saints at Ierusalem: and in this place he
hath authority of the high priests to bind all that call on thy name.
The lord said unto him: Go thy ways: for he is a chosen vessel unto
me, to bear my name before the gentiles, and kings and the children
of Israhel: For I will shew him how great things he must suffer for
my name's sake.
    Ananias went his way and entered into the house and put his hands
on him and said: brother Saul, the lord that appeared unto thee in
the way as thou camest, hath sent me, that thou mightest receive thy
sight and be filled with the holy ghost. And immediately there fell
from his eyes as it had been scales and he received his sight, and
arose and was baptised. And received meat and was comforted.
    Then was Saul a certain days with the disciples which were at
Damascus. And straightway he preached Christ in the Synagogues how
that he was the son of God. All that heard him were amazed and said:
is not this he that spoiled them which called on this name in
Ierusalem? And came hither for the intent that he should bring them
bound unto the high priests? Saul increased in strength, And
confounded the jews which dwelt at Damascus affirming that this was
very Christ.
    After a good while, the jews took counsel among themselves 
to kill him. But their layings wait were known of Saul.
And they watched at the gates day and night to kill him. Then the
disciples took him by night, and put him thorow the wall and let him
down in a basket.
    When Saul came to Ierusalem he assayed to couple himself with the
disciples, and they were all afraid of him and believed not that he
was a disciple. But Barnabas took him and brought him to the apostles
and told them how he had seen the lord in the way and had spoken with
him: and how he had done boldly at Damascus in the name of Iesu, And
he had his conversation with them at Ierusalem, and quit himself
boldly in the name of the lord Iesu. And he spake and disputed with
the greeks and they went about to slay him. When the brethren knew of
that, they brought him to Cesarea, and sent him forth to Tharsus.
Then had the congregations rest thorowout all jewry and Galile and
Samary, and were edified, and walked in the fear of the lord, And
multiplied by the comfort of the holy ghost.
    It chanced that as Peter walked throughout all quarters, he came
to the saints which dwelt at Lydda. And there he found a certain man
named Eneas, which had kept his bed viij. years sick of the palsy.
Then said Peter unto him: Eneas, the lord Iesus Christ make thee
whole: Arise and make thy bed. And he arose immediately. And all that
dwelt at Lydda and Assaron, saw him, and turned to the lord.
    There was at Ioppa a certain woman (which was a disciple named
Tabitha, which by interpretation is called Dorcas) she was full of
good works and alms deeds, which she did. It chanced in those days
that she was sick and died. When they had washed her and laid her in
a chamber: Because Lydda was nigh to Ioppa, and the disciples had
heard that Peter was there, they sent unto him, desiring him that he
would not be grieved to come unto them.
    Peter arose and came with them: when he was come, they brought
him into the chamber, and all the widows stood round about him
weeping and shewing the coats and garments which Dorcas made while
she was with them. Peter put them all forth and kneeled down and
prayed and turned him to the body, and said: Tabitha, arise. She
opened her eyes, and when she saw Peter she sat up. And he gave her
his hand and lift her up, and called the saints and widows and shewed
her alive. And it was known thorow out all Ioppa, and many believed
on the lord. And it fortuned that he tarried many days in Ioppa with
one Simon a tanner.

The .x. Chapter.

    There was a certain man in Cesarea called Cornelius, a captain of
the soldiers of Italy, a devout man, and one that feared God with all
his household, which gave much alms to the people, and prayed God
always. The same man saw in a vision evidently about the ninth hour
of the day the angel of God coming in unto him, and saying unto him:
Cornelius, when he looked on him, he was afraid, and said: what is it
lord? He said unto him: Thy prayers and thy alms are come up into
remembrance in the presence of God. And now send men to Ioppa, and
call for one Simon named also Peter. He lodgeth with one Simon a
tanner, whose house is by the seaside. He shall tell thee, what thou
oughtest to do. When the Angel which spake unto Cornelius was
departed, he called two of his household, and a devout soldier of
them that waited on him, to whom he told all the matter, and sent
them to Ioppa.
    On the morrow as they went on their journey and drew nigh unto
the city, Peter went up into the uppermost part of the house to pray,
about the vj. hour. Then waxed he an hungered, and would have eaten.
while they made ready for him. He fell into a trance, and saw heaven
opened, and a certain vessel come down unto him, as it had been a
great sheet, knit at the iiij. corners, and was let down to the
earth, wherein were all manner of iiij. footed beasts of the earth
and vermin and worms, and fouls of the air. And a voice spake unto
him from heaven: Rise Peter Kill and eat. Peter said: God forbid
lord, for I have never eaten any thing that is common or unclean. And
the voice spake unto him again the second time: What God hath
cleansed that make thou not common. This was done thrice, And the
vessel was received up again into heaven.
    While Peter mused in himself what this vision which he had seen
meant, behold, the men which were sent from Cornelius, had made
inquirance for Simon's house, and stood before the door. And called
out one and asked whether Simon which was also called Peter, were
lodged there. While Peter thought on this vision, the spirit said
unto him: Lo, men seek thee: arise therefore, get thee down, and go
with them, and doubt not. For I have sent them. Peter went down to
the men which were sent unto him from Cornelius, and said: Lo, I am
he, whom ye seek, what is the cause wherefore ye are come? They said
unto him: Cornelius the captain a just man, and one that feareth God,
and of good report among all the people of the jews was warned by an
holy angel, to send for thee in to his house, and to hear words of
thee. Then called he them in, and lodged them.
    On the morrow Peter went with them, and certain brethren from
Ioppa accompanied him. And the third day entered they into Cesaria.
Cornelius waited for them, and had called together his kinsmen, and
special friends. And as it chanced Peter to come in, Cornelius met
him, and fell down at his feet, and worshipped him. Peter took him
up, saying: Even I myself am a man. And as he talked with him he came
in, and found many that were come together. And he said unto them: Ye
do know how that it is an unlawful thing for a man that is a jew to
company or come unto an alien: But God hath shewed me that I should
not call any man common or unclean: therefore came I unto you without
scruple, as soon as I was sent for. I ask therefore: for what intent
have ye sent for me?
    And Cornelius said: This day now. iiij. days I fasted, and at the
ninth hour I prayed in my house, and behold, a man stood before me in
bright clothing, and said: Cornelius, thy prayer is heard, and thine
alms deeds are had in remembrance in the sight of God. Send therefore
to Ioppa, and call for Simon which is also called Peter. He is lodged
in the house of one Simon a tanner by the seaside, the which as soon
as he is come, shall speak unto thee. Then sent I for thee
immediately, and thou hast well done for to come. Now are we all
here, present before God to hear all things that are commanded unto
thee of God.
    Peter opened his mought and said: Of a truth I perceive, that God
is not partial, but in all people he that feareth him and worketh
righteousness, is accepted with him.
    Ye know the preaching that God sent unto the children of
Israhell, preaching peace by Iesus Christe (which is lord over all
things.) which preaching was published thorowout all Iewery, and
began in Galile, after the baptism preached by Ihon, After that God
had anointed Iesus of Nazareth with the holy ghost, and with power,
he went about doing good, and healing all that were oppressed with
devils, for God was with him. And we are witnesses of all things
which he did in the land of the jewes and at Ierusalem, whom they
slew, and hung on tree. Him God raised up the third day, and shewed
him openly, not to all the people, but unto us witnesses chosen
before of God, which ate and drank with him, after he arose from
death. And he commanded us to preach unto the people and testify,
that it is he that is ordained of God a judge of quick and dead. To
him giveth all the prophets witness, that thorow his name shall
receive remission of sins all that believe in him.
    While Peter yet spake these words, the holy ghost fell on all
them which heard his preaching. And they of the circumcision which
believed were astonied, as many as came with Peter, because that on
the gentiles also was shed out the gift of the holy ghost. For they
heard them speak with tongues, and magnify God. Then answered Peter:
can any man forbid water that these should not be baptised, which
have received the holy ghost as well as we? And he commanded them to
be baptised in the name of the lord. Then prayed they him, to tarry a
few days.

The .xj. Chapter.

    It came to the ears of the Apostles and the brethren which were
in jewry, that the heathen also had received the word of God. When
Peter was come up to Ierusalem, they of the circumcision disputed
with him, saying: Thou wentest in unto men uncircumcised, and atest
with them.
    Peter began and expounded the thing in order to them saying: I
was in the city of Ioppa praying, and in a trance I saw a vision, A
certain vessel descend, as it had been a large linen cloth, let down
from heaven by the four corners, And it came to me: into the which
when I had fastened mine eyes I considered and saw fourfooted beasts
of the earth, and vermin and worms, and fowls of the air. I heard
also a voice saying unto me: Arise Peter, slay and eat. And I said:
God forbid lord, for nothing common or unclean hath at any time
entered into my mought. The voice answered me again from heaven count
not thou those things common, which God hath cleansed. And this was
done three times. And all were taken up again into heaven.
    And behold immediately were there three men come unto the house
where I was, sent from Cesarea unto me. And the spirit said unto me,
that I should go with them, without doubting. Moreover the six
brethren accompanied me. And we entered into the man's house. And he
shewed us, how he had seen an angel in his house, which stood and
said to him: Send men to Ioppa, and call for Simon, named also Peter
he shall tell thee words, whereby both thou and all thine house shall
be saved. And as I began to preach, the holy ghost fell on them, as
he did on us at the beginning. Then came to my remembrance the words
of the lord, how he said: Ihon baptised with water, but ye shall be
baptised with the holy ghost. Forasmuch then as God gave them like
gifts, as he did unto us, when we believed on the lord Iesus Christ:
what was I that I should have withstood God? when they heard this,
they held their peace and glorified God, saying: Then hath God also
to the Gentiles granted repentance unto life.
    They which were scattered abroad thorow the affliction that arose
about Steven, walked thorow out till they came unto Phenice and
Cypers and Antioche, preaching the word to no man, but unto the jews
only. Some of them were men of Cypers and of Syrene, which when they
were come into Antioch, spake unto the greeks, and preached the lord
Iesus. And the hand of the lord was with them, and a great number
believed and turned unto the lord.
    Tidings of this came unto the ears of the congregation, which was
in Ierusalem, And they sent forth Barnabas that he should go unto
Antioche. Which when he was come, and had seen the grace of the lord,
was glad, and exhorted them all, that with purpose of heart they
would continually cleave unto the lord. For he was a perfect man, and
full of the holy ghost and of faith. And much people was added unto
the lord. Then departed Barnabas to Tarsus, for to seek Saul, and
when he had found him, he brought him unto Antioche. And it chanced
that a whole year they had their conversation with the congregation
there, and taught much people insomuch that the disciples of Antioche
were the first that were called Christen.
    In those days came prophets from Ierusalem unto Antioche. There
stood up one of them named Agabus, and signified by the spirit, that
there should be great dearth throughout all the world, which came to
pass in the Emperor Claudius days. Then the disciples every man
according to his ability, purposed to send succour unto the brethren
which dwelt in jewry, which thing they also did, and sent it to the
seniors, by the hands of Barnabas and Saul.

The .xij. Chapter.

    In that time Herod the king layed hands on certain of the
congregation, to vex them. And he killed Iames the brother of Ihon
with a sword: and because he saw that it pleased the jews, he
proceeded further, to take Peter also. Then were the days of
unleavened bread, and when he had caught him, he put him in prison,
and delivered him to iiij. quaternions of soldiers to be kept,
intending after ester to bring him forth to the people. Then was
Peter kept in prison. But prayer was made without ceasing of the
congregation unto God for him. When Herod would have brought him out
unto the people, the same night slept Peter between ij. soldiers,
bound with two chains, And the keepers before the door kept the
prison.
    And behold the angel of the lord was there present, and a light
shined in the lodge. And he smote Peter on the side, and stirred him
up saying: arise up quickly. And the chains fell off from his hands.
And the Angel said unto him: gird thyself and bind on thy sandals,
And so he did. And he said unto him: cast on thy mantle about thee,
and follow me. And he came out and followed him, and wist not, that
it was truth which was done by the angel, but thought he had seen a
vision. When they were past the first and the second watch, they came
unto the iron gate, that leadeth unto the city, which opened to them
by his own accord. And they went out and passed thorow one street,
and by and by the angel departed from him.
    And when Peter was come to himself, he said: now I know of a
surety, that the lord hath sent his Angel, and hath delivered me from
the hand of Herod, and from all the waiting for of the people of the
jewes. And as he considered the thing, he came to the house of Mary
the mother of one Ihon, which was called Mark also, where many were
gathered together in prayer. As Peter knocked at the entry door, a
damsel came forth to hearken, named Rhoda. And when she knew Peter's
voice, she opened not the entry for gladness, but ran in and told how
Peter stood before the entry. And they said unto her: thou art mad.
And she bare them down that it was even so. Then said they: it is his
angel. Peter continued knocking: When they had opened the door, and
saw him, they were astonied. He beckoned unto them with his hand to
hold their peace, and told them by what means the lord had brought
him out of the prison. And said: go shew this unto Iames and to the
brethren. And he departed and went into another place.
    As soon as it was day there was no little ado among the soldiers,
what was become of Peter. When Herod had called for him, and found
him not, he examined the keepers, and commanded to depart. And he
descended from Iewry to Cesarea, and there abode. Herod was
displeased with them of Tyre and Sidon. And they came all at once,
and made intercession unto Blastus the king's chamberlain, and
desired peace, because their country was nourished by the king's
land. Upon a day appointed, the king arrayed him in royal apparel,
and set him in his seat, and made an oration unto them. And the
people gave a shout, saying: It is the voice of a God and not of a
man. And immediately the angel of the lord smote him, because he gave
not God the honour, and he was eaten of worms, and gave up the ghost.
    And the word of God grew and multiplied. And Barnabas and Saul
returned to Ierusalem, and fulfilled their office, and took with them
Ihon, which was also called Marcus.

The .xiij. Chapter.
There were at Antioche, in the congregation, prophets and doctors, as
Barnabas and Simeonb called Nyger, And Lucius of Cerene, and Manahen
Herod the tetrarkes nursefellow, and Saul. As they served God, and
fasted, The holy ghost said: separate me Barnabas and Saul, for the
work whereunto I have called them. Then fasted they and prayed, and
put their hands on them, and let them go.
    And they after they were sent of the holy ghost, came unto
Seleutia, and from thence they sailed to Cyprus. And when they were
come to Solamine, they shewed the word of God in the synagogues, unto
the jewes. And they had Ihon to their minister.
    When they had gone over all the Isle unto the city of Paphos,
they found a certain sorcerer, a false prophet which was a jewe,
named Bariesu, which was with the ruler of the country one Sergius
Paulus a prudent man. The same ruler called unto him Barnabas and
Saul, and desired to hear the word of God. The sorcerer Elemas (for
so was his name by interpretation) withstood them, and sought to turn
away the ruler from the faith. Then Saul which also is called Paul
being full of the holy ghost, set his eyes on him, and said: O full
of all subtlety and deceitfulness the child of the devil, and the
enemy of all righteousness thou ceasest not to pervert the straight
ways of the lord. And now behold the hand of the lord is upon thee,
and thou shalt be blind and not see the sun for a season. And
immediately fell on him a mist and a darkness, And he went about
seeking, them that should lead him by the hand. Then the ruler when
he saw what had happened, believed, and wondered at doctrine of the
lord.
    When Paul and they that were with him, had shipped from Paphus,
they came to Perga a city of Pamphilia. There departed Ihon from
them, and returned to Ierusalem. But they wandered thorow the
countries, from Perga to Antioche a city of the country of Pisidia,
and went into the synagoge on the saboth day, and sat down. After the
lecture of the law and the prophets, the rulers of the synagogue sent
unto them saying: Ye men and brethren, if ye have any sermon to
exhort the people, say on.
    Paul stood up and beckoned with his hand and said: Men of
Israhel, and ye that fear God, give audience. The God of this people
chose our fathers, and exalted the people when they dwelt as
strangers in the land of Egypt, and with a mighty arm brought them
out of it, and about the time of. xl. years, suffered he their
manners in the wilderness. And he destroyed vij. nations in the land
of Canaan, and divided their land to them by Lott. And afterward he
gave unto them judges about the space of. iiij.C. and l. years unto
the time of Samuel the prophet. And after that they desired a king,
and God gave unto them Saul the son of Cis, a man of the tribe of
Benjamin, by the space of xl. years. And after he had put him down,
he set up David to be their king, to whom he gave witness, saying: I
have found David the son of Iesse, a man after mine own heart, he
shall fulfil all my will.
    Of this man's seed hath God (according to his promise) brought
forth to the people of Israel a saviour, one Iesus, when Ihon had
first preached before his coming the baptism of repentance to
Israhel. When Ihon had fulfilled his course, he said: Whom ye think
that I am? the same am I not, but behold there cometh one after me,
whose shoes of his feet I am not worthy to lowse.
    Ye men and brethren, children of the generation off Abraham, and
whosoever among you feareth God, to you is this word of health sent.
The inhabiters of Ierusalem, and their rulers because they knew him
not, nor yet the voices of the prophets which are read every saboth
day, have fulfilled them in condemning him. And when they found no
cause of death in him, yet desired they Pilate to kill him. And when
they had fulfilled all that were written of him, they took him down
from the tree and put him in a sepulchre: But God raised him again
from death, and he was seen many days of them, which came with him
from Galile to Ierusalem which are his witnesses unto the people.
    And we declare unto you, how that the promise made unto the
fathers, God hath now fulfilled unto us the children, in that he raised
up Iesus again, even as it is written in the first {other second}
psalm: Thou art my son, this same day begat I thee. As concerning
that he so raised him up from death, now no more to return to
corruption, he said on this wise: The holy promises made to David I
will keep faithfully. Wherefore he saith also in another place: Thou
shalt not suffer thy saincte to see corruption. For David after he
had in his time fulfilled the will of God, he slept, and was laid
with his fathers, and saw corruption. But he whom God raised again,
saw no corruption.
    Be it known unto you therefore ye men and brethren, that thorow
this man is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins, And by him are
all that believe justified from all things from the which ye could
not be justified by the law of Moses. Beware therefore lest that fall
on you, which is spoken of in the prophets: Behold ye despisers, and
wonder, and perish ye: for I do a work in your days, which ye shall
not believe, if a man would declare it you.
    When the jews were gone out of the Synagogue, the gentiles
besought them that they would preach the word of God to them between
the saboth days. When the congregation was broken up, many of the 
jews and virtuous proselites followed Paul and Barnabas, which spake 
to them and exhorted them to continue in the grace of God.
    And the next saboth day came Almost the whole city together to
hear the word of God. When the jews saw the people, they were full of
indignation and spake against those things which were spoken of Paul,
They spake against it, and dispraised it, rayling on it. Then Paul
and Barnabas waxed bold, and said: it was meet that the word of God
should first have been preached to you. But seeing ye put it from
you, and think yourselves unworthy of everlasting life, lo, we turn
to the gentiles. For so hath the lord commanded us: I have made thee
a light to the gentiles, that thou be health unto the end of the
world.
    The gentiles heard, and were glad and glorified the word of the
lord, and believed even as many as were ordained unto eternal life.
And the word of the lord was published thorowout all the region. But
the jews moved the worshipful and honorable women, and the chief men
of the city. And raised persecution against Paul and Barnabas, and
expelled them out of their coasts. But they shook off the dust off
their feet against them, and came unto Iconium. And the disciples
were filled with joy and with the holy ghost.

The .xiiij. Chapter.

    It fortuned in Iconium that they went both together into the
synagogue of the jewes, and so spake, that a great multitude both of
the jewes and also of the greeks believed. But the unbelieving jews,
stirred up and unquieted the minds of the gentiles against the
brethren. Long time abode they there and quit themselves boldly with
the help of the lord, the which gave testimony unto the word of his
grace, And caused signs and wonders to be done by their hands. The
people of city were divided: and part held with the jews, and part
with the Apostles.
    When there was a fault made both of the gentiles and also of the
jewes with their rulers, to put them to shame and to stone them, they
were ware of it, and fled unto Lystra and Derba, cities of Licaonia,
and unto the region that lieth round about, and there preached the
gospell. And there sat a certain man at Lystra weak in his feet,
being halt from his mother's womb, and never walked. The same heard
Paul preach, which beheld him and perceived that he had faith to be
whole, and said with a loud voice: stand upright on thy feet. And he
started up, and walked. When the people saw what Paul had done, they
lift up their voices, saying in the speech of Lycaonia: Goddes are
come down to us in the likeness of men. And they called Barnabas,
Iupiter, and Paul Mercurius, because he was the preacher. Then
Iupiters priest, which dwelt before their city, brought oxen and
garlands unto the church porch, and would have done sacrifice with
the people. When the Apostles, Barnabas and Paul heard that, they
rent their clothes, and ran in among the people, crying and saying:
sirs, why do ye this? We are mortal men like unto you, and preach
unto you, that ye should turn from these vanities unto the living
God, which made heaven and earth and the sea and all that in them is,
the which in times past suffered all nations to walk in their own
ways. Nevertheless he left not himself without witness, in that he
shewed his benefits, in giving us rain from heaven and fruitful
seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness. And with these
sayings, scarce refrained they the people, that they had not done
sacrifice unto them.
    Thither came certain jews from Antioche and Iconium, and obtained
the peoples' consent and stoned Paul, and drew him out of the city,
supposing he had been dead. As the disciples stood round about him,
he arose up and came into the city. And the next day he departed with
Barnabas to Derba. After they had preached to that city, and taught
many, they returned again to Lystra, and to Iconium and Antioche, and
strengthened the disciples souls, exhorting them to continue in the
faith, affirming that we must thorow much adversity enter into the
kingdom of God. And when they had ordained them seniors by election
in every congregation, after they had prayed and fasted, they
commended them to God on whom they believed.
    And they went over all Pisidia and came into Pamphilia, and when
they had preached the word of God in Perga, they descended into
Attalia, and thence departed by ship to Antioche, from whence they
were delivered unto the grace of God, to the work which they had
fulfilled. When they were come and had gathered the congregation
together, they rehearsed all that God had done by them, and how he
had opened the door of faith unto the Gentiles. And there they abode
long time with the disciples.

The .xv. Chapter.

    And there came certain from jewry and taught the brethren: except
ye be circumcised after the manner of Moses ye cannot be saved. Then
arose there dissension and disputing not a little unto Paul and
Barnabas against them. And they determined that Paul and Barnabas and
certain other of them should ascend to Ierusalem unto the Apostles
and seniors about this question. After they were brought on their way
by the congregation, they passed over Phenices and Samaria, declaring
the conversation {conversion} of the Gentiles, and they brought great 
joy unto all the brethren. When they were come to Ierusalem they were 
received of the congregation and of the apostles and seniors. And 
they declared what things God had done by them. Then arose there up 
certain of the sect of the pharisees, which did believe saying that it 
was needful to circumcise them and to enjoin them to keep the law of Moses.
 The Apostles and seniors came together to reason of this matter.
    When there was much disputing, Peter rose up and said unto them:
Ye men and brethren, ye know how that a good while ago, God chose
among us that the Gentiles by my mouth should hear the word of the
gospell and believe. And God which knoweth the heart, bare them
witness, and gave unto them the holy ghost, even as he did unto us,
And he put no difference between them and us, and with faith purified
their hearts. Now therefore why tempt ye God, that ye would put a
yoke on the disciples necks which neither our fathers nor we were
able to bear: But we believe that thorow the grace of the lord Iesu
Christ we shall be saved as they do. Then all the multitude was
peaced and gave audience to Barnabas and Paul which told what signs
and wonders God had shewed among the gentiles by them. As soon as
they held their peace, Iames answered saying: Men and brethren
hearken unto me, Simeon told how God at the beginning did visit the
gentiles, and received of them people unto his name. And to this
agreeth the words of the prophets, as it is written: After this I
will return, and will build again the tabernacle of David which is
fallen down, and that which is fallen in decay of it will I build
again and I will set it up, that the residue of men might seek after
the lord, and also the Gentiles upon whom my name is called saith the
lord, which doth all these things: known unto God are all his works
from the beginning of the world. Wherefore my sentence is, that we
trouble not them which of the gentiles are turned to God: but that we
write unto them, that they abstain themselves from filthiness of
images, from fornication, from strangled, and from blood. For Moses
of old time in every city hath them that preach him, and he is read
in the synagogues every saboth day.
    Then pleased it the apostles and seniors with the whole
congregation to send chosen men of their own company to Antioche with
Paul and Barnabas. They sent Iudas called also Barsabas and Silas
which were chief men among the brethren and gave them letters in
their hands after this manner.
    The Apostles, seniors and brethren send greetings unto the
brethren which are of the gentiles in Antioch, Syria and Cilicia.
Forasmuch as we have heard that certain which departed from us, have
troubled you with words, and cumbered your minds saying: Ye must be
circumcised and keep the law, to whom we gave no such commandment. It
seemed therefore to us a good thing, when we were come together with
one accord, to send chosen men unto you, with our beloved Barnabas
and Paul, men that have jeoparded their lives, for the name of our
lord Iesus Christ. We have sent therefore Iudas and Sylas, which
shall also tell you the same things by mouth. For it seemed good to
the holy ghost and to us, to put no grievous thing to you more than
these necessary things, that is to say, that ye abstain from things
offered unto images, from blood, from strangled and fornication. From
which if ye keep yourselves, ye shall do well. So fare ye well.
    When they were departed, they came to Antioche and gathered the
multitude together and delivered the pistel. When they had read it,
they rejoiced of that consolation. Iudas and Silas being prophets,
exhorted the people with much preaching, and strengthened them. After
they had tarried there a certain space, they were let go in peace of
the brethren unto the Apostles. Notwithstanding it pleased Sylas to
abide there still. Paul and Barnabas continued in Antioche teaching,
and preaching the word of the lord with other many.
    But after a certain space Paul said unto Barnabas: Let us go
again and visit our brethren in every city, where we have shewed the
word of the lord, and see how they do. Barnabas gave counsel, to take
with them Ihon called also Marke: But Paul thought it not meet to
take him unto their company which departed from them at Pamphilia,
and went not with them to the worke. So sharp was the dissension
between them, that they departed asunder one from the other. And
Barnabas took Mark and sailed unto Cypers. Paul chose Sylas and
departed delivered of the brethren unto the grace of God. And he went
thorow all Cyria and Cilicia, stablishing the congregations.

The .xvj. Chapter.

    Then came he to Derba and Listra. And behold a certain disciple
was there named Timotheus, a womans son which was a jewess and
believed, but his father was a greek. Of whom reported well, the
brethren of Listra and of Iconium. Paul would that he should go forth
with him, and took and circumcised him because of the jewes which
were in those quarters, for they knew all that his father was a
greek. As they went thorow the cities, they delivered them the
decrees for to keep, ordained of the apostles and seniors which were
at Ierusalem. So were the congregations stablished in the faith, and
increased in number daily.
    When they had gone thorowout Phrigia and the region of Galatia,
and were forbidden of the holy ghost to preach the word in Asia, they
came to Misia, and sought to go into Bethinia, and the spirit
suffered them not. When they went over Misia, and came down to Troada
and a vision appeared to Paul in the night. There stood a man of
Macedonia and prayed him saying: Come into Macedonia and help us.
After he had seen the vision immediately we prepared to go into
Macedonia certified that the lord had called us for to preach the
gospell unto them. Then loosed we forth from Troada, and with a
straight course came we to Samothracia, and the next day to Neapolim,
and from thence to Philippos, which is the chiefest city in the parts
of Macedonia and a free city.
    We were in that city abiding a certain days. And on the saboth
days we went out of the city besides a river where men were wont to
pray, and we sat down and spake unto the women which thither
resorted. And a certain woman named Lidia, a seller of purple, of the
city of Thyatira which worshipped God, gave us audience, whose heart
God opened that she attended unto those things which Paul spake. When
she was baptised, and her household, she besought us saying: If ye
think that I believe on the lord come into my house, and abide there.
And she constrained us.
    It fortuned as we went to prayer, a certain damsel possessed with
a spirit that prophesied met us, which brought her master and mastress
much vantage with prophesying. The same followed Paul and us saying:
These men are the servants of the most high God, which shew unto us
the way of health. And this did she many days. But Paul not content
turned about and said to the spirit: I command thee in the name of
Iesu Christ that thou come out of her. And he came out the same hour.
    When her master and masters saw that the hope of their gains was
gone, they caught Paul and Silas, and brought them into the market
place unto the rulers, and delivered them to the officers saying:
These men trouble our city, which are jews and shew new decrees,
which are not lawful for us to receive, neither to observe seeing we
are romans. And the people ran on them, and the officers rent their
clothes, and commanded them to be beaten with rods, and when they had
beaten them sore, they cast them into prison commanding the jailer to
keep them surely. Which when he had received such commandment thrust
them into the inner prison, and made their feet fast in the stocks.
    At midnight Paul and Silas prayed, and lauded God. And the
prisoners heard them. Suddenly there was a great earthquake, so that
the foundation of the prison was shaken, and by and by all the doors
opened, and every man's bonds were lowsed. When the keeper of the
prison waked out of his sleep, and saw the prison doors open, he drew
out his sword and would have killed himself, supposing the prisoners
had been fled. Paul cried with a loud voice saying: Do thyself no
harm, for we are all here.
    He called for a light and sprang in, and came trembling, and fell
down before Paul and Silas, and brought them out and said, Sirs what
must I do to be saved? And they said: believe on the lord Iesus, and
thou shalt be saved and thy household. And they preached unto him the
word of the lord, and to all that were in his house. And he took them
the same hour of the night and washed their wounds, and was baptised
with all that belonged unto him straight way. When he had brought
them into his house, he set meat before them, and joyed that he with
all his household believed on God.
    And when it was day the officers sent the ministers saying: Let
those men go. The keeper of the prison told this saying to Paul: the
officers have sent word to loose you. Now therefore get you hence and
go in peace. Then said Paul unto them: They have beaten us openly
uncondemned, for all that we are Romans, and have cast us into
prison: and now would they send us away privily? Nay not so, but let
them come themselves and fetch us out. The ministers told these words
unto the officers and they feared when they heard that they were
Romans, and came and besought them, and brought them out, and desired
them to depart out of the city. They went out of the prison and
entered into the house of Lidia, and when they had seen the brethren,
they comforted them and departed.

The .xvij. Chapter.

    As they made their journey thorow Amphipolis, and Apolonia, they
came to Thessalonica where was a synagogue of the jewes. Paul as his
manner was went in unto them, and three saboth days declared out of
the scripture unto them, opening and alleging that Christ must needs
have suffered and risen again from death. And that this Iesus was
Christ, whom (said he) I preach to you. And some of them believed and
came and companied with Paul and Silas. Also of the honorable greeks
a great multitude, and of the chief women, not a few.
    The jewes which believed not having indignation took unto them
evil men which were vagabonds, and gathered a company, and set all
the city on a roar, and made assault unto the house of Iason, and
sought to bring them out to the people. and when they found them not,
they drew Iason and certain brethren unto the heads of the city
crying: These that trouble the world are come hither also, which
Iason hath received privily. And these all do contrary to the
ordinations of Cesar, affirming another king, one Iesus. And they
troubled the people and the officers of the city when they heard
these things. And when they were sufficiently answered of Iason, and
of the other they let them go.
    The brethren immediately sent away Paul, and Silas by night unto
Berrea. When they were come thither they entered into the Synagogue
of the jews. These were the noblest among them of Thessalonia, which
received the word with all diligence of mind, and searched the
scriptures daily whether those things were even so. And many of them
believed, and of worshipful women which were greeks, and of men not a
few. When the jews of Thessalonia had knowledge that the word of God
was preached of Paul at Berrea, they came thither and moved the
people, and then by and by the brethren sent away Paul to go unto the
sea: but Silas and Timotheus abode there still. They that guided Paul
brought him unto Athens, and received a commandment unto Silas and
Timotheus for to come to him at once. And came their way.
    While Paul waited for them at Athens, his spirit was moved in him
to see the city given to worshipping of images. Then he disputed in
the synagogue with the jews, and with the devout persons, And in the
market daily with them that came unto him. Certain Philosophers of
the Epicures, and of the Stoyckes disputed with him. And some there
were which said: what will this babbler say. Other said: he seemeth
to be a tidings bringer of new devils, because he preached unto them
Iesus, and the resurrection, and they took him, and brought him into
Marce street saying: may we not know what is this new doctrine
whereof thou speakest. For thou bringest strange tidings to our ears.
We would know therefore what these things mean. For all the Athenians
and strangers which were there gave themselves to nothing else, but
either to tell or to hear new tidings.
    Paul stood in the midst of Marce street and said, ye men of
Athens, I perceive that in all things ye are somewhat superstitious.
For as I passed by and beheld the manner how ye worship your gods, I
found an altar wherein was written: unto the unknown God. Whom ye
then ignorantly worship, him shew I unto you: God that made the
world, and all that are in it, seeing that he is lord of heaven and
earth, he dwelleth not in temples made with hands neither is
worshipped with men's hands, as though he needed of any thing.
Forasmuch as he giveth to all men life and breath every where, and
hath made of one blood all nations of men, for to dwell on all the
face of the earth. And hath assigned times appointed before, And the
ends of their inhabitation, that they should seek God, if they might
feel and find him, though he be not far from every one of us. For in
him we live, move, and have our being, as certain of your own poets
said. For we are also his generation. Forasmuch then as we are the
generation of God, we ought not to think that the godhead is like
unto gold, silver, or stone, graven by craft and imagination of man.
    And the time of this ignorance God regarded not: but now he
biddeth all men everywhere repent, because he hath appointed a day,
in the which he will judge the world according to righteousness, by
that man, whom he hath appointed, and hath given faith to all men,
after that he had raised him from death. When they heard of the
resurrection from death, some mocked, and other said: we will hear
thee again of this matter. So Paul departed from among them. Certain
men clave unto Paul and believed, among the which was Dionysius a
senator, and a woman named Damaris, and other with them.

The .xviij. Chapter.

    After that, Paul departed from Athens, and came to Corinthum, and
found a certain jew named Aquila, born in Ponthus, lately come from
Italy with his wife Priscilla (because that the Emperor Claudius had
commanded all jewes to depart from Rome) and he drew unto them. And
because he was of the same craft he abode with them and wrought
(their craft was to make tents.) and he preached in the synagogue
every saboth day, And exhorted the jewes and the gentiles.
    When Silas and Timotheus were come from Macedonia Paul was pained
by the spirit, as he testified to the jewes that Iesus was Christ.
When they said contrary and blasphemed, he shook his raiment and said
unto them: your blood upon your own heads. For henceforth I go unto
the gentiles, and he departed thence, and entered into a certain
man's house named Iustus which worshipped God, whose house joined
hard to the synagogue. One Crispus a ruler of the synagogue believed
on the lord with all his household. And many of the Corinthians gave
audience and believed, and were baptised.
    Then spake the lord to Paul in the night by a vision: be not
afraid, but speak, and hold not thy peace: for I am with thee, and no
man shall invade thee that shall hurt thee. For I have much people in
this city. And he rested there a year and six months, and taught them
the word of God.
    When Gallio was ruler of the country of Acaia. The jewes made
insurrection with one accord against Paul, and brought him to the
judge's seat, saying: This man teacheth to worship God contrary to
the law. And as Paul was about to open his mouth Gallio said unto the
jews: if it were a matter of wrong, or an evil deed (o ye jews)
reason would that I should hear you: but if it be a question of
words, or of names, or of your law, look ye to it yourselves. For I
will be no judge in such matters, and he drave them from his seat.
Then took all the greeks Sosthenes a ruler of the Synagogue and smote
him before the judge's seat. And Gallio cared for none of those
things.
    Paul after this, tarried there yet a good while, and then took
his leave of the brethren, and sailed thence into Ciria, Priscilla
and Aquila accompanying him after that he shore his head in Cenchrea.
For he had a vow. And he came to Ephesus and left them there: but he
himself entered into the Synagogue, and reasoned with the jewes. When
they desired him to tarry longer time with them, he consented not,
but bade them fare well saying: I must needs at this feast that
cometh be in Ierusalem: but I will return again unto you if God will.
And departed from Ephesus and came unto Cesarea: and ascended and
saluted the congregation, and departed unto Antioche, and when he had
tarried there a while, he departed, and went over all the country of
Galatacia and Phrigia by order, strengthening all the disciples.
    And a certain jewe named Apollos, born at Alexandria came to
Ephesus. An eloquent man, and mighty in the scriptures. The same was
informed in the way of the lord, and he spake fervently in the
spirit, and taught diligently the things of the lord, and knew but
the baptism of Ihon only. And the same began to speak boldly in the
Synagogue. When Priscilla and Aquila had heard him: they took him
unto them, And expounded unto him the way of God more perfectly.
    When he was disposed to go into Acaia, the brethren exhorted him
thereto, and wrote unto the disciples that they should receive him.
After he was come thither he helped them much, which had believed
thorow grace. And mightily he overcame the jews openly shewing by the
scriptures that Iesus was Christ.

The .xix. Chapter.

    It fortuned, while Apollos was at Corinthum, that Paul passed
over the upper coasts, and came to Ephesus, and found certain
disciples and said unto them: have ye received the holy ghost after
ye believed? And they said unto him: No, neither have we heard if
there be any holy ghost or no. And he said unto them: wherewith were
ye then baptised? And they said: with Ihon's baptism. Then said Paul:
Ihon verily baptised with the baptism of repentance, saying unto the
people that they should believe on him, which should come after him.
That is on Christ Iesus. When they heard that, they were baptised in
the name of the lord Iesu, and when Paul laid his hands upon them,
the holy ghost came on them. And they spake with tongues and
prophesied, All the men were about xij.
    And he went into the synagogue, and behaved himself boldly for
the space of three months, disputing, and giving them exhortations of
the kingdom of God. When diverse waxed hard hearted, and believed
not, but spake evil of the way of the lord before the multitude: he
departed from them, And severed the disciples away, And taught daily
in the school of one called Tirannus. And this continued by the space
of two years: So that all they which dwelt in Asia heard the word of
the lord Iesu, both jewes and greeks. And God wrought not small
miracles by the hands of Paul. So that from his body were brought
unto the sick, napkins or partlets, and the diseases and evil spirits
departed from them.
    Certain of the vagabond jewes exorcists, took upon them to call
over them which had evil spirits the name of the lord Iesus saying:
We adjure you by Iesu whom Paul preacheth.
    There were seven sons of one Sceva a ruler of the synagogue which
did so: and the evil spirit answered and said: Iesus I know, and Paul
I know: but who are ye? And the man in whom the wicked devil was, ran
on them, and overcame them, and prevailed against them, so that they
fled out of the house naked and wounded. This was known to all the
jewes and greeks also, which dwelt at Ephesus, and fear came on them
all. And they magnified the name of the lord Iesus.
    And many that believed came, and confessed and shewed their
works. Many of them which used curious crafts, brought their books
and burned them before all men, and they counted the price of them,
and found it fifty thousand silverlings. So mightily grew the word of
God, and prevailed. After these things were ended Paul purposed in
the spirit, to pass over Macedonia and Acaia, and to go to Ierusalem
saying: After I have been there I must also see Rome. So sent he into
Macedonia two of them that ministered unto him: Timotheus and
Erastus: but he himself remained in Asia. For a season.
    The same time there arose no little a do about that way. For a
certain man named Demetrius, a goldsmith, which made silver shrines
for Diana, was not a little beneficial unto the craftsmen: which he
called together with the workmen of like occupation, and said: Sirs
ye know that by this craft we have vantage. Moreover ye see and hear
that not alone at Ephesus: but almost thorow out all Asia, this Paul
entiseth, and turned away much people saying: that they be no gods
which are made with hands: so that not only this our craft cometh
into peril to be set at nought: but that also the temple of great
Diana should be despised. And her majesty should be destroyed, which
all Asia, and the world worshippeth.
    When they heard these sayings, they were full of wrath, and cried
out saying: Great is Diana of the Ephesians. And all the city was on
a roar, and they rushed into the common hall with one assent, and
caught Gaius, and Aristarcus, men of Macedonia, Paul's companions.
When Paul would have entered in unto the people, the disciples
suffered him not. Certain also of the chief of Asia which were his
friends, sent unto him, desiring him that he would not press into the
common hall. Some cried one thing, and some another and the
congregation was all out of quiet, and the more part knew not
wherefore they were come together.
    Some of the company drew forth Alexander (the jewes thrusting him
forwards) Alexander beckoned with the hand, and would have given the
people an answer. When they knew that he was a jewe, there arose a
shout almost for the space of two hours of all men crying, great is
Diana of the Ephesians.
    When the town clerk had ceased the people he said: ye men of
Ephesus: what man is it that knoweth not how that the city of the
Ephesians is a worshipper of the great goddess Diana, and of the
image which came from heaven. Seeing then that no man saith here
against, ye ought to be content, and to do nothing rashly, For ye
have brought hither these men, which are neither robbers of churches,
nor yet despisers of your goddess. Wherefore if Demetrius and the
craftsmen which are with him, have any saying to any man, the law is
open, and there are rulers, let them accuse one another. If ye go
about any other thing, it may be determined in a lawful congregation.
For we are in jeopardy to be accused of this day's business. For as
much as there is no cause whereby we may give a reckoning of this
concourse of people. And when he had thus spoken, he let the
congregation depart.

The .xx. Chapter.

    After the rage was ceased, Paul called the disciples unto him,
and took his leave of them, and departed for to go into Macedonia.
And when he had gone over those parts, and given them large
exhortations, he came into Greece. And there abode .iij. months. When
the jewes laid wait for him as he was about to sail into Syria, He
purposed to return through Macedonia. There accompanied him into Asia
Sopater of Berrea: And of Thessalonia Aristarcus and Secundus, and
Gaius of Derba, and Timotheus: Out of Asia Tychicus, and Trophimos.
These went before, and tarried us at Troas. We sailed away from
Philippos after the ester holidays, and came unto them to Troas in
five days, where we abode seven days.
    On a saboth day the disciples came together for to break bread,
and Paul preached unto them (ready to depart on the morrow) and
continued the preaching unto midnight. There were many lights in the
chamber where we were gathered together, and there sat in a window a
certain young man named Eutichus, fallen into a deep sleep. And as
Paul declared he was the more overcome with sleep, and fell down from
the third loft, and was taken up dead. Paul went down and fell on
him, and embraced him, and said: Make nothing ado. For his life is in
him. When he was come up again, he brake bread, and tasted, and
communed a long while even till the morning, and so departed. They
brought the young man alive, and were not a little comforted.
    Then took we shipping, and departed unto Asson, there to receive
Paul. For so had he appointed, and would himself go by land. When he
was come to us unto Asson, we took him in, and came to Mittilenes.
And sailed thence, and came the next day over against Chios. And the
day following we arrived at Samos, and tarried at Trogilon. The next
day we came to Mileton. For Paul had determined to leave Ephesus as
they sailed, because he would not spend the time in Asia. For he
hasted to be (if he were possible) at Ierusalem at the day of
Pentecost.
    From Mileton he sent to Ephesus, and called the seniors of the
congregation. When they were come to him, he said to them: Ye know
from the first day that I came unto Asia, after what manner I have
been with you at all seasons, serving God with all humbleness of
mind, and with many tears, and temptations, which happened unto me by
the layings wait of the jewes, and how I kept back nothing that might
be for your profit: but that I have shewed you, and taught you openly
and at home in your houses, witnessing both to the jewes, and also to
the greeks, the repentance toward God, and faith toward our lord
Iesu.
    And now behold I go bound in the spirit unto Ierusalem, and know
not what shall come of me there, but that the holy ghost witnesseth
in every city saying: that bonds and trouble abide me: but none of
those things move me. Neither is my life dear unto myself, that I
might fulfil my course with joy, and the ministration which I have
received of the lord Iesu to testify the gospell of the grace of God.
    And now behold, I am sure that henceforth ye all (thorow whom I
have gone preaching the kingdom of God) shall see my face no more.
Wherefore I take you to record this same day, that I am pure from the
blood of all men. For I have kept nothing back: but have shewed you
all the counsel of God. Take heed therefore unto yourselves, and to
all the flock, whereof the holy ghost hath made you overseers, to
rule the congregation of God, which he hath purchased with his blood.
For I am sure of this, that after my departing shall grievous wolves
enter in among you, which will not spare the flock. And of your
ownselves shall men arise speaking perverse things, to draw disciples
after them. Therefore awake and remember, that by the space of iij.
years I ceased not to warn every one of you, both night and day with
tears.
    And now dear brethren I commend you to God and to the word of his
grace, which is able to build further, and to give you an inheritance
among all them which are sanctified. I have desired no man's silver,
gold, or vesture. Ye know well that these hands have ministered unto
my necessities, and to them that were with me. I have shewed you all
things, how that so laboring ye ought to receive the weak, and to
remember the words of the lord Iesu, how that he said: It is more
blessed to give, than to receive.
    When he had thus spoken, he kneeled down, and prayed with them
all. And they wept all abundantly, and fell on Paul's neck, and
kissed him sorrowing, most of all, for the words, which he spake,
that they should see his face no more. And they accompanied him unto
the ship.

The .xxj. Chapter.

    And it chanced that as soon as we had launched forth, and were
departed from them, we came with a straight course unto Choon, and
the day following unto the Rhodes, and from thence unto Patara. And
we found a ship ready to sail unto Phenices, and went aboard and set
forth. Then appeared unto us Cyprus, and we left it on the left hand,
and sailed unto Syria, and came unto Tyre. For there the ship unladed
her burden. And when we had found brethren, we tarried there. vij.
days. And they told Paul thorow the spirit, that he should not go up
to Ierusalem. And when the days were ended we departed, and went our
ways, and they all brought us on our way, with their wives and
children, till we were come out of the city. And we kneeled down in
the shore and prayed. And when we had taken our leave one of another,
we took ship, and they returned home again.
    When we had full ended the course, from Tyre, we arrived at
Ptholomaida, and saluted the brethren, and abode with them one day.
The next day, we that were of Paulus company, came unto Cesarea. And
we entered into the house of Philip the evangelist, which was one of
the seven, and abode with him. The same man had four daughters
virgins, which did prophesy. And as we tarried there a good many
days, there came a certain prophet from jewry, named Agabus. When he
was come unto us, he took Paul's girdle, and bound his hands and feet
and said: Thus saith the holy ghost: So shall the jewes at Ierusalem,
bind the man that owneth this girdle, and shall deliver him into the
hands of the gentiles.
    When we heard this, both we and other of the same place, besought
him, that he would not go up to Ierusalem. Then Paul answered, and
said: What do ye weeping, and breaking mine heart? I am ready not to
be bound only, but also to die at Ierusalem for the name of the lord
Iesu. When we could not turn his mind, we ceased saying: The will of
the lord be fulfilled. After those days we made ourselves ready, and
went up to Ierusalem. There went with us also certain of his
disciples of Cesarea, and brought with them one Mnason of Cyprus, an
olde disciple, with whom we should lodge. And when we were come to
Ierusalem, the brethren received us gladly. On the morrow Paul went
in with us unto Iames. And all the seniors came together. And when he
had saluted them, he told by order, what things God had wrought among
the gentiles by his ministration. When they heard it, they glorified
the lord, and said unto him: Thou seest brother, how many thousand
jewes there are which believe, and they are all zealous over the law.
And they are informed of thee that thou teachest all the jewes which
are among the gentiles to forsake Moses, and sayest that they ought
not to circumcise their children, neither to live after the customs.
What is it therefore? The multitude must needs come together. For
they shall hear that thou art come. Do therefore this that we say to
thee.
    We have iiij. men, which have a vow on them. Them take and purify
thyself with them, and do cost on them, that they may shave their
heads and all shall know that those things which they have heard of
thee are nothing: but that thou thyself also walkest and keepest the
law. As touching the gentiles which believe we have written and
concluded, that they observe no such things: but that they keep
themselves from things offered to idols, from blood, from strangled,
and from fornication. Then the next day Paul took the men and
purified himself with them, and entered into the temple, declaring
the fulfilling of the days of purification, until that an oblation
should be offered for every one of them.
    And as the seven days should have been ended, the jewes which
were of Asia when they saw him in the temple, they moved all the
people and laid hands on him crying: Men of Israhell help. This is
the man that teacheth all men everywhere against the people, and the
law, and this place. Moreover also he hath brought greeks into the
temple, and hath polluted this holy place. For they saw one Trophimus
an Ephesian with him in the city. Him they supposed Paul had brought
into the temple. And all the city was moved, and the people swarmed
together. And they took Paul, and drew him out of the temple, and
forthwith the doors were shut to.
    As they went about to kill him, tidings came unto the high
captain of the soldiers, that all Ierusalem was moved. Which
immediately took soldiers and undercaptains, and ran down unto them.
When they saw the uppercaptain and the soldiers, They left smiting of
Paul. Then the captain came near and took him, and commanded him to
be bound with two chains, and demanded what he was, and what he had
done. One cried this, another that, among the people. And when he
could not know the certainty, for the rage: He commanded him to be
carried into the castle. When he came unto a grece, it fortuned that
he was borne of the soldiers for the violence of the people. The
multitude of the people followed after crying: away with him.
    And as Paul should have been carried into the castle, He said
unto the high captain: May I speak unto thee? Which said: Canst thou
speak greek? Art not thou that Egyptian which before these days, made
an uproar, and led out into the wilderness iiij. thousand men that
were murderers? Paul said: I am a man which am a jewe of Tharsus a
city in Cicill, a citizen of no vile city, I beseech thee suffer me
to licence, Paul stood on the steps, and beckoned with the hand unto
the people, and there was made a great silence. And he spake unto
them in Hebrew saying:

The .xxij. Chapter.

    Ye men, brethren, and fathers, hear mine answer which I make unto
you. When they heard that he spake Hebrew unto them, they kept the
more silence. And he said: I am verily a man which am a jewe, born in
Tharsus, a city in Cicill, nevertheless yet brought up in this city,
at the feet of Gamaliel, and informed diligently in the law of the
fathers, and was fervent minded to Godward, as ye all are this same
day, and I persecuted this way unto the death binding, and delivering
into prison both men and women, as the chief priest doth bear me
witness, and all the seniors: of whom also I received letters unto
the brethren, and went to Damascus to bring them which were there
bound unto Ierusalem for to be punished.
    And it fortuned that as I made my journey, and was come nigh unto
Damascus, about noon, suddenly there shone from heaven a great light
round about me, and I fell unto the earth, and heard a voice saying
unto me. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? And I answered: what
art thou lord? and he said unto me? I am Iesus of Nazareth, whom thou
persecutest. And they that were with me saw verily a light and were
afraid: but they heard not the voice of him that spake with me. And I
said: what shall I do lord? And the lord said unto me: Arise and go
into Damascus and there it shall be told thee of all things which are
appointed for thee to do. And when I saw nothing for the brightness
of that light, I was led by the hand of them that were with me, and
came into Damascus. One Ananias a perfect man, and as pertaining to
the law having good report of all the jewes which there dwelt, came
unto me, and stood and said unto me: Brother Saul receive thy sight.
And that same hour I received my sight and saw him. And he said unto
me, the God of our fathers hath ordained thee before, that thou
shouldest know his will, and shouldest see that which is rightful,
and shouldest hear the voice of his mouth: for thou shalt be his
witness unto all men of those things which thou hast seen and heard.
And now: why tarriest thou? Arise and be baptised, and wash away thy
sins, in calling on the name of the lord.
    And it fortuned, when I was come again to Ierusalem and prayed in
the temple, that I was in a trance, And saw him saying unto me: Make
haste, and get thee quickly out of Ierusalem: for they will not
receive the witness that thou bearest of me. And I said: lord they
know that I prisoned, and beat in every synagogue them that believed
on thee. And when the blood of thy witness Stephen was shed, I also
stood by, and consented unto his death and kept the raiment of them
that slew him. And he said unto me: depart for I will send thee afar
hence unto the gentiles.
    They gave him audience unto this word, and lifted up their voices
and said: away with such a fellow from the earth: it is pity that he
should live. And they cried and cast off their clothes, and threw
dust into the air. The captain bade him to be brought into the
castle, and commanded him to be scourged, and to be examined, that he
might know wherefore they cried on him. And as they bound him with
thongs, Paul said unto an undercaptain: Is it lawful for you to
scourge a Roman uncondemned? When the centurion heard that, he went
to the uppercaptain, and told him saying: What intendest thou to do?
This man is a Roman.
    The uppercaptain came to him, and said: Tell me, art thou a
Roman? He said: Yee. {yea} And the captain answered: With much money
obtained I this freedom. And Paul said: I was freeborn. Then
straightway departed from him they which should have examined him.
And the captain also was afraid, after he knew that he was a Roman:
because he had bound him.
    On the morrow he lowsed him from his bonds desiring to know the
certainty for what cause he was accused of the jewes, and commanded
the high priests and all the council to come together, and brought
Paul, and set him before them.

The .xxiij. Chapter.

    Paul beheld the council and said: Men and brethren, I have lived
in all good conscience before God until this day. The high priest
Ananias commanded them that stood by, to smite him on the mought. Then
said Paul to him: God shall smite thee thou painted wall. Sittest
thou and judgest me after the law: and commandest me to be smitten
contrary to the law? And they that stood by said: Revilest thou god's
high priest? Then said Paul: I wist not brethren, that he was the
high priest. For it is written thou shalt not speak evil to the ruler
of thy people.
    When Paul perceived that the one part were Saduces, and the other
Pharises: He cried out in the council. Men and brethren I am a
pharisaye, the son of a pharisaye. Of hope, and of resurrection from
death I am judged. And when he had so said, there arose a debate
between the pharises and the saduces, and the multitude was divided.
For the Saduces say that there is no resurrection, neither angel, nor
spirit. But the Pharises grant both. And there arose a great cry, and
the scribes which were of the Pharises' part strove saying: We find
none evil in this man. Though a spirit, or an angel hath appeared to
him, let us not strive against God.
    And when there arose great debate, the captain fearing lest Paul
should have been plucked asunder of them, commanded the soldiers to
go down, and to take him from among them, and to bring him into the
castle. The night following God stood by him and said: Be of good
cheer Paul: For as thou hast testified of me in Ierusalem, so must
thou bear witness at Rome.
    When day was come, certain of the jewes gathered themselves
together, and made a vow saying: that they would neither eat nor
drink till they had killed Paul. They were about. xl. which had made
this conspiration. And they came to the chief priest and seniors, and
said: we have bound ourselves with a vow, that we will eat nothing
until we have slain Paul. Now therefore give ye knowledge to the
upper captain, and to the council that he bring him forth unto us
tomorrow, as though we would know some thing more perfectly of him.
But we (or ever he come near) are ready in the mean season to kill
him.
    When Paul's sister's son heard of their laying await, he went and
entered into the castle, and told Paul. And Paul called one of the
under captains unto him, and said: Bring this young man unto the
captain: for he hath a certain thing to shew him. And he took him,
and led him to the high captain, and said: Paul the prisoner called
me unto him and prayed me to bring this young man unto thee, which
hath a certain matter to shew thee.
    The high captain took him by the hand, and went apart with him
out of the way: and asked him: what hast thou to say unto me? And he
said: the jewes are determined to desire thee that thou wouldest
bring forth Paul tomorrow into the council, as though they would
enquire somewhat of him more perfectly. But follow not their minds:
for there lay await for him of them, more than xl. men, which have
bound themselves with a vow, that they will neither eat nor drink
till they have killed him. And now are they ready, and look for thy
promise.
    The upper captain let the young man depart and charged him: See
thou tell no man that thou hast told me this. And he called unto him
two under captains, saying: make ready two hundred soldiers to go to
Cesarea, and horsemen threescore and ten. And spearmen two hundred,
at the third hour of the night. And deliver them beasts that they may
put Paul on, and bring him safe unto Felix the high debite, and wrote
a letter in this manner.
    Claudius Lisias unto the most mighty ruler Felix sendeth
greetings. This man was taken of the jewes, and should have been
killed of them: Then came I with soldiers, and rescued him, and
perceived that he was a Roman. And when I would have known the cause,
wherefore they accused him, I brought him forth into their council.
There perceived I that he was accused of questions of their law: but
was not guilty of any thing worthy of death, or of bonds. Afterward
when it was shewed me how that the jews laid wait for the man, I sent
him straight way to thee, and gave commandment to his accusers, if
they had ought against him, to tell it unto thee: fare well.
    The soldiers as it was commanded them, took Paul and brought him
by night to Antipatras. On the morrow they left horsemen to go with
him, and returned unto the castle. When they came to Cesarea, they
delivered the pistel to the debite, and presented Paul before him.
When the debite had read the letter, he asked of what country he was.
And when he understood that he was of Cicill, I will hear thee (said
he) when thine accusers are come also: And commanded him to be kept
in Herod's palace.

The .xxiiij. Chapter.

    After v. days, Ananias the high priest descended, with seniors,
and with a certain orator named Tartullus, and enformed the ruler
against Paul. When Paul was called forth, Tartullus began to accuse
him saying: Seeing that we live in great quietness by the means of
thee and that many good things are done unto this nation thorow thy
providence: that allow we ever and in all places, most mighty Felix
with all thanks. Notwithstanding, lest I be not tedious unto thee, I
pray thee that thou wouldest hear us of thy courtesy a few words.
    We have found this man a pestilent fellow, and a mover of debate
among all the jewes thorow out the world, And a maintainer of the
sect of the Nazarens: Which also hath enforced to pollute the temple,
whom we took and would have judged according to our law: but the high
captain Lisias came upon us, and with great violence took him out of
our hands, commanding his accusers to come unto thee, of whom thou
mayest (if thou wilt enquire) know the certain of all these things
where of we accuse him. The jewes likewise affirmed, saying that it
was even so.
    Then Paul (after that the ruler himself had beckoned unto him
that he should speak) answered: I shall with a more quiet mind answer
for myself, forasmuch as I understand that thou hast been of many
years a judge unto this people, because that thou mayest know that
there are yet but xij. days since I went up to Ierusalem for to pray.
And that they neither found me in the temple disputing with any man,
either raising up the people, neither in the synagogues nor in the
city. Neither can they prove the things whereof they accuse me.
    But this I confess unto thee, that after that way (which they
call heresy) so worship I the God of my fathers, believing all things
which are written in the law and the prophets, and have hope towards
God, that the same resurrection from death (which they themselves
look for also) shall be both of just and unjust. And therefore study
I to have a clear conscience toward God, and toward man also.
    Many years ago I came and brought alms to my people and
offerings, in the which they found me purified in the temple, neither
with multitude, nor yet with unquietness. There were certain jewes
out of Asia which ought to be here present before thee, and accuse
me, if they had ought against me: or else let these same here say, if
they have found any evildoing in me, while I stand here in the
council, except it be for this one voice, that I cried standing among
them of the resurrection from death am I judged of you this day.
    When Felix heard that he deferred them, for he knew very well of
that way and said: when Lisias the captain is come, I will know the
utmost of your matters. And he commanded an undercaptain to keep
Paul, and that he should have rest, and that he should forbid none of
his acquaintance to minister unto him, or to come unto him.
    After a certain days came Felix, and his wife Drusilla which was
a jewess, and called forth Paul, and heard him of the faith which is
toward Christ. And as he preached of Justice, temperance, and
Judgement to come, Felix trembled, and answered: thou hast done
enough at this time, depart, when I have a convenient time, I will
send for thee. He hoped also that money should have been given him of
Paul that he might loose him, wherefore he called him the oftener,
and communed with him. After two year came Festus Porcius into Felix
room, and Felix willing to shew the jewes a pleasure left Paul in
prison bound.

The .xxv. Chapter.

    When Festus was come into the province, after three days, he
ascended from Cesarea unto Ierusalem. Then informed him the high
priests, and the chief of the jews against Paul. And they entreated
him, and desired favour against him that he would send for him to
Ierusalem, and laid wait for him in the way to kill him. Festus
answered that Paul should be kept at Cesarea: but that he himself
would shortly depart thither. Let them therefore (said he) which
among you are able to do it come down with us and accuse him, if
there be any fault in the man.
    When he had tarried there more than ten days he departed unto
Cesarea, and the next day sat down in the judgement seat, and
commanded Paul to be brought. When he was come the jewes which were
come from Ierusalem, came about him and laid many and grievous
complaints against Paul, which they could not prove as long as he
answered for himself, that he had neither against the law of the
jewes, neither against the temple, nor yet against Cesar offended any
thing at all.
    Festus willing to do the jewes a pleasure, answered Paul, and
said: Wilt thou go to Ierusalem, and there be judged of these things
before me? Then said Paul: I stand at Cesar's judgement seat, where I
ought to be judged. To the jewes have I no harm done, as thou verily
well knowest. If I have hurt them, or committed any thing worthy of
death, I refuse not to die. If none of these things are, where of
they accuse me, no man ought to deliver me to them. I appeal unto
Cesar. Then spake Festus with deliberation, and answered: Thou hast
appealed unto Cesar: unto Cesar shalt thou go.
    After a certain days king Agrippa and Bernice came unto Cesarea
to salute Festus. And when they had been there a good season, Festus
rehearsed Paul's cause unto the king saying: There is a certain man
left in prison of Felix about whom when I came to Ierusalem the high
priests, and seniors of the jewes informed me, and desired to have
judgement against him. To whom I answered: It is not the manner of
the Romans to deliver any man that he should perish, before that he
which is accused, have the accusers before him, and have license to
answer for himself, as pertaining to the crime whereof he is accused:
when they were come hither, without delay on the morrow I sat to give
judgement, and commanded the man to be brought forth. Against whom
when the accusers stood up, they brought none accusation of such
things as I supposed: But had certain questions against him of their
own superstition, and of one Iesus which was dead. whom Paul affirmed
to be alive. Because I doubted of the questions, I asked him whither
he would go to Ierusalem, and there be judged of these matters. Then
when Paul had appealed to be kept unto the knowledge of Cesar. I
commanded him to be kept till I might send him to Cesar.
    Agrippa said unto Festus: I would also hear the man myself.
Tomorrow (said he) thou shalt hear him. On the morrow when Agrippa
was come and Bernice with great pomp, and were entered into the
council house with the captains and chief men of the city, at Festus'
commandment Paul was brought forth, and Festus said: King Agrippa,
and all men which are here present with us: Ye see this man about
whom all the multitude of jewes have been with me, both at Ierusalem
and also here, crying that he ought not to live any longer. Yet found
I nothing worthy of death that he had committed. Nevertheless seeing
that he hath appealed to Cesar, I have determined to send him. Of
whom I have no certain thing to write unto my lord. Wherefore I have
brought him unto you, and specially unto thee, king Agrippa, that
after examination had, I might have somewhat to write. For me
thinketh it unreasonable for to send a prisoner, and not to shew the
causes, which are laid against him.

The .xxvj. Chapter.

    Agrippa said unto Paul: Thou art permitted to speak for thyself.
Then Paul stretched forth his hand, and answered for himself: I think
myself happy King Agrippa, because I shall answer this day before
thee of all the things whereof I am accused of the jewes, namely
because thou art expert in all customs, and questions, which are
among the jewes. Wherefore I beseech thee to hear me patiently.
    My living of a child, which was at the first among mine own
nation at Ierusalem know all the jewes which knew me from the
beginning, if they would testify it. For after the most straitest
sect of our lay, lived I a pharisaye and now I stand and am judged
for the hope of the promise made of God unto our fathers unto which
promise, our xij. tribes instantly serving God day and night, hope to
come. For which hope's sake, king Agrippa am I accused of the jewes.
Why should it be thought a thing incredible unto you, if God raise
again the dead?
    I also verily thought in myself, that I ought to do many contrary
things, clean against the name of Iesus of Nazareth: which things I
also did in Ierusalem. And many of the saints shut I in prison,
moreover I received authority of the high priests: And when they were
put to death I gave the sentence. And I punished them oft in every
synagogue, and compelled them to blaspheme: and was yet more mad upon
them, even unto strange cities. About the which things as I went to
Damascus with authority, and commission from the high priests, even
at mid day (king Agrippa) I saw in the way a light from heaven, above
the brightness of the sun, shine round about me and them, which
journeyed with me.
    When we were all fallen to the earth, I heard a voice speaking
unto me, and saying in the Hebrew tongue: Saul, Saul, why persecutest
thou me? It is hard for thee to kick against the prick. And I said:
Who art thou lord? And he said: I am Iesus whom thou persecutest: But
rise and stand up on thy feet. For I have appeared unto thee for this
purpose, to make thee a minister, and a witness both of those things
which thou hast seen, and of those things in thee which I will appear
unto thee, delivering thee from the people, and from the gentiles,
unto thee which now I send thee, to open their eyes that they might
turn from darkness unto light, and from the power of Satan unto God,
that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among them
which are sanctified by faith in me.
    Wherefore king Agrippa, I was not disobedient unto the heavenly
vision: but shewed first unto them of Damascus, and at Ierusalem, and
thorowout all the coasts of Iewry, and to the gentiles, that they
should repent, and turn to God, and do the right works of repentance.
For this cause the jewes caught me in the temple, and went about to
kill me. Nevertheless I obtained help of God, and stood unto this day
witnessing both to small and to great, saying none other things, than
those which the prophets and Moses did say should come, that Christ
should suffer, and that he should be the first that should rise from
death, and should shew light unto the people, and to the gentiles.
    As he thus answered for himself: Festus said with a loud voice:
Paul, thou art besides thyself. Much learning hath made thee mad. And
Paul said: I am not mad most dear Festus: but speak the words of
truth and soberness. The king knoweth of these things, before whom I
speak freely: neither think I that any of these things are hidden
from him. For this thing was not done in a corner. King Agrippa
believest thou the prophets? I wot well thou believest. Agrippa said
unto Paul: Somewhat thou bringest me in mind for to become 
christen. And Paul said: I would to God that not only thou: but also
all that hear me today, were not somewhat only, but altogether such
as I am except these bonds. And when he had thus spoken, the king
rose up, and the debite, and Bernice, and they that sat with them.
And when they were gone apart, they talked between themselves saying:
This man doth nothing worthy of death, nor of bonds. Then said
Agrippa unto Festus: This man might have been lowsed if he had not
appealed unto Cesar.

The .xxvij. Chapter.

    When it was concluded that we should sail into Italy, they
delivered Paul and certain other prisoners unto one named Iulius, an
undercaptain of Cesar's soldiers. And we entered into a ship of
Adramicium, and lowsed from land, appointed to sail by the coasts of
Asia, one Aristarcus out of Macedonia, of the country of Thessalia,
being with us. The next day came we to Sidon, and Iulius courteously
entreated Paul, and gave him liberty to go unto his friends, and to
refresh himself. And from thence launched we and sailed hard by
Cypers, because the winds were contrary. Then sailed we over the sea
of Cicill, and Pamphylia, and came to Myra a city in Lycia.
    And there the undercaptain found a ship of Alexandry ready to
sail into Italy, and put us therein, and when we had sailed slowly
many days, and scarce were come over against Gnydon (because the wind
withstood us) we sailed hard by the coast of Candy, over against
Salmo, and with much work sailed beyond it, and came unto a place
called Goode port. Nigh whereunto was a city called Lasea. When much
time was spent and sailing was now jeopardous, because also that we
had overlong fasted, Paul put them in remembrance, and said unto
them: Sirs I perceive that this voyage will be with hurt and damage,
not of the lading and ship only: but also of our lives. But the
undercaptain believed the governor, and the master, better than those
things which were spoken of Paul. And because the haven was not
commodious to winter in, many took counsel to depart thence, if by
any means they might attain to Phenices and there to winter, which
haven pertaineth to Candy, and serveth to the southwest, and
northwest wind. When the south wind blew, they supposing to obtain
their purpose lowsed unto Asson, and sailed past all Candy.
    But anon after there arose (against their purpose) a flaw of wind
out of the northeast. When the ship was caught, and could not resist
the wind, we let her go and drave with the weather. We came unto an
isle named Clauda, And had much work to come by a boat, which they
took up, and used help undergirding the ship, fearing lest we should
have fallen into Syrtes, and we let down a vessel and so were
carried. The next day when we were tossed with an exceeding tempest,
they lightened the ship, and the third day we cast out with our own
hands the tackling of the ship. When at the last neither sun nor star
in many days appeared, And no small tempest lay upon us, all hope
that we should be saved, was taken away.
    Then after long abstinence Paul stood forth in the midst of them
and said: Sirs ye should have heard me, and not have departed from
Candy, neither to have brought unto us this harm and loss. And now I
exhort you to be of good cheer, for there shall be no loss of any
man's life among you: But of the ship only. For there stood by me
this night the angel of God whose I am, and whom I serve, saying:
fear not Paul, for thou must be brought before Cesar. And lo, God
hath given unto thee all that are in the ship with thee, wherefore
sirs be of good cheer, for I believe God that so it shall be even as
it was told me, and we must be cast into a certain island.
    But when the fourteenth night was come as we were carried in
Adria, about midnight the shipmen deemed that there appeared some
country unto them, and they sounded, and found it xx. fathoms. they
went a little further and sounded again, and found xv. fathoms. Then
fearing lest they should have fallen on some Rocke, they cast iiij.
anchors out of the stern, and wished for the day. As the shipmen were
about to flee out of the ship, and had let down the boat into the
sea, under a colour as though they would have cast anchors out of the
foreship: Paul said unto the undercaptain and the soldiers: except
these abide in the ship ye cannot be safe. Then the soldiers cut off
the rope of the boat, and let it fall away.
    And in the meantime, betwixt that and day, Paul besought them all
to take meat, saying: this is the fourteenth day that ye have tarried
and continued fasting receiving nothing at all, wherefore I pray you
to take meat: for this no doubt is for your health, for there shall
not an hair fall from the head of any of you. And when he had thus
spoken he took bread and gave thanks to God in presence of them all,
and brake it, and began to eat. Then were they all of Good cheer, and
they also took meat. We were all together in the ship, two hundred
and three score and sixteen souls. When they had eaten enough, they
lightened the ship and cast out the wheat into the sea.
    When it was day they knew not the land, but they spied a certain
reach with a bank, into the which they were minded (if it were
possible) to thrust in the ship. And when they had taken up the
anchors, they committed themselves unto the sea, and lowsed the
rudder bonds and hoised up the main sail to the wind and drew to
land, but they fell into a place, which had the sea on both the
sides, and thrust in the ship. And the fore part stuck fast, and
moved not, but the hinderpart brake with the violence of the waves.
    The soldiers' counsel was to kill the prisoners lest any of them,
when he had swum out should flee away: but the undercaptain willing
to save Paul kept them from their purpose, and commanded that they
that could swim should cast themselves first in to the sea, and scape
to land. And the other he commanded to go, some on boards, and some
on broken pieces of the ship. And so it came to pass, that they came
all safe to land.

The .xxviij. Chapter.

    And when they were scaped they knew that the isle was called
Mileta. The people of the country shewed us no little kindness, for
they kindled a fire and received us every one because of the present
rain, and because of cold. When Paul had gathered a bundle of sticks,
And put them into the fire, a viper (because of the heat) crept out
leapt on his hand. When the men of the country saw the worm hang on
his hand, they said among themselves: this man must needs be a
murderer: Whom (though he have escaped the sea) yet vengeance
suffereth not to live. and he shook off the vermin into the fire, and
felt no harm. They waited when he should have swollen, or fallen down
dead suddenly. But after they had looked a great while, and saw no
harm come to him, they changed their minds, and said that he was a
God.
    In the same quarters, the chief man of the isle whose name was
Publius, had a lordship: which received us, and lodged us three days
courteously. It fortuned that the father of Publius lay sick of a
fever, and of a bloody flux to whom Paul entered in and prayed, and
laid his hands on him and healed him. When this was done, other also
which had diseases in the isle, came and were healed: And they did us
great honour. And when we departed, they laded us with things
necessary.
    After three months we departed in a ship of Alexandry, which had
wintered in the isle, whose badge was Castor and Pollux. And when we
came to Ciracusa, we tarried there iij. days, from whence we sailed
about and came to Regium. And after one day the south wind blew, and
we came the next day to Putiolus where we found brethren, and were
desired to tarry with them seven days, and so came we to Rome. and
from thence, when the brethren heard of us, they came to Apiphorum,
and three taverns, and met us. When Paul saw them he thanked God, and
waxed bold. When he came to Rome, the undercaptain delivered the
prisoners to the chief captain of the host: but Paul was suffered to
dwell alone with one Soldier that kept him.
    It fortuned after three days Paul called the chief of the jewes
to gether. When they were come, he said unto them: Men and brethren,
though I have committed no thing against the people, or laws of our
fathers: yet was I delivered prisoner from Ierusalem into the hands
of the romans. Which when they had examined me, would have let me go,
because they found no cause of death in me: but when the jewes cried
contrary: I was constrained to appeal unto Cesar. Not because I had
ought to accuse my people of. For this cause have I called for you to
see you, and to speak with you. For I because of the hope of Israhel,
am bound with this chain.
    And they said unto him: We neither received letters out of Iewry
pertaining unto thee, neither came any of the brethren that shewed or
spake any harm of thee. But we will hear of thee what thou thinkest.
For we have heard of this sect, that everywhere it is spoken against.
When they had appointed him a day, there came many unto him into his
lodging: to whom he expounded and testified the kingdom of God. and
preached unto them of Iesu: both by the law of Moses, and also out by
the prophets from morning to night. And some believed the things
which were spoken, and some believed not.
    When they agreed not among themselves, they departed, after that
Paul had spoken one word: well spake the holy ghost by Esay the
prophet unto our fathers, saying: Go unto this people and say: with
your ears shall ye hear, and shall not understand: and with your eyes
shall ye see and shall not perceive. For the heart of this people is
waxed gross, and their ears wex thick of hearing, and their eyes
have they closed, lest they should see with their eyes, and hear with
their ears, and understand with their hearts, and should be
converted, and I should heal them. Be it known therefore unto you,
that this consolation of God is sent to the gentiles, and they shall
hear it. And when he had said that, the jewes departed from him, and
had great despicions among themselves.
    But Paul dwelt two years in his lodging. And received all that
came to him, preaching the kingdom of God, and teaching those things
which concerned the lord Iesus with all confidence, no man forbidding
him.

Here endeth the Actes off the Apostles.


The epistle of S. Paul to the Romans

The first Chapter.

    Paul the servant of Iesus Christ, called unto the office of an
apostle, put apart to preach the gospell of God, which he promised
afore by his prophets, in the holy scriptures that make mention of
his son, the which was begotten of the seed of David, as pertaining
to the flesh: and declared to be the son of God with power of the
holy ghost, that sanctifieth, since the time that Iesus Christ our
lord rose again from death, by whom we have received grace and
apostleship, that all gentiles should obey to the faith which is in
his name, of the which number are ye also, which are Iesus Christe's
by vocation.
    To all you of Rome beloved of God, and saints by calling. Grace
be with you and peace from God our father, and from the lord Iesus
Christ.
    First verily I thank my God thorow Iesus Christ for you all,
because your faith is published throughout all the worlde. For God is
my witness, whom I serve with my spirit, in the gospell of his son
that without ceasing I make mention of you always in my prayers,
beseeching that at one time or another, a prosperous journey (by the
will of God) might fortune me to come unto you. For I long to see
you, that I might bestow among you some spiritual gift, to strengthen
you with all (that is) that I might have consolation together with
you, through the common faith, which both ye and I have.
    I would that ye should know, brethren, how that I have oftentimes
purposed to come unto you (but have been let hitherto) to have some
fruit among you, as I have among other of the gentiles. For I am
debtor both to the greeks, and to them which are no greeks, unto the
learned and also unto the unlearned. Likewise, as much as in me is, I
am ready to preach the gospell to you of Rome also.
    For I am not ashamed of the gospell of Christ, because it is the
power of God unto salvation to all that believe, namely to the jewe,
and also to the gentile. For by it the righteousness which cometh of
God is opened, from faith to faith. As it is written: The just shall
live by faith.
    For the wrath of God of heaven appeareth against all ungodliness
and unrighteousness of men which withhold the truth in
unrighteousness, seeing that that, which may be known of God, is
manifest among them. For God did shew it unto them. For his invisible
things (that is to say, his eternal power and godhead) are understood
and seen, by the works from the creation of the world. So that they
are without excuse, in as much as when they knew God, they glorified
him not as God, neither were thankful, but waxed full of vanities in
their imaginations. And their foolish hearts were blinded. When they
counted themselves wise, they became fools and turned the glory of
the immortal God, unto the similitude of the image of mortal man, and
of birds, and four footed beasts and serpents.
    For this cause God gave them up unto their hearts' lusts, unto
uncleanness to defile their own bodies between themselves: which
turned his truth unto a lie, and worshipped and served the creatures
more then the maker, which is blessed forever Amen. For this cause
God gave them up unto shameful lusts. For even their women did change
the natural use unto the unnatural. And likewise also the men left
the natural use of the woman, and brent in lust one on another among
themselves. And man with man wrought filthiness, and received in
themselves the reward of their error as it was according.
    And as it seemed not good unto them to be aknown of God, even so
God delivered them up unto a leawde mind, that they should do those
things which were not comely, being full of all unrighteous doing, of
fornication, wickedness, covetousness, maliciousness, full of envy,
murder, debate, deceit, evil conditioned whisperers, backbiters,
haters of God, doers of wrong, proude, boasters, bringers up of evil
things, disobedient to fathers and mothers, without understanding,
covenant breakers, unloving, stubborn and merciless. Which men,
though they knew the righteousness of God, how that they which such
things commit are worthy of death, yet not only do the same, but also
had pleasure in them that did them.

The Second Chapter.

    Therefore art thou inexcusable o man whosoever thou be that
judgest. For in the same wherein thou judgest another, thou
condemnest thyself. For thou that judgest doest even the same self
things. But we are sure that the judgement of God is according to
truth, against them which commit such things. Thinkest thou O thou
man that judgest them which do such things and yet doest even the
very same, that thou shalt escape the judgement of God? Other
despisest thou the riches of his goodness and patience, and long
sufferance? and rememberest not how that the kindness of God leadeth
thee to repentance?
    But thou after thine hard heart that cannot repent, heapest thee
together the treasure of wrath against the day of vengeance, when
shall be opened the righteous judgement of God, which will reward
every man according to his deeds, that is to say praise, honour, and
immortality, to them which continue in good doing, and seek eternal
life: But unto them that are rebellious, and disobey the truth, yet
follow iniquity, shall come indignation, and wrath, tribulation and
anguish upon the soul of every man that doth evil. Of the jewe first
And also of the gentile. To every man that doth good shall come
praise, honour and peace, to the jewe first, and also to the gentile.
For there is no partiality with God: But whosoever hath sinned
without law, shall perish without law. And as many as have sinned
under the law, shall be judged by the law. For before God they are
not righteous which hear the law: but they which do the law shall be
justified. For if the gentiles which have no law, do of nature the
things contained in the law: then they having no law, are a law unto
themselves, which shew the deed of the law written in their hearts:
While their conscience beareth witness unto them, and also their
thoughts, accusing one another, or excusing at the day when God shall
judge the secrets of men, by Iesus Christ according to my Gospell.
    Behold, thou art called a Iewe, and trustest in the law and
rejoicest in God, and knowest his will, and hast experience of good
and bad, in that thou art informed by the law: And believest that
thou thyself art a guide unto the blind, a light to them which are in
darkness, an informer of them which lack discretion, a teacher of the
unlearned, which hast the ensample of that which ought to be known,
and of the truth in the law. Now teachest thou another: but teachest
not thyself. Thou preachest, a man should not steal: and yet thou
stealest. Thou sayest, a man should not commit advoutry and thou
breakest wedlock. Thou abhorrest images, and robbest God of his
honour. Thou rejoicest in the law, and thorow breaking the law
dishonourest God. For the name of God is evil spoken of among the
gentiles thorow you as it is written.
    Circumcision verily availeth if thou keep the law: But if thou
break the law thy circumcision is made uncircumcision. Therefore if
the uncircumcised keep the right things contained in the law: shall
not his uncircumcision be counted for circumcision? And shall not
uncircumcision which is by nature (if it keep the law) judge thee,
which being under the letter and circumcision, dost transgress the
law? For he is not a Iewe, which is a Iewe outward. Neither is that
thing circumcision, which is outward in the flesh: But he is a Iewe
which is hid within, and the circumcision of the heart is the true
circumcision, which is in the spirit, and not in the letter: whose
praise is not of men but of God.

The Third Chapter.

    What preferment than hath the Iewe? other what advantageth
circumcision? Surely very much. First unto them was committed the
word of God. What then though some of them did not believe? shall
their unbelief make the promise of God without effect? God forbid.
Let God be true, and all men liars, as it is written: That thou
mightest be justified in thy sayings and shouldest overcome when thou
art judged. If our unrighteousness make the righteousness of God more
excellent: what shall we say? Is God unrighteous which taketh
vengeance? (I speak after the manner of men.) God forbid. For how
then shall God judge the world? if the verity of God appear more
excellent thorow my lie, unto his praise, why am I hence forth judged
as a sinner? and say not rather (as men evil speak of us, and as some
affirm that we say) let us do evil, that good may come thereof. Whose
damnation is just.
    What say we then? Are we better than they? no, in no wise. For we
have all ready proved how that both jewes and gentiles are all under
sin, as it is written: There is none righteous, no not one: There is
none that understandeth, there is none that seeketh after God, they
are all gone out of the way, they are all made unprofitable, there is
none that doeth good, no not one. Their throat is an open sepulchre,
with their tongues they have deceived: the poison of Aspes is under
their lips. whose mouths are full of cursing and bitterness. Their
feet are swift to shed blood. Destruction and wretchedness are in
their ways: And the way of peace have they not known. There is no
fear of God before their eyes.
    Yea and we know that whatsoever the law saith, he saith it to them
which are under the law: That all mouths may be stopped, and all the
world be subdued to God, because that by the deeds of the law, shall
no flesh be justified in the sight of God. For by the law cometh the
knowledge of sin.
    Now verily is the righteousness that cometh of God declared with
out the fulfilling of the law having witness yet of the law, and of
the prophets. The righteousness no doubt which is good before God
cometh by the faith of Iesus Christ unto all, and upon all them that
believe.
    For there is no difference, all have sinned, and lack the praise
that is of valour before God: but are justified freely by his grace,
through the redemption that is in Christ Iesu, whom God hath made a
seat of mercy thorow faith in his blood, to shew the righteousness
which before him is of valour, in that he forgiveth the sins that are
passed, which God did suffer to shew at this time: the righteousness
that is allowed of him, that he might be counted just, and a
justifier of him which believeth on Iesus.
    Where is then thy rejoicing? It is excluded. By what law? by the
law of workes? Nay: but by the law of faith.
    We suppose therefore that a man is justified by faith without the
deeds of the law. Is he the God of the jewes only? Is he not also the
God of the gentiles? He is no doubt, God also of the gentiles. For it
is God only which justifieth circumcision, which is of faith: and
uncircumcision thorow faith. Do we then destroy the law thorow faith?
God forbid. We rather maintain the law.

The .iiij. Chapter.

    What shall we say then, that Abraham our father as pertaining to
the flesh did find? If Abraham were justified by deeds, then hath he
wherein to rejoice: but not with God. For what saith the scripture?
Abraham believed God, and it was counted unto him for righteousness.
To him that worketh is the reward not reckoned of favour: but of
duty. To him that worketh not, but believeth on him that justifieth
the ungodly, is faith counted for righteousness. Even as David
describeth the blessedfulness of a man, unto whom good {God} 
ascribeth righteousness without deeds: Blessed are they, whose
unrighteousnesses are forgiven, and whose sins are covered. Blessed
is that man to whom the lord imputeth not sin.
    Came this blessedness then upon the circumcised or upon the
uncircumcised? We say verily how that faith was reckoned to Abraham,
for righteousness. How was it reckoned? in the time of circumcision?
or in the time before he was circumcised? Not in time of
circumcision: but when he was yet uncircumcised. And he received the
sign of circumcision, as a seal of the righteousness which is by
faith, which faith he had yet being uncircumcised, that he should be
the father of all them that believe, though they be not circumcised,
that righteousness might be imputed to them also, And that he might
be the father of the circumcised: not because they are circumcised
only: but because they walk also in the steps of that faith, which
was in our father Abraham before the time of circumcision.
    For the promise that he should be heir of the world was not given
to Abraham, or to his seed thorow the law: but thorow the
righteousness which cometh of faith. For if they which are of the law
be heirs, then is faith but vain, and the promise of none effect.
Because the law causeth wrath. For where no law is, there is no
transgression. Therefore by faith is the inheritance given, that it
might come of favour: and that the promise might be sure to all the
seed. Not to them only which are of the law: but also to them which
are of the faith of Abraham, which is the father of us all. As it is
written: I have ordained thee a father to many nations, before God
whom thou hast believed, which quickeneth the dead and calleth those
things which be not as though they were.
    Which Abraham, contrary to hope, believed in hope, that he should
be the father of many nations, according to that which was spoken: So
shall thy seed be. And he fainted not in the faith, nor yet
considered his own body, which was now dead, even when he was almost
an hundred year old. Neither considered he the barrenness of Sara. He
staggered not at the promise of God thorow unbelief: But was made
strong in the faith, and gave honour to God and steadfastly believed,
that he which had made the promised was able also to make it good.
And therefore was it reckoned to him for righteousness.
    It is not written for him only, that it was reckoned to him for
righteousness: but also for us, to whom it shall be counted for
righteousness so we believe on him that raised, up Iesus our lord
from death. Which was delivered for our sins, and rose again for to
justify us.

The .v. Chapter.

    Because therefore that we are justified by faith we are at peace
with God thorow our lord Iesus Christ: by whom we have a way in
thorow faith unto this faveour wherein we stand and rejoice in hope
of the praise that shall be given of God. Neither do we so only: but
also we rejoice in tribulation: For we know that tribulation bringeth
patience, patience bringeth feeling, feeling bringeth hope. and hope
maketh not ashamed, because the love that God hath unto us, is shed
abroad in our hearts, by the holy ghost, which is given unto us.
    For when we were yet weak according to the time: Christ died for
us which were ungodly. Yet scarce will any man die for a righteous
man. Peradventure for a good man durst a man die. But God setteth out
his love that he hath to us, Seeing that while we were yet sinners,
Christ died for us. Much more then now (seeing we are justified in
his blood) shall we be preserved from wrath thorow him.
    For if when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the
death of his son: much more, seeing we are reconciled, we shall be
preserved by his life. Not only so, but we also joy in God by the
means of our lord Iesus Christ, by whom we have received this
atonement.
    Wherefore as by one man sin entered into the worlde, and death by
the means of sin. And so death went over all men, insomuch that all
men sinned. For even unto the time of the law was sin in the worlde:
but sin was not regarded, as long as there was no law: nevertheless
death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them also that sinned
not, with like transgression as did Adam: which is the similitude of
him that was {is} to come.
    But the gift is not like as the sin. For if thorow the sin of
one, many be dead: much more plenteous upon many was the faveour of
God and gift by faveour: which faveour was given by one man Iesus
Christ.
    And the gift is not over one sin, as death came thorow one sin of
one that sinned. For damnation came of one sin unto condemnation: But
the gift came to justify from many sins. For if by the sin of one,
death reigned by the means of one, much more shall they which receive
abundance of faveour and of the gift of righteousness reign in life
by the means of one (that is to say) Iesus Christe.
    Likewise then as by the sin of one, condemnation came on all men:
even so by the justifying of one cometh the righteousness that
bringeth life, upon all men. For as by one man's disobedience many
became sinners: so by the obedience of one shall many be made
righteous.
    The law in the mean time entered in that sin should increase. And
where abundance of sin was, there was more plenteousness of grace.
That as sin had reigned unto death, even so might grace reign thorow
righteousness unto eternal life, by the help of Iesu Christ.

The .vj. Chapter.

    What shall we say then? shall we continue in sin, that there may
be abundance of grace? God forbid. How shall we that are dead as
touching sin live any longer therein? Remember ye not that all we
which are baptised in the name of Christ Iesu, are baptised to die
with him? We are buried with him by baptism for to die: That as
Christ was raised up from death by the glory of the father: even so
we also should walk in a new life. For if we be graft in death like
unto him: even so must we be in the resurrection. This we must
remember, that our old man is crucified with him also, that the body
of sin might utterly be destroyed, that henceforth we should not be
servants of sin. For he that is dead, is justified from sin.
    Wherefore if we be dead with Christ, we believe that we shall
live with him: remembering that Christ once raised from death, dieth
no more. Death hath no more power over him. For as touching that he
died, he died as concerning sin once. And as touching that he liveth,
he liveth unto God. Likewise imagine ye also, that ye are dead
concerning sin: but are alive unto God thorow Iesus Christ our lord.
Let not sin reign therefore in your mortal bodies, that ye should
thereunto obey in the lusts of it. Neither give ye your members as
instruments of unrighteousness unto sin: But give yourselves unto
God, as they that are alive from death. And give your members as
instruments of righteousness unto God. Sin shall not have power over
you. For ye are not under the law, but under grace.
    What then? Shall we sin, because we are not under the law: but
under grace? God forbid. Remember ye not how that to whomsoever ye
commit yourselves as servants to obey, his servants ye are to whom ye
obey: whether it be of sin unto death, or of obedience unto
righteousness? God be thanked. Ye were once the servants of sin: But
now have obeyed with your hearts unto the form of doctrine where unto
ye were delivered. Ye are then made free from sin, and are become the
servants of righteousness.
    I will speak grossly because of the infirmity of your flesh. As
ye have given your members servants to uncleanness and to iniquity,
from iniquity unto iniquity: even so now give your members servants
unto righteousness, that ye may be sanctified. For when ye were
servants of sin, ye were not under righteousness. What fruit had ye
then in those things, where of ye are now ashamed. For the end of
those things is death. But now are ye delivered from sin, and made
the servants of God, and have your fruit that ye should be
sanctified, and the end everlasting life. For the reward of sin is
death: but eternal life is the gift of God, thorow Iesus Christ our
lord.

The .vij. Chapter.

    Remember ye not brethren (I speak to them that know the law) how
that the law hath power over a man as long as it endureth: For the
woman which is in subjection to a man, is bound by the law to the
man, as long as he liveth. If the man be dead, she is lowsed from the
law of the man. So then if while the man liveth she couple herself
with another man, she shall be counted a wedlock breaker. But if the
man be dead she is free from the law: so that she is no wedlock
breaker, though she couple herself with another man.
    Even so ye my brethren, ye also are made dead as concerning the
law by the body of Christ, that ye should be coupled to another (I
mean to him that is risen again from death) that we should bring
forth fruit unto God. When we were in the flesh, the lusts of sin
which were stirred up by the law, reigned in our members, to bring
forth fruit unto death. But now are we delivered from the law, and
dead from it, whereunto we were in bondage, that we should serve in a
new conversation of the spirit, and not in the old conversation of
the letter.
    What shall we say then? is the law sin? God forbid: but I knew
not what sin meant but by the law. For I had not known what lust had
meant, except the law had said, thou shalt not lust. But sin took an
occasion by the means of the commandment, and wrought in me all
manner of concupiscence. For verily without the law sin was dead. I
once lived without law: but when the commandment came, sin revived,
and I was dead. And the very same commandment which was ordained unto
life, was found to be unto me an occasion of death. For sin took
occasion by the means of the commandment and so deceived me, and by
the self commandment slew me. Wherefore the law is holy, and the
commandment holy, just, and good.
    Was that then which is good made death unto me? God forbid. Nay
sin was death unto me, that it might appear how that sin by the means
of that which is good, had wrought death in me: that sin which is
under the commandment, might be out of measure sinful. For we know
that the law is spiritual: but I am carnal, sold under sin: because I
wot not what I do. For what I would, that do I not: but what I hate,
that do I. If I do now that which I would not, I grant to the law
that it is good. So then now it is not I that do it, but sin that
dwelleth in me. For I know that in me (that is to say in my flesh)
dwelleth no good thing. To will is present with me: but I find no
means to perform that which is good. For I do not that good thing
which I would: but that evil do I, which I would not. Finally, if I
do that I would not, then is it not I that do it, but sin that
dwelleth in me doeth it. I find then by the law that when I would do
good, evil is present with me. I delight in the law of God, as
concerning the inner man. But I see another law in my members
rebelling against the law of my mind, and subduing me unto the law of
sin, which is in my members. O wretched man that I am: who shall
deliver me from this body of death? I thank God by Iesus Christ our
lord: So then I myself in my mind serve the law of God, and in my
flesh the law of sin.

The .viij. Chapter.

    There is then no damnation to them which are in Christ Iesu,
which walk not after the flesh: but after the spirit. For the law of
the spirit, wherein is life thorow Iesus Christ hath delivered me
from the law of sin, and death. For what the law could not do in as
much as it was weak because of the flesh: that performed God, and
sent his son in the similitude of sinful flesh, and by sin damned sin
in the flesh: that the righteousness required of the law, might be
fulfilled in us, which walk not after the flesh: but after the
spirit.
    For they that are carnal, are carnally minded. and they that are
spiritual are ghostly minded. To be carnally minded is death. and to
be spiritually minded is life, and peace: because that the fleshly
mind is emnity against God: For it is not obedient to the law of God,
neither can be. So then they that are given to the flesh, cannot
please God.
    But ye are not given to the flesh, But to the spirit: If so be
that the spirit of God dwell in you. If there be any man that hath
not the spirit of Christ, the same is none of his. If Christ be in
you, the body is dead because of sin: But the spirit is life for
righteousness' sake. Wherefore if the spirit of him that raised up
Iesus from death, dwell in you: even he that raised up Christ from
death, shall quicken your mortal bodies, because that his spirit
dwelleth in you.
    Therefore brethren we are now debtors, not to the flesh, to live
after the flesh: For if ye live after the flesh, ye must die. But if
ye mortify the deeds of the body, by the help of the spirit, ye shall
live, for as many as are led by the spirit of God, are the sons of
God. For ye have not received the spirit of bondage to fear any more,
but ye have received the spirit of adoption whereby we cry Abba
father. The same spirit certifieth our spirit that we are the sons of
God. If we be sons, we are also heirs (the heirs I mean of God) and
heirs annexed with Christ, if so be that we suffer together, that we
may be glorified together.
    For I suppose that the afflictions of this life, are not worthy
of the glory which shall be shewed upon us. Also the fervent desire
of the creatures abideth looking when the sons of God shall appear
because the creatures are subdued to vanity against their will: but
for his will which subdued them in hope. For the very creatures shall
be delivered from the bondage of corruption, into the glorious
liberty of the sons of God. For we know that every creature groaneth
with us also, and travaileth in pain even unto this time.
    Not they only, but even we also which have the first fruits of
the spirit mourn in ourselves and wait for the adoption, and look for
the deliverance of our bodies. For we are saved by hope. But hope
that is seen is no hope. For how can a man hope for that which he
seeth? but and if we hope for that we see not, then do we with
patience abide for it.
    Likewise the spirit also helpeth our infirmities. For we know
not, what to desire as we ought: but the spirit maketh intercession
mightily for us with groanings which cannot be expressed with tongue.
And he that searcheth the hearts knoweth what is the meaning of the
spirit: for he maketh intercession for the saints according to the
pleasure of God. For we know well that all things work for the best
unto them that love God, which also are called of purpose. For those
which he knew before, he also ordained before, that they should be
like fashioned unto the shape of his son, that he might be the first
begotten son among many brethren. Moreover which he appointed before,
them he also called. And which he called, them also he justified.
which he justified, them he also glorified.
    What shall we then say unto these things? if God be on our side:
who can be against us? which spared not his own son, but gave him for
us all: How shall he not with him give us all things also? Who shall
lay anything to the charge of God's chosen? It is God that
justifieth: who then shall condemn? it is Christ which is dead, Ye
rather which is risen again, which is also on the right hand of God
and maketh intercession for us.
    Who shall separate us from God's love? shall tribulation? or
anguish? or persecution, other hunger? other nakedness? other peril?
other sword? As it is written: For thy sake are we killed all day
long, and are counted as sheep appointed to be slain. Nevertheless in
all these things we overcome strongly thorow his help that loved us.
Yea and I am sure that neither death, neither life, neither angell,
nor rule, neither power, neither things present, neither things to
come, neither heyth, neither lowth, neither any other creature shall
be able to depart us from God's love, which is in Christ Iesu our
lord.

The .ix. Chapter.

    I Say the truth in Christ and lie not, in that whereof my
conscience beareth me witness in the holy ghost, that I have great
heaviness, and continual sorrow in my heart. For I have wished myself
to be cursed from Christ for my brethren, which are my kinsmen as
pertaining to the flesh. Which are the Israelites, to whom pertaineth
the adoption, and the glory, and the testaments, and the ordinance of
the law, and the service of God, and the promises, whose also are the
fathers, and they of whom (as concerning the flesh) Christ came:
which is God over all things blessed forever Amen.
    I speak not these things as though the words of God had took none
effect. For they are not all Israelites which came of Israhel,
Neither are they all children straightway because they are the seed
of Abraham: But in Isaac shall thy seed be called, that is to say,
They which are the children of the flesh, are not the children of
God. But the children of promise are counted the seed. For this is a
word of promise, about this time will I come, and Sara shall have a
son.
    Neither was it to with her only: but also when Rebecca was with
child by one, I mean by our father Isaac, yer the children were born,
when they had neither done good neither bad (that the purpose of God
which is by election, might stand) it was said unto her, not by the
reason of works, but by grace of the caller, the elder shall serve
the younger. As it is written: Iacob he loved, but Esau he hated.
    What shall we say then? is there any unrighteousness with God?
God forbid. For he saith to Moses: I will shew mercy to whom I shew
mercy: And will have compassion on whom I have compassion. So lieth
it not then in a man's will, or running, but in the mercy of God. For
the scripture saith unto Pharaoh: Even for this same purpose have I
stirred thee up, to shew my power on thee, and that my name might be
declared thorowout all the world. So hath he mercy on whom he will.
And whom he will he maketh hard hearted.
    Thou wilt say then unto me: why then blameth he us yet? For who
can resist his will? But o man what art thou, which disputest with
God? shall the work say to the workman: why hast thou made me on this
fashion? Hath not the potter power over the clay, even of the same
lump to make one vessel unto honour, and another unto dishonour? Even
so, God willing to shew his wrath, and to make his power known,
suffered with long patience the vessels of wrath, ordained to
damnation, that he might declare the riches of his glory on the
vessels of mercy, which he had prepared unto glory: that is to say,
us which he called, not of the jewes only, but also of the gentiles.
As he saith in Osee: I will call them my people which were not my
people: and her beloved which was not beloved. And it shall come to
pass in the place where it was said unto them: Ye are not my people,
that there shall be called the sons of the living God.
    But Esaias crieth for Israhel, though the number of the children
of Israel be as the sand of the sea, yet shall a remnant be saved. He
finisheth the work verily and maketh it short in righteousness. For a
short word will God make on earth. And as Esaias said before: Except
the lord of saboth had left us seed, we had been made as Zodoma, and
had been likened to Gomorra.
    What shall we say then? we say that the gentiles which followed
not righteousness, have overtaken righteousness I mean the
righteousness which cometh of faith. But Israel which followed the
law of righteousness, could not attain unto the law of righteousness.
And wherefore? Because they sought it not by faith: but as it were by
the works of the law. For they have stumbled at the stumbling stone.
As it is written: Behold I put in Syon a stumbling stone, and a rock
which shall make men fall. And none that believe on him, shall be
ashamed.

The .x. Chapter.

    Brethren my heart's desire, and prayer to God for Israel is that
they might be saved. For I bear them record that they have a fervent
mind to Godward, but not according to knowledge. For they are
ignorant of the righteousness which is allowed before God, and go
about to establish their own righteousness and therefore are not
obedient unto the righteousness which is of value before God. For
Christ is the end of the law to justify all that believe.
    Moses describeth the righteousness which cometh of the law, how
that the man which doth the things of the law shall live therein. But
the righteousness which cometh of faith, speaketh on this wise: Say
not in thine heart: who shall ascend into heaven? (That is nothing
else than to fetch Christ down.) Other who shall descend into the
deep? That is nothing else but to fetch up Christ from death. But
what saith the scripture? The word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth
and in thine heart.
    This word is the word of faith which we preach. For if thou shalt
knowledge with thy mought that Iesus is the lord, and shalt believe
with thine heart that God raised him up from death, thou shalt be
safe. For the belief of the heart justifieth: and to knowledge with
the mouth maketh a man safe. For the scripture saith: whosoever
believeth on him, shall not be ashamed.
    There is no difference between the jewe and the gentile. For one
is lord of all, which is rich unto all that call on him. For
whosoever shall call on the name of the lord shall be safe. How shall
they call on him, on whom they believed not? how shall they believe
on him of whom they have not heard? how shall they hear with out a
preacher? And how shall they preach except they be sent? As it is
written: how beautiful are the feet of them which bring glad tidings
of peace, and bring glad tidings of good things. But they have not
all obeyed to the gospell. For Esaias saith: lord who shall believe
our sayings? So then faith cometh by hearing, and hearing cometh by
the word of God. But I ask: have they not heard? No doubt, their
sound went out into all lands: and their words into the ends of the
world.
    But I demand whether Israhel did know or not? First Moses saith:
I will provoke you for to envy by them that are no people, and by a
foolish nation I will anger you. Esaias after that is bold and saith.
I am found of them that sought me not, and have appeared to them that
asked not after me. And against Israhel he saith: All day long have I
stretched forth my hands unto a people that believeth not, but
speaketh against me.

The .xj. Chapter.

    I say then: hath God cast away his people? God forbid. For even I
verily am an Israelite of the seed of Abraham, and of the tribe of
Benjamin, God hath not cast away his people which he knew before.
Other wot ye not what the scripture saith by the mouth of Helias, how
he spake to God against Israhel, saying: lord they have killed thy
prophets and digged down thine altars: and I am left only, and they
seek my death. But what saith the answer of God to him again? I have
reserved unto me seven thousand men which have not bowed their knees
to baal. Even so at this time is there a remnant left thorow the
election of grace. If it be of grace then is it not by the deserving
of works. For then were faveour no more faveour. If it be by the
deserving of works, then is there no faveour. For then were deserving
no deserving.
    What then? Israhel hath not obtained that that he sought. No but
yet the election hath obtained it. The remnant are blinded, according
as it is written: God hath given them the spirit of unquietness: eyes
that they should not see, and ears that they should not hear, even
unto this day. And David saith: Let their table be made a snare to
take them with all, and an occasion to fall, and a reward unto them.
Let their eyes be blinded that they see not: and ever bow down their
backs.
    I say then: Have they therefore stumbled that they should but
fall only? God forbid: but thorow their fall is health happened unto
the gentiles for to provoke them with all. Wherefore if the fall of
them, be the riches of the world: and the minishing of them the
riches of the gentiles: How much more should it be so if they all
believed. I speak to you gentiles, inasmuch as I am the apostle of
the gentiles I will magnify mine office that might provoke them which
are my flesh: and might save some of them. For if the casting away of
them, be the reconciling of the worlde: what shall the receiving of
them be, but life again from death? For if one piece be holy, the
whole heap is holy. And if the root be holy, the branches are holy
also.
    Though some of the branches be broken off, and thou being a wild
olive tree art graft in among them, and made part taker of the root,
and fatness of the olive tree, boast not thyself against the
branches. For if thou boast thyself, remember that thou bearest not
the root, but the root thee. Thou wilt say then: the branches are
broken off, that I might be graft in. Thou sayest well: because of
unbelief they are broken off, and thou standest steadfast in faith.
Be not high minded, but fear: seeing that God spared not the natural
branches, lest haply he also spare not thee.
    Behold the kindness and rigorousness of God: on them which fell,
rigorousness: but towards thee kindness, if thou continue in his
kindness. Or else thou shalt be hewn off, and they if they bide not
still in unbelief shall be grafted in again. For God is of power to
graft them in again. For if thou wast cut out of a natural wild olive
tree, and wast graffed contrary to nature in a true olive tree: how
much more shall the natural branches be graffed in their own olive
tree again.
    I would not that this secret should be hid from you my brethren
(lest ye should be wise in your own conceits) that partly blindness
is happened in Israhell, until the fullness of the gentiles be come
in. And so all Israhell shall be saved. As it is written: There shall
come out of Sion he that doth deliver, and shall turn away the
ungodliness of Iacob. And this is my covenant unto them, when I shall
take away their sins. As concerning the gospell, They are enemies for
your sakes: but as touching the election, they are loved for the
fathers' sakes.
    For verily the gifts and calling of God are such, that it cannot
repent him of them, for look, as ye in time passed have not believed
God, yet have now obtained mercy thorow their unbelief: even so now
have they not believed the mercy which is happened unto you, That
they also may obtain mercy. God hath wrapped all nations in unbelief,
that he might have mercy on all. O the deepness of the abundant
wisdom and knowledge off God: how incomprehensible are his
judgements, and his ways unsearchable. For who hath known the mind of
the lord? or who was his counsellor? other who hath given unto him
first, that he might be recompensed again? For of him, and thorow
him, and unto him are all things. To him be glory forever Amen.

The .xij. Chapter.

    I beseech you therefore brethren by the mercifulness of God that
ye make your bodies a quick sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto God
which is your reasonable serving of God. and fashion not yourselves
like unto this worlde: But be ye changed in your shape, by the
renewing of your wits, that ye may feel what thing that good, that
acceptable, and perfect will of God is. For I say (thorow the grace
that unto me given is) to every man among you, that no man esteem of
himself more than it becometh him to esteem: But that he discreetly
judge of himself according as God hath dealt to every man the measure
of faith.
    As we have many members in one body: and all members have not one
office: So we being many are one body in Christ: and every man (among
ourselves) one another's members. Seeing that we have divers gifts
according to the grace that is given unto us, if any man have the
gift of prophecy, let him have it that it be agreeing unto the faith.
Let him that hath an office, wait on his office. Let him that
teacheth take heed to his doctrine. Let him that exhorteth give
attendance to his exhortation. If any man give, let him do it with
singleness. Let him that ruleth do it with diligence. If any man shew
mercy let him do it with cheerfulness.
    Let love be without dissimulation. Hate that which is evil, and
cleave unto that which is good. Be kind one to another, with
brotherly love. In giving honour go one before another. Let not that
business which ye have in hand be tedious to you. Be fervent in the
spirit. Apply yourselves to the time. Rejoice in hope. Be patient in
tribulation, continue in prayer. Distribute unto the necessity of the
saints. Bless them which persecute you: bless but curse not. Be merry
with them that are merry. Weep with them that weep. Be of like
affection one towards another. Be not high minded, but make
yourselves equal to them of the lower sort. Be not wise in your own
opinions. Recompense to no man evil for evil. Provide aforehand
things honest in the sight of all men. If it be possible, yet on your
part have peace with all men.
    Derly beloved avenge not yourselves but give room unto the wrath
of God. For it is written: vengeance is mine, and I will reward saith
the lord.
    Therefore if thine enemy hunger feed him: if he thirst, give him
drink. For in so doing thou shalt heap coals of fire on his head: Be
not overcome of evil: But overcome evil with goodness.

The .xiij. Chapter.

    Let every soul submit himself unto the authority of the higher
powers. There is no power but of God. The powers that be, are
ordained of God. Whosoever therefore resisteth power, resisteth the
ordinance of God. They that resist, shall receive to themselves
damnation. For rulers are not to be feared for good works but for
evil. Wilt thou be without fear of the power? Do well then: and so
shalt thou be praised of the same. For he is the minister of God, for
thy wealth. But and if thou do evil, then fear: for he beareth not a
sword for nought. for he is the minister of God, to take vengeance on
them that do evil. Wherefore ye must needs obey, not for fear of
vengeance only: but also because of conscience. Even for this cause
pay ye tribute. For they are God's ministers, serving for the same
purpose.
    Give to every man therefore his duetie: Tribute to whom tribute
belongeth: Custom to whom custom is due: fear to whom fear belongeth:
Honour to whom honour pertaineth. Owe no thing to any man: but to
love one another. For he that loveth another, fulfilleth the law. For
these commandments: Thou shalt not commit advoutry: Thou shalt not
kill: Thou shalt not steal: Thou shalt not bear false witness: Thou
shalt not desire: and so forth if there be any other commandment, are
all comprehended in this saying: Love thine neighbor as thyself. Love
hurteth not his neighbor: Therefore is love the fulfilling of the
law.
    This also we know, I mean the season, how that it is time that we
should now awake out of sleep. For now is our salvation nearer than
when we believed. The night is passed and the day is come nigh. Let
us therefore cast away the deeds of darkness, and let us put on the
armour of light. Let us walk honestly as it were in the daylight: not
in eating and drinking: neither in chambering and wantonness: neither
in strife and envying: but put ye on the lord Iesus Christ. And make
not provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts of it.

The .xiiij. Chapter.
Him that is weak in the faith, receive unto you, not in disputing and
troubling his conscience. One believeth that he may eat all things.
Another which is weak eateth herbs, Let not him that eateth, despise
him that eateth not. And let not him which eateth not judge him that
eateth. For God hath received him. What art thou that judgest another
man's servant? Whether he stand or fall, that pertaineth unto his
master. Yee, he shall stand. For God is able to make him stand.
    This man putteth difference between day and day: another man
counteth all days alike. See that no man waver in his own mind. He
that observeth one day more than another, doth it for the lord's
pleasure. And he that observeth not one day more than another, doth
it to please the lord, for he giveth God thanks. and he that eateth
not, eateth not to please the lord with all, and giveth God thanks.
For none of us liveth his own servant: and also none of us dieth his
own servant. If we live, we live to be at the lord's will. And if we
die, we die at the lord's will. Whether we live therefore or die, we
are the lord's. For Christ therefore died and rose again, and
revived, that he might be lord both of dead and quick.
    But why doest thou then judge thy brother? other why dost thou
despise thy brother? We shall all be brought before the judgement
seat of Christ. For it is written: As truly as I live saith the lord,
all knees shall bow to me, and all tongues shall give a knowledge to
God. So shall every one of us give accounts of himself to God. Let us
not therefore, judge one another any more.
    But judge this rather, that no man put a stumbling block, or an
occasion to fall in his brother's way. For I know, and surely believe
in the lord Iesus, that there is nothing common of itself: but unto
him that judgeth it to be common, to him it is common. If thy brother
be grieved with thy meat, now walkest thou not charitably. Destroy
not him with thy meat, for whom Christ died. Suffer ye not that your
treasure be evil spoken of. For the kingdom of God is not meat and
drink, but righteousness, peace and joy, in the holy ghost. For
whosoever in these things serveth Christ, pleaseth well God: and is
commended of men.
    Let us follow those things which make for peace: and things
wherewith one may edify another. Destroy not the work of God for a
little meat's sake. All things are pure: but it is evil for that man,
which eateth with hurt of his conscience. It is good neither to eat
flesh, neither to drink wine, neither anything, whereby thy brother
stumbleth, other falleth, or is made weak. Hast thou faith? have it
with thyself before God. Happy is he that condemneth not himself in
that thing which he alloweth. For he that maketh conscience, is
damned if he eat: Because he doth it not of faith. For whatsoever is
not of faith, that same is sin.

The .xv. Chapter.

    We which are strong ought to bear the frailness of them which are
weak, and not to stand in our own conceits. Let every man please his
neighbor unto his wealth and edifying. For Christ pleased not
himself: but as it is written: The rebukes of them which rebuked
thee, fell on me. Whatsoever things are written aforetime, are
written for our learning that we thorow patience and comfort of the
scripture should have hope.
    God which is lord of patience and consolation, give unto every
one of you, that ye be like likeminded one towards another after the
ensample of Iesu Christ, that ye all agreeing together, may with one
mouth praise God the father of our lord Iesus. Wherefore receive ye
one another as Christ received us, to the praise of God.
    And I say that Iesus Christ was a minister of the circumcision
for the truth of God, to confirm the promises made unto the fathers.
And let the gentiles praise God for his mercy. As it is written: For
this cause I will praise thee among the gentiles, and sing in thy
name. And again he saith: ye gentiles rejoice with his people. Again,
praise the lord all ye gentiles, and laud him all nations. And in
another place Esaias saith: there shall be the root of Iesse, and he
that shall rise to reign over the gentiles: in him shall the gentiles
trust. The God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing,
that ye may be rich in hope thorow the power of the holy ghost.
    I myself am full certified of you my brethren that ye yourselves
are full of goodness, and filled with all knowledge, and are able to
counsel one another. Nevertheless brethren I have somewhat boldly
written unto you, as one that putteth you in remembrance, for the
grace which is given me of God for this purpose that I should be the
minister of Iesu Christ among the gentiles, and should minister the
glad tidings of God, that the gentiles might be an acceptable
offering, sanctified by the holy ghost. I have therefore whereof I
may rejoice in Christ Iesu, in those things which pertain to God. For
I dare not speak of any of those things which Christ hath not wrought
by me (to make the gentiles obedient) with word and deed, in mighty
signs and wonders, by the power of the spirit of God, so that from
Ierusalem and the coasts round about, unto Illiricum, I have filled
all countries with glad tidings of Christ.
    So have I enforced myself to preach the gospell, not where Christ
was named, lest I should have built on another man's foundation: but
as it is written: To whom he was not spoken of, they shall see: and
they that heard not, shall understand. For this cause I have been
ofte let to come unto you: but now seeing I have no more to do in
these countries, and also have been desirous many years to come unto
you, when I shall take my journey into Spayne, I will come to you. I
trust to see you in my journey, and to be brought on my way
thitherward by you after that I have somewhat enjoyed you.
    Now go I unto Ierusalem, and minister unto the saints. For it
hath pleased them of Macedonia and Achaia, to make a certain
distribution upon the poor saints which are at Ierusalem. It hath
pleased them verily, and their debtors are they. For if the gentiles
be made partakers of their spiritual things, their duty is to
minister unto them in carnal things. When I have performed this, and
have shewed them this fruit, I will come back again by you into
Spayne. And I am sure when I come, that I shall come with abundance
of the blessing of the gospell of Christ.
    I beseech you brethren for our lord Iesu Christe's sake, and for
the love of the spirit, that ye help me in my business, with your
prayers to God for me, that I may be delivered from them which
believe not in Iewry. and that this my service, which I have to
Ierusalem, may be accepted of the saints, that I may come unto you
with joy, by the will of God, and may with you be refreshed. The God
of peace be with all you Amen.

The .xvj. Chapter.

    I commend unto you Phebe our sister (which is a minister of the
congregation of Cencrea) that ye receive her in the lord as it
becometh saints, and that ye assist her, in whatsoever business she
needeth of your aid. For she hath succoured many, and mine own self
also. Greet Prisca and Aquila my helpers in Christ Iesu, which have
for my life laid down their own necks. Unto whom not I only give
thanks: but also the congregations of the gentiles. Likewise greet
all the company that is in their house. Salute my well beloved
Epenetes, which is the firstfruit among them of Achaia. Greet Mary
which bestowed much labour on us. Salute Andronicus, and Iunia my
cousins, which were prisoners with me also, which are well taken
among the apostles, and were in Christ before me. Greet Amplias my
beloved in the lord. Salute Urban our helper in Christ, and Stachys
my beloved. Salute Apellas approved in Christ. Salute them which are
of Aristobolus' household. Salute Herodion my kinsman. Greet them of
the household of Narcissus which are in the lord. Salute Triphena and
Triphosa, which women did labour in the lord. Salute the beloved
Persis, which laboured much in the lord. Salute Rufus chosen in the
lord, and his mother and mine. Greet Asincritus, Phlegon, Hermas,
Patrobas, Mercurius, and the brethren which are with them. Salute
Philologus and Iulia, Nereus and his sister, and Olimpha, and all the
saints which are with them. Salute one another among yourselves with
an holy kiss. The congregations of Christ salute you.
    I beseech you brethren mark them which cause division, and give
occasions of evil contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned: and
avoid them. For they that are such serve not the lord Iesus Christ:
but their own bellies. And with sweet preachings and flattering words
deceive the hearts of the innocents: for your obedience is spoken of
among all men. I am glad no doubt of you. But yet I would have you
wise unto that which is good. And to be innocent as concerning evil.
The God of peace tread Satan under your feet in short time. The grace
of our lord Iesu Christ be with you.
    Timotheus my work fellow, and Lucius, and Iason, and Sopater, my
kinsmen salute you. I Tercius salute you, which wrote this epistle in
the lord. Gaius mine host and the host of all the congregations,
saluteth you. Erastus saluteth you, the chamberlain of the city. And
Quartus a brother, saluteth you. The grace of our lord Iesu Christ be
with you all Amen.
    To him that is of power to establish you according to my gospell,
wherewith I preach Iesus Christ, in opening of the mystery which was
kept close since the world began, and now is opened at this time and
declared in the scriptures of prophecy, at the commandment of the
everlasting God, to stir up obedience to the faith published among
all nations: To the same God, which alone is wise, be praise thorow
Iesus Christ for ever Amen.

To the Romayns. Sent from Corrinthum by Phebe, she that was the
minister unto the congregacion at Chenchrea.


The first pistel of S. Paul to the Corrinthians

The first Chapter.

    Paul by vocation an Apostle of Iesus Christ thorow the will of
God, and brother Sostenes. Unto the congregation of God which is at
Corinthum. To them that are sanctified in Iesus Christ, saints by
calling, with all that call on the name of our lord Iesus Christ in
every place, both of theirs and of ours.
    Grace be with you and peace from God our father, and from the
lord Iesus Christ.
    I thank my God always on your behalf for the faveour of God which
is given you by Iesus Christ, that in all things ye are made rich by
him, in all speach and in all knowledge (even as the testimony of
Iesus Christ was confirmed in you,) so that ye are behind in no gift,
and wait for the appearing of our lord Iesus Christ which shall
strength you unto the end, that ye may be blameless in the day of our
lord Iesus Christ.
    God is faithful, by whom ye are called unto the fellowship of his
son Iesus Christ our lord.
    I beseech you brethren in the name of our lord Iesus Christ, that
ye all speak one thing, and that there be no dissension among you:
but be ye perfect in one mind, and one meaning: It is shewed unto me
(my brethren) of you by them that are of the house of Cloe, that
there is strife among you, I speak of that which everyone of you
sayth: I hold of Paul, Another sayth: I hold of apollo: Another
saith: I hold of Cephas: and another saith I hold of Christ. Is
Christ divided? was Paul crucified for you? other were ye baptised in
the name of Paul? I thank God that I christened none of you, but
Crispus and Gaius, lest any should say that I in mine own name had
baptised. I baptised also the house of Stephana. Furthermore know I
not whether I baptised any man or no.
    For Christ sent me not to baptise, but to preach the gospell, not
with wisdom of words, lest the cross of Christ should have been made
of none effect. For the preaching of the cross is to them that perish
foolishness: but unto us which are saved, it is the power of God. For
it is written: I will destroy the wisdom of the wise and will cast
away the understanding of the prudent.
    Where is the wise man? where is the scribe? where is the searcher
of this world? Hath not God made the wisdom of this world
foolishness?
    For when the world thorow wisdom knew not God, in the wisdom of
God: it pleased God thorow foolishness of preaching to save them that
believe. For the jews require a sign, and the greeks seek after
wisdom. But we preach Christ crucified, unto the jews an occasion of
falling and unto the greeks foolishness: but unto them which are
called both of Iews and greeks we preach Christ the power of God, and
the wisdom of God.
    For Godly foolishness is wiser than men: And Godly weakness is
stronger than are men.
    Brethren look on your calling how that not many wise men after
the flesh, not many mighty, not many of high degree are called: But
God hath chosen the foolish things of the world, to confound the
wise. And hath chosen the weak things of the world, to confound
things which are mighty. And vile things of the world, and things
which are despised, hath God chosen yee and things of no reputation,
for to bring to nought things of reputation, that no flesh should
rejoice in his presence. And unto him pertain ye, in Christ Iesu,
which of God is made unto us wisdom, and also righteousness, and
sanctifying, and redemption. That according as it is written: he
which rejoiceth, should rejoice in the lord.

The .ij. Chapter.

    And I brethren when I came to you, came not in gloriousness of
words or of wisdom, shewing unto you the testimony of God. Neither
shewed I myself that I knew any thing among you save Iesus Christ,
even the same that was crucified. And I was among you in weakness,
and in fear, and in much trembling. And my words, and my preaching
were not with enticing words of man's wisdom: but in shewing of the
spirit and of power, that your faith should not stand in the wisdom
of men: but in the power of God.
    We speak that which is wisdom among them that are perfect: not
the wisdom of this world neither of the rulers of this world (which
goeth to nought,) but we speak the wisdom of God, which is in secret
and lieth hid, which God ordained before the world unto our glory:
which wisdom none of the rulers of the world knew. For had they known
it, they would not have crucified the lord of glory: but as it is
written: The eye hath not seen, and the ear hath not heard, neither
have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath
prepared for them that love him.
    But God hath opened them unto us by his spirit. For the spirit
searcheth all things, yee the bottom of God's secrets. For what man
knoweth the things of a man: save the spirit of a man which is within
him? Even so the things of God knoweth no man, but the spirit of God.
And we have not received the spirit of the world: but the spirit
which cometh of God, for to know the things that are given to us of
God, which things also we speak, not in the cunning words of man's
wisdom, but with the cunning words of the holy ghost, making
spiritual comparisons of spiritual things. For the natural man
perceiveth not the things of the spirit of God: For they are but
foolishness unto him. Neither can he perceive them because he is
spiritually examined: but he that is spiritual discusseth all things:
yet he himself is judged of no man. For who knoweth the mind of the
lord, other who shall inform him? but we understand the mind of
Christ.

The .iij. Chapter.

    And I could not speak unto you brethren as unto spiritual: but as
unto carnal, even as it were unto babes in Christ. I gave you milk to
drink and not meat. For ye then were not strong, no neither yet are
strong. For ye are yet carnal. As long verily as there is among you
envying, strife and dissension: are ye not carnal, and walk after the
manner of men? As long as one saith: I hold of Paul, and another, I
am of apollo, are ye not carnal? What is Paul? what thing is apollo?
but ministers by whom ye believed even as the lord gave every man
grace. I have planted: Apollo watered: but God gave increase. So
then, neither is he that planteth any thing, neither he that
watereth: but God which gave the increase.
    He that planteth, and he that watereth, are neither better than
the other. Every man yet shall receive his reward according to his
labour. We are God's laborers: ye are God's husbandry, ye are God's
building. According to the grace of God given unto me, as a wise
builder have I laid the foundation, another hath built thereon: but
let every man take heed how he buildeth upon. For other foundation
can no man lay, than that which is laid, which is Iesus Christ. If
any man build on this foundation, gold, silver, precious stones,
timber, hay, or stubble: every man's work shall appear. For the day
shall declare it, and it shall be shewed in fire, and the fire shall
try every man's work what it is. If any man's work that he hath built
upon, bide, he shall receive a reward. If any man's work burn, he
shall suffer loss: but he shall be safe himself: nevertheless yet as
it were thorow fire.
    Are ye not ware that ye are the temple of God, and how that the
spirit of God dwelleth in you? If any man defile the temple of God,
him shall God destroy. For the temple of God is holy, which temple
are ye. Let no man deceive himself. If any man seem wise among you,
let him be a fool in this world, that he may be wise. For the wisdom
of this world is foolishness with God. For it is written: he
compasseth the wise in their craftiness. And again, God knoweth the
thoughts of the wise that they be vain. Therefore let no man rejoice
in men. For all things are yours, whether it be Paul, other Apollo,
either Cephas: whether it be the world, either life, either death,
whether they be present things or things to come: all are yours, and
ye are Christe's, and Christ is God's.

The .iiij. Chapter.

    Let men this wise esteem us, even as the ministers of Christ, and
disposers of the secrets of God. Furthermore it is required of the
disposers that they be found faithful. With me is it but a very small
thing, that I should be judged of you, either of man's day. No I
judge not mine own self. I know nought by myself: yet am I not
thereby justified. It is the lord that judgeth me. Therefore judge
nothing before the time, until the lord come, which will lighten
things that are hid in darkness: and open the counsels of the hearts.
And then shall every man have praise of God.
    These things brethren I have described in mine own person, and
Apollos: for your sakes, that ye might learn by us that no man count
of himself beyond that which is above written: that one swell not
against another for any man's cause. For who preferreth thee? What
hast thou, that thou hast not received? if thou have received it: why
rejoicest thou as though thou haddest not received it? Now ye are
full: now ye are made rich: ye reign as kings without us: and I would
to God ye did reign, that we might reign with you.
    Me thinketh that God hath shewed us which are apostles, for the
hindmost of all, as it were men appointed to death. For we are a
gazingstock unto the world, and to the angels, and to men, we are
fools for Christe's sake, and ye are wise thorow Christ: we are weak,
and ye are strong. Ye are honorable, and we are despised. Even unto
this day we hunger and thirst, and are naked, and are buffeted with
fists, and have no certain dwelling place, and labour working with
our own hands. We are reviled, and yet we bless. We are persecuted,
and suffer it. We are evil spoken of, and we pray. We are made as it
were the filthiness of the world, the offscouring of all things, even
unto this time.
    I write not these things to shame you: but as my beloved sons I
warn you. For though ye have ten thousand instructors in Christ: yet
have ye not many fathers. In Christ Iesu, I have begotten you thorow
the gospell. Wherefore I desire you to counterfeit me. For this cause
have I sent unto you Timotheus, which is my dear son, and faithful in
the lord, which shall put you in remembrance of my ways which I have
in Christ, even as I teach everywhere in all congregations. Some
swell as though I would come no more at you: but I will come to you
shortly, if God will, and will know, not the words of them which
swell, but the power. For the Kingdom of God is not in words, but in
power. What will ye? Shall I come unto you with a rod, or else in
love, and in the spirit of meekness?

The .v. Chapter.

    There goeth a common saying that there is fornication among you,
and such fornication as is not once named among the gentiles: that
one should have his father's wife. And ye swell and have not rather
sorrowed, that he which hath done this deed might be put from among
you. For I verily as absent in body, even so present in spirit, have
determined already (as though I were present) of him that hath done
this deed, in the name of our lord Iesu Christ, when ye are gathered
together, and my spirit, with the power of the lord Iesus Christ, to
deliver him unto Satan, for the destruction of the flesh that the
spirit may be saved in the day of the lord Iesus.
    Your rejoicing is not good. Know ye not that a little leaven
sowereth the whole lump of dough? Purge therefore the old leaven,
that ye may be new dough as ye are sweet bread. For Christ our ester
lamb is offered up for us. Therefore let us keep holyday, not with
old leaven, neither with the leaven of maliciousness and wickedness
but with the sweet bread of pureness and truth.
    I wrote unto you in the pistel that ye should not company with
fornicators. And I meant not at all of the fornicators of this world,
either of the covetous, or of extortioners, either of idolaters: for
then must ye needs have gone out of the world: but now I have written
unto you that ye company not together. If any that is called a
brother, be a fornicator, or covetous, or a worshipper of images,
either a railer, either a drunkard, or an extortioner: with him that
is such see ye eat not. For what have I to do to judge them which are
without? Do ye not judge them that are within? Them that are without,
God shall judge. Put away from among you that evil person.

The .vj. Chapter.

    How dare one of you having business with another, go to law under
the wicked? and not rather under the saints? Do ye not know that the
saints shall judge the world? If the world shall be judged by you:
are ye not good enough to judge small trifles. Know ye not how that
we shall judge the angels? How much more may we judge things that
pertain to the life? If ye have judgements of worldly matters, take
them which are despised in the congregation, and make them judges.
This I say to your shame. Is there utterly no wise man among you?
what not one at all? that can judge between brother and brother? but
one brother goeth to law with another: and that under the
unbelievers?
    Now therefore there is utterly a fault among you, because ye go
to law one with another. Why rather suffer ye not wrong? why rather
suffer ye not yourselves to be robbed? Nay ye yourselves do wrong,
and rob: and that the brethren. Do ye not remember how that the
unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God? Be not deceived.
For neither fornicators, neither worshippers of images, neither
whoremongers, neither weaklings, neither abusers of themselves with
mankind, neither thieves, neither the covetous, neither drunkards,
neither cursed speakers, neither pillers, shall inherit the kingdom
of God. And such were ye verily: but ye are washed: ye are
sanctified: ye are justified by the name of the lord Iesus: And by
the spirit of our God.
    All things are lawful unto me: but all things are not profitable.
I may do all things: but I will be brought under no man's power.
Meats are ordained for the belly, and the belly for meats: but God
shall destroy both him and them. Let not the body be applied unto
fornication, but unto the lord, and the lord unto the body. God hath
raised up the lord, and shall raise us up by his power. Either
remember ye not, that your bodies are the members of Christe? Shall I
now take the members of Christ, and make them the members of an
harlot? God forbid. Do ye not understand that he which coupleth
himself with an harlot, is become one body? For two (saith he) shall
be one flesh: but he that is joined unto the lord is one spirit.
    Flee fornication. All sins that a man doth, are without the body.
But he that is a fornicator, sinneth against his own body. Know ye
not how that your bodies are the temple of the holy ghost, which is
in you, whom he have of God, and how that ye are not your own? For ye
are dearly bought. Therefore glorify ye God in your bodies and in
your spirits, for they are God's.

The .vij. Chapter.

    As concerning the things whereof ye wrote unto me: It is good for
a man, not to touch a woman. Nevertheless to avoid fornication, let
every man have his wife: and let every woman have her husband. Let
the man give unto the wife due benevolence. Likewise also the wife
unto the man. The wife hath not power over her own body: but the
husband: And likewise the man hath not power over his own body: but
the wife. Withdraw not your selves one from another except it be with
consent for a time, for to give yourselves to fasting and prayer, and
afterward come again to the same thing, lest Satan tempt you for your
incontinency.
    This I say of favour, not of commandment. For I would that all
men were as I my self am: but every man hath his proper gift of God,
one after this manner, another after that. I say unto the unmarried
men, and widows: it is good for them if they abide even as I do: but
and if they cannot abstain, let them marry. For it is better to marry
than to burn.
    Unto the married command not I, but the lord: that the wife
separate not herself from the man. If she separate herself, let her
remain unmarried, or be reconciled unto her husband again. And let
not the husband put away his wife from him.
    To the remnant speak I, and not the lord: if any brother have a
wife that believeth not, if she be content to dwell with him, let him
not put her away. And the woman which hath to her husband an infidel,
if he consent to dwell with her, let her not put him away. For the
unbelieving husband is sanctified by the wife: and the unbelieving
wife is sanctified by the husband. Or else were your children
unclean: but now are they pure. But and if the unbelieving depart,
let him depart. A brother or a sister is not in subjection to such.
God hath called us in peace. For how knowest thou o woman, whether
thou shalt save thy husband or not? Other how knowest thou o man,
whether thou shalt save the wife or not? but even as God hath
distributed to every man.
    As the lord hath called every person, so let him walk: and so
ordain I in all congregations. If any man be called being
circumcised, let him add nothing thereto. If any be called
uncircumcised: let him not be circumcised. Circumcision is nothing,
uncircumcision is nothing: but the keeping of the commandments of God
is altogether. Let every man abide in the same state wherein he was
called. Art thou called a servant? care not for it. Nevertheless if
thou mayst be free, use it rather. For he that is called in the lord
being a servant, is the lord's freeman. Likewise he that is called
being free, is Christe's servant. Ye are dearly bought, be not men's
servants. Brethren let every man wherein he is called, therein abide
with God.
    As concerning virgins, I have no commandment of the lord: yet
give I counsel as one that hath obtained of the lord to be faithful.
I suppose that it is good for the present necessity. For it is good
for a man so to be. Art thou bound unto a wife? seek not to be
lowsed. Art thou lowsed from a wife? seek not a wife. But and if thou
take a wife, thou hast not sinned. Likewise if a virgin marry, she
hath not sinned: nevertheless such shall have trouble in their flesh:
but I favor you.
    This say I brethren, the time is short. It remaineth that they
which have wives, be as though they had none: and they that weep, be
as though they wept not: and they that rejoice, be as though they
rejoiced not: And they that buy, be as though they possessed not: And
they that use this world, be as though they used it not: For the
fashion of this world goeth away.
    I would have you without care, the single man careth for the
things of the lord, how he may please the lord: but he that hath
married, careth for the things of the world, how he may please his
wife. There is difference between a virgin and a wife. The single
woman careth for the things of the lord, that she may be pure both in
body and also in spirit: but she that is married, careth for the
things of the world, how she may please her husband. This speak I for
your profit, not to tangle you in a snare: but for that which is
honest and comely unto you And that ye may quietly cleave unto the
lord without separation.
    If any man think that it is uncomely for his virgin if she pass
the time of marriage, and if so need require, let him do what he
listeth, he sinneth not: let them be coupled in marriage.
Nevertheless, he that purposeth surely in his heart, having none
need: but hath power over his own will: and hath so decreed in his
heart that he will keep his virgin, doth well. So then he that
joineth his virgin in marriage doth well. And he that joineth not his
virgin in marriage doth better. The wife is bound to the law as long
as her husband liveth. If her husband sleep, she is at liberty to
marry with whom she will only in the lord. But she is happier if she
so abide, in my judgement. And I think verily that I have the spirit
of God.

The .viij. Chapter.

    To speak of things dedicate unto idols, we are sure that we all
have knowledge. Knowledge maketh a man swell: but love edifieth. If
any man think that he knoweth any thing, he knoweth nothing yet as he
ought to know. But if any man love God, the same is known of him.
    To speak of meat dedicat unto idols, we are sure that there is
none idol in the world: and that there is none other God but one. And
though there be that are called goddes, whether in heaven or in earth
(as there be goddes many and lords many) but unto us is there one
God, which is the father, of whom are all things, and we in him: and
one lord Iesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him.
    But every man hath not knowledge. For some suppose that there is
an idol, until this hour, and eat as of a thing offered unto the
idol, and so their consciences being yet weak are defiled. Meat
maketh us not acceptable to God: Neither if we eat are we the better:
Neither if we eat not are we the worse.
    But take heed that your liberty cause not the weak to fall. For
if some man see thee which hast knowledge sit at meat in the idol's
temple shall not the conscience of him which is weak be boldened to
eat those things which are offered unto the idol? And so thorow thy
knowledge shall the weak brother perish for whom Christ died. When we
sin so against the brethren and wound their weak consciences, we sin
against Christ. Wherefore if meat hurt my brother, I will eat no
flesh while the world standeth, because I will not hurt my brother.

The .ix. Chapter.

    Am I not an Apostle? am I not free? have I not seen Iesus Christ
our lord? Are not ye my work in the lord. If I be not an Apostle unto
other, yet am I unto you. For the seal of mine Apostleship are ye in
the lord. Mine answer to them that ask me, is this: Have we not power
to eat and to drink? Either have we not power to lead about a sister
to wife as well as other Apostles, and as the brethren of the lord,
and Cephas? Either only I and Barnabas have not power this to do? Who
goeth a warfare any time at his own cost? who planteth a vineyard and
eateth not of the fruit? or who feedeth a flock and eateth not of the
milk?
    Say I these things after the manner of men? or sayth not the law
the same also? For it is written in the law of Moses: Thou shall not
muzzle the mouth of the ox that treadeth out the corn. Doth God take
thought for oxen? Either saith he it not all together for our sakes?
For our sakes no doubt this is written: that he which eareth should
ear in hope: and that he which throsheth in hope, should be part
taker of his hope. If we sow unto you spiritual things: is it a great
thing if we reap your carnal things? If other be part takers of this
power over you? wherefore are not we rather.
    Nevertheless we have not used this power: but suffer all things
lest we should hinder the gospell of Christ. Do ye not understand how
that they which minister in the temple: have their finding of the
temple? And they which wait at the altar are partakers with the
altar? Even so also did the lord ordain, that they which preach the
gospell, should live of the gospell: But I have used none of these
things.
    Neither wrote I these things that it should be so done unto me.
It were better for me to die than any man should take this rejoicing
from me. In that I preach the gospell I have nothing to rejoice of.
For necessity is put unto me. Woe is it unto me if I preach not the
gospell. If I do it with a good will, I have a reward. If I do it
against my will, an office is committed unto me. What is my reward
then? Verily that when I preach the gospell, I make the gospell of
Christ free, that I misuse not mine authority in the gospell.
    For though I be free from all men, yet have I made myself servant
unto all men, that I might win the more. And unto the jewes, I became
as a jewe, to win the jewes. To them that were under the law, was I
made as though I had been under the law, to win them that were under
the law. To them that were without law, became I as though I had been
without law (when I was not without law as pertaining to God, but
under a law as concerning Christ) to win them that were without law.
To the weak became I as weak, to win the weak. In all thing I
fashioned myself to all men, to save at the leastway some. And this I
do for the gospell's sake, that I might have my part thereof.
    Perceive ye not how that they which run in a course, run all, yet
but one receiveth the reward? So run that ye may obtain. Every man
that proveth masteries abstaineth from all things. And they do it to
obtain a corruptible crown: but we to obtain an everlasting crown: I
therefore so run, not as at an uncertain thing. So fight I, not as
one that beateth the air: but I tame my body and bring him into
subjection, lest after that I have preached to other, I myself should
be a castaway.

The .x. Chapter.

    Brethren I would not that ye should be ignorant of this, how that
our fathers were all under a cloud, and all passed thorow the sea,
and were all baptised under Moses in the cloud and in the sea: and
did all eat of one spiritual meat, and did all drink of one manner of
spiritual drink. And they drank of that spiritual rock that followed
them, which rock was Christ. But in many of them had God no delight.
For they were overthrown in the wilderness.
    These are examples to us that we should not lust after evil
things, as they lusted. Neither be ye worshippers of images as were
some of them according as it is written: The people sat down to eat
and drink, and rose up again to play. Neither let us commit
fornication as some of them committed fornication, and were destroyed
in one day xxiij. thousand. Neither let us tempt Christ, as some of
them tempted and were destroyed of serpents. Neither murmur ye as
some of them murmured, and were destroyed of the destroyer.
    All these things happened upon them for ensamples, and were
written to put us in remembrance, whom the ends of the world are come
upon. Wherefore let him that thinketh he standeth, take heed lest he
fall. There hath none other temptation taken you, but such as
followeth the nature of man. God is faithful, which shall not suffer
you to be tempted above your strength: but shall in the midst of the
temptation make a way to escape out. Wherefore my dear beloved, flee
from worshipping of idols.
    I speak as unto them which have discretion, judge ye what I say.
Is not the cup of blessing which we bless, partaking of the blood of
Christ? is not the bread which we break, partaking of the body of
Christ? because that we (though we be many) yet are one bread, and
one body in as much as we all are partakers of one bread. Behold
Israhell which walketh carnally. Are not they which eat of the
sacrifice, partakers of the altar?
    What say I then? that the image is anything? or that it which is
offered to images is anything? Nay, but I say, that those things
which the gentiles offer, they offer to devils, and not to God. And I
would not that ye should have fellowship with the devils. Ye cannot
drink of the cup of the lord, and of the cup of the devils. Ye can
not be partakers of the lord's table, and of the table of devils.
Other shall we provoke the lord? other are we stronger than he? All
things are lawful unto me, but all things are not expedient. All
things are lawful, but all things edify not. Let no man seek his own
profit: but let every man seek his neighbors wealth.
    Whatsoever is sold in the market, that eat, and ask no questions
for conscience sake. For the earth is the lord's, and all that
therein is. If any of them which believe not bid you to a feast, and
if ye be disposed to go, whatsoever is set before you eat, asking no
question for conscience sake. but and if any man say unto you: this
is dedicate unto idols, eat not of it for his sake that shewed it,
and for hurting of conscience: the earth is the lord's and all that
therein is. Conscience I say, not thine: but the conscience of that
other. Why should my liberty be judged of another man's conscience?
For if I take my part with thanks: why am I evil spoken of for that
thing wherefore I give thanks?
    Whether therefore ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to
the praise of God. See that ye give none occasion of evil, neither to
the jewes, nor yet to the gentiles, neither to the congregation of
God: even as I please all men in all things not seeking mine own
profit, but the profit of many, that they might be saved.

The .xj. Chapter.
Follow me as I do Christ.
    I commend you brethren that ye remember me in all things, and
keep the ordinances which I gave to you. I would ye knew that Christ
is the head of every man. and the womans head is the man. and
Christe's head is God. Every man praying or prophesying having any
thing on his head, shameth his head. Every woman that prayeth or
prophesieth bare headed, dishonesteth her head. For it is even all
one, and the very same thing even as though she were shaven. If the
woman be not covered, let her also be shaven. If it be shame for a
woman to be shaven or shorn, let her cover her head.
    A man ought not to cover his head, forasmuch as he is the image
and glory of God. The woman is the glory of the man. For the man is
not of the woman, but the woman of the man. Neither was the man
created for the woman's sake: but the woman for the man's sake. For
this cause ought the woman to have power in {on} her head, for the 
angels' sake. Nevertheless, neither is the man without the woman, 
neither the woman without the man in the lord. For as the woman is 
of the man, even so is the man by the woman: but all is of God.
    Judge in yourselves whether it be comely that a woman pray unto
God bareheaded. Or else doth not nature teach you, that it is a shame
for a man, if he have long hair: and a praise to a woman if she have
long hair? For her hair is given her to cover her with all. If there
be any man among you that lusteth to strive, let him know that we
have no such customes, neither the congregations of God.
    This I warn you of, and commend not that ye come together after a
worse manner, and not after a better. First of all when ye come
together in the congregation, I hear that there is dissension among
you: And I partly believe it. For there must be sects among you, that
they which among you are perfect might be known. When ye come
together in one place, a man cannot eat the lord's supper. For every
man beginneth afore to eat his own supper. And one is hungry, and
another is drunken. Have ye not houses to eat and to drink in? Or
else despise ye the congregation of God? and shame them that have
not? what shall I say unto you? shall I praise you? in this praise I
you not.
    That which I gave unto you I received of the lord. For the lord
Iesus the same night in the which he was betrayed, took bread: and
thanked and brake, and said. Take ye, and eat ye this is my body
which is broken for you. This do ye in the remembrance of me. After
the same manner he took the cup when supper was done saying: This cup
is the new testament in my blood, this do as oft as ye drink it, in
the remembrance of me.
    For as often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye
shall shew the lord's death, till he come. Wherefore whosoever shall
eat of this bread, or drink of the cup unworthily, shall be guilty of
the body and blood of the lord. Let a man therefore examine himself,
and so let him eat of the bread and drink of the cup. For he that
eateth or drinketh unworthily, eateth and drinketh his own damnation,
because he maketh no difference of the lord's {lordis} body.
    For this cause many are weak and sick among you, and many sleep.
If we had truly judged ourselves, we should not have been judged.
When we are judged of the lord we are chastened, because we should
not be damned with the world. Wherefore my brethren, when ye come to
gether to eat, tarry one for another. If any man hunger, let him eat
at home, that ye come not together unto condemnation. Other things
will I set in order when I come.

The .xij. Chapter.

    In spiritual things brethren I would not have you ignorant. Ye
know that ye were gentiles, and went your ways unto dumb idols, even
as ye were led. Wherefore I declare unto you that no man speaking in
the spirit of God defieth Iesus. Also no man can say that Iesus is
the lord: but by the holy ghost.
    There are diversities of gifts verily, yet but one spirit. And
there are differences of administrations, and yet but one lord. And
there are divers manners of operations, and yet but one God, which
worketh all things that are wrought in all creatures. The gifts of
the spirit are given to every man to profit the congregation. To one
is given the utterance of wisdom: to another is given the utterance
of knowledge by the same spirit: to another is given faith, by the
same spirit. To another the gifts of healing, by the same spirit. To
another power to do miracles: To another prophecy, To another
judgement of spirits, To another diverse tongues: To another the
interpretation of tongues: and these all worketh even the self same
spirit, dividing to every man several gifts even as he will.
    For as the body is one, and hath many members, and all the
members of one body though they be many, yet are but one body: even
so is Christ. For in one spirit are we all baptised to make one body,
whether we be jewes or gentiles: whether we be bond or free, and have
all drunk of one spirit. For the body is not one member, but many. If
the foot say: I am not the hand, therefore I am not of the body: is
he therefore not of the body? and if the ear say I am not the eye:
therefore I am not of the body: is he therefore not of the body? if
all the body were an eye: where were then the ear? if all were
hearing: where were the smelling?
    But now hath God disposed the members, every one of them in the
body, at his own pleasure. If they were all one member: where were
the body? Now are there many members, yet but one body. And the eye
cannot say unto the hand: I have no need of thee: nor the head also
to the feet: I have no need of you. Yea rather a great deal those
members of the body which seem to be most feeble, are most necessary.
And upon those members of that body which we think least honest, put
we most honesty on. And our ungodly parts have most beauty on. For
our honest members need it not: but God hath so disposed the body,
and hath given most honour to that part which lacked, lest there
should be any strife in the body: but that the members should
indifferently care for one another. And if one member suffer all
suffer with him: if one member be had in honour, all members be glad
also.
    Ye are the body of Christ, and members one of another. And God
hath also ordained in the congregation, first the Apostles,
secondarily prophets, thirdly teachers, then them that do miracles,
after that, the gifts of healing, helpers, governors, diversity of
tongues.
    Are all Apostles? are all prophets? Are all teachers? are all
doers of miracles? have all the gifts of healing? Do all speak with
tongues? do all interpret? Covet after the best gifts. And yet shew I
unto you a more excellent way.

The .xiij. Chapter.

    Though I spake with the tongues of men and angels, and yet had no
love, I were even as sounding brass: and as a tinkling cymbal. And
though I could prophesy, and understood all secrets, and all
knowledge: yee, if I had all faith so that I could move mountains out
of their places, and yet had no love, I were nothing. And though I
bestowed all my goods to feed the poor, and though I gave my body
even that I burned, and yet had no love, it profiteth me nothing.
    Love suffereth long, and is courteous. Love envieth not. Love
doth not frowardly, swelleth not, dealeth not dishonestly, seeketh
not her own, is not provoked to anger, thinketh not evil rejoiceth
not in iniquity: but rejoiceth in the truth, suffereth all things,
believeth all things hopeth all things, endureth in all things.
Though that prophesying fail, or tongues shall cease, or knowledge
vanish away: yet love falleth never away.
    For our knowledge is unperfect, and our prophesying is unperfect:
but when that which is perfect is come: then that which is unperfect
shall be done away. When I was a child, I spake as a child, I
understood as a child, I imagined as a child: but as soon as I was a
man I put away childishness. Now we see in a glass even in a dark
speaking: but then shall we see face to face. Now I know unperfectly:
but then shall I know even as I am known. Now abideth faith, hope,
and love, even these three: but the chief of these is love.

The .xiiij. Chapter.

    Labour for love, and covet spiritual gifts: and most chiefly for
to prophesy. For he that speaketh with tongues speaketh not unto men,
but unto God. No man heareth him: For in the spirit he speaketh
mysteries. But he that prophesieth speaketh unto men, for their
edifying, and comfort. He that speaketh with tongues, profiteth
himself: he that prophesieth edifieth the congregation. I would that
ye all spake with tongues: but rather that ye prophesied. For greater
is he that prophesieth, than he that speaketh with tongues, except he
expound it also, that the congregation may have edifying. Now
brethren if I come unto you speaking with tongues: what shall I
profit you? except I speak unto you, either by revelation, or
knowledge, or prophesying, or doctrine.
    Moreover when things without life give sound: whether it be a
pipe, or an harp: except they make a distinction in the sounds: how
shall it be known what is piped or harped? And also if the trumpet
give an uncertain voice, who shall prepare himself to fight? Even so
likewise when ye speak with tongues, except ye speak words that have
signification, how shall it be understood what is spoken? For ye
shall but speak in the air.
    Many kinds of voices are in the world, and none of them are
without signification. If I know not what the voice meaneth, I shall
be unto him that speaketh an alien: and he that speaketh shall be an
alien unto me. Even so ye (for a much as ye covet spiritual gifts)
seek that ye may have plenty unto the edifying of the congregation.
    Wherefore let him that speaketh with tongues, pray that he may
interpret also. If I pray with tongues, my spirit prayeth: but my
mind is without fruit. What is it then? I will pray with my spirit,
and will pray with my mind also. I will sing with my spirit, and will
sing with my mind also.
    For else when thou blessest with the spirit, how shall he that
occupieth the room of the unlearned say amen at thy giving of thanks?
seeing he understandeth not what thou sayest? Thou verily givest
thanks well: but the other is not edified. I thank my God, I speak
with tongues more than ye all. Yet had I lever in the congregation to
speak five words with my mind to the information of other, rather
than ten thousand words with the tongue.
    Brethren, be not children in wit: as concerning maliciousness be
children: but in wit be perfect. In the law it is written, with other
tongues, and with other lips will I speak unto this people, and yet
for all that will they not hear me saith the lord. Wherefore tongues
are for a sign, not to them that believe: but to them that believe
not. Contrariwise prophesying serveth not for them that believe not:
but for them which believe.
    If therefore when all the congregation is come together, and all
speak with tongues, there come in they that are unlearned, or they
which believe not: will they not say that ye are out of your wits?
But and if all prophesy, and there come in one that believeth not, or
one unlearned, he is reproved of all men, and is judged of every man:
and so are the secrets of his heart opened: and then falleth he down
on his face, and worshippeth God, and saith that God is with you
indeed.
    How is it then brethren? when ye come together every man hath his
song, hath his doctrine, hath his tongue, hath his revelation, hath
his interpretation: Let all things be unto edifying. If any man speak
with tongues, let it be two at once: or at the most three at once:
and that by course, and let another interpret it: But if there be no
interpreter, let him keep silence in the congregation, and let him
speak to himself, and to God.
    Let the prophets speak two at once, or three at once, and let
other judge. If any revelation be made to another that sitteth by,
let the first hold his peace. For ye may all prophesy one by one,
that all may learn, and all may have comfort. For the spirits of the
prophets are in the power of the prophets. For God is not causer of
strife: but of peace, as he is in all other congregations of the
saints.
    Let your wives keep silence in the congregations. For it is not
permitted unto them to speak: but let them be under obedience, as
saith the law: if they will learn any thing, let them ask their
husbands at home. For it is a shame for women to speak in the
congregation. Sprang the word of God from you? Either came it unto
you only? If any man think himself a prophet either spiritual: let
him understand, what things I write unto you. For they are the
commandments of the lord. But and if any man be ignorant, let him be
ignorant. Wherefore brethren covet to prophesy, and forbid not to
speak with tongues. Let all things be done honestly and in order.

The .xv. Chapter.

    Brethren as pertaining to the gospell which I preached unto you,
which ye have also accepted, and in the which ye continue: by the
which also ye are saved, I do you to wit after what manner I preached
unto you, if ye keep it, except ye have believed in vain.
    For first of all I delivered unto you that which I received: how
that Christ died for our sins, agreeing to the scriptures: and that
he was buried, and that he arose again the third day according to the
scriptures: and that he was seen of Cephas, then of the twelve, After
that he was seen of more than five hundred brethren at once: of which
many remain unto this day, and many are fallen asleep. After that
appeared he to Iames, then to all the Apostles.
    And last of all he was seen of me, as of one that was born out of
due time. For I am the least of all the Apostles, which am not worthy
to be called an apostle, because I persecuted the congregation of
God: But by the faveour of God I am that I am. And his faveour which
is in me was not in vain: but I laboured more abundantly than they
all, not I, but the faveour of God which is with me. Whether it were
I or they, so have we preach, and so have ye believed.
    If Christ be preached how that he rose from death: how say some
that are among you, that there is no resurrection of the dead? If
there be no rising again of death: then is Christ not risen. If
Christ be not risen, then is our preaching vain, and your faith is
also in vain. Yee, and we are found false witnesses of God. For we
have testified against God how that he raised up Christ, whom he 
raised not up, if it be so that the dead rise not up again. For if 
the dead rise not again, then is Christ not risen again. If it be so 
that Christ rose not, then is your faith in vain, and yet are ye 
in your sins. And they which are fallen asleep in Christ, are perished.
 If in this life only we believe on Christ, then are we of all men the
miserablest.
    Now is Christ risen from death, and is become the first fruits of
them that slept. For by a man came death, and by a man came
resurrection of death. For as by Adam all die: even so by Christ,
shall all be made alive, and every man in his own order: The first is
Christ, then they that are Christi's at his coming. Then cometh the
end, when he hath delivered up the kingdom to God the father, when he
hath put down all rule, authority, and power. For he must rule till
he have put all his enemies under his feet.
    The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death. For he hath put
all things under his feet. But when he saith, all things are put
under him, it is manifest, that he is excepted, which did put all
things under him. When all things are subdued unto him: then shall
the son also himself be subject unto him that put all things under
him, that God may be all in all things. Other else what do they which
are baptised over the dead, if the dead rise not at all? why are they
baptised over the dead? And why stand we in jeopardy every hour? by
our rejoicing which I have in Christ Iesu our lord, I die daily. That
I have fought with beasts at Ephesus after the manner of men, what
advantageth it me, if the dead rise not again? Let us eat and drink,
tomorrow we shall die. Be not deceived: malicious speakings corrupt
good manners. Awake truly out of sleep, and sin not. For some have
not the knowledge of God. I speak this unto your rebuke.
    But some man will say: how shall the dead arise? with what body
shall they come? Thou fool, that which thou sowest, is not quickened
except it die. And what sowest thou? Thou sowest not that body that
shall be: but bare corn (I mean either of wheat, or of some other)
and God giveth it a body at his pleasure, to every seed a several
body.
    All flesh is not one manner of flesh: but there is one manner
flesh of men, another manner flesh of beasts, another manner flesh of
fishes, and another of birds. There are celestial bodies, and there
are bodies terrestrial: But the glory of the celestial is one, and
the glory of the terrestrial is another. There is one manner glory of
the sun, and another glory of the moon, an another glory of the
stars. For one star differeth from another in glory. So is the
resurrection of the dead. It is sown in corruption, and riseth in
incorruption. It is sown in dishonour, and riseth in honour. It is
sown in weakness, and riseth in power. It is sown a natural body, and
riseth a spiritual body.
    There is a natural body and there is a spiritual body. as it is
written: The first man Adam was made a living soul: and the last Adam
was made a quickening spirit: but that is not first which is
spiritual: but that which is natural, and then that which is
spiritual. The first man is of the earth, earthy: The second man is
from heaven, heavenly. As is the earthy, such are they that are
earthy: And as is the heavenly, such are they that are heavenly. And
as we have born the image of the earthy, so shall we bear the image
of the heavenly.
    This say I brethren, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the
kingdom of God. Neither doth corruption inherit uncorruption. Behold
I shew a mystery unto you: we shall not all sleep: but we shall all
be changed, and that in a moment, and in the twinkling of an eye, at
the sound of the last trumpet. For the trumpet shall blow, and the
dead shall rise incorruptible: And we shall be changed. For this
corruptible must put on incorruptibility: and this mortal must put on
immortality.
    When this corruptible hath put on incorruptibility: and this
mortal hath put on immortality: then shall be brought to pass the
saying that is written: Death is consumed into victory. Death where
is thy sting? Hell where is thy victory? The sting of death is sin.
    The strength of sin is the law: But thanks be unto God, which
hath given us victory thorow our lord Iesus Christ. Therefore my dear
brethren, be ye steadfast and unmoveable, always rich in the works of
the lord, forasmuch as ye know how that your labour is not in vain in
the lord.

The .xvj. Chapter.

    Of the gathering for the saints, as I have ordained in the
congregations of Galacia, even so do ye. In some saboth day let every
one of you put aside at home, and lay up whatsoever he thinketh meet,
that there be no gatherings when I come. When I am come, whosoever ye
shall allow by your letters, them will I send to bring your
liberality unto Ierusalem. And if it be meet that I go, they shall go
with me. I will come unto you after I have gone over Macedonia. For I
will go thorowout Macedonia. With you peradventure I will abide a
while: or else winter, that ye may bring me on my way whithersoever I
go.
    I will not see you now in my passage: but I trust to abide a
while with you, if God shall suffer me. I will tarry at Ephesus until
witsontide: For a great door and a fruitful is opened unto me: and
there are many adversaries. If Timotheus come, see that he be without
fear with you. For he worketh the work of the lord as I do. Let no
man despise him: but convey him forth in peace, that he may come unto
me. For I look for him with the brethren.
    To speak of brother Apollo: I greatly desired him to come unto
you with the brethren, but his mind was not at all to come at this
time. He will come when he shall have convenient time. Watch ye,
stand fast in the faith, quit you like men, and be strong. Let all
your business be done in love.
    Brethren (ye know the house of Stephana how that they are the
first fruits of Achaia, and that they have appointed themselves to
minister unto the saints:) I beseech you that ye be obedient unto
such, and to all that help and labour. I am glad of the coming of
Stephana, Fortunatus, and Achaicus: for that which was lacking on
your part they have supplied. They have comforted my spirit and
yours. Look therefore that ye know them that are such.
    The congregations of Asia salute you. Aquila and Priscilla salute
you much in the lord, and so doeth the congregation that is in their
house. All the brethren greet you. Greet ye one another with an holy
kiss. The salutation of me Paul with mine own hand: If any man love
not the lord Iesus Christ, the same be anathema maranatha. The
faveour of the lord Iesus Christ be with you all. My love be with you
all in Christ Iesu, Amen.

The pistle unto the Corrinthyans sent from Philippos, By Stephana,
and Fortunatus, and Acaichus, and Timotheus.


The second pistel of S. Paul to the Corrinthians

The first Chapter.

    Paul an apostle of Iesus Christ by the will of God, and brother
Timotheus.
    Unto the congregation of God, which is at Corinthum, with all the
saints which are in all Achaia: Grace be with you and peace from God
our father, and from the lord Iesus Christ.
    Blessed be God the father of our lord Iesus the Christ, father of
mercy, and the God of all comfort, which comforteth us in all our
tribulation, insomuch that we are able to comfort them which are
troubled, in whatsoever tribulation it be, with the same comfort
wherewith we our selves are comforted of God. For as the afflictions
of Christ are plenteous in us: even so is our consolation plenteous
by Christ.
    Whether we be troubled for your consolation, and health, which
health sheweth her power in that ye suffer the same afflictions which
we also suffer: or whether we be comforted for your consolation and
health: yet our hope is steadfast for you inasmuch as we know how
that as ye have your part in afflictions, so shall ye be part takers
of consolation.
    Brethren I would not have you ignorant of our trouble, which
happened unto us in Asia. For we were grieved out of measure passing
strength, so greatly that we despaired even of life. Also we received
an answer of death in ourselves, and that was done because we should
not put our trust in ourselves: but in God, which raiseth the dead to
life again: Which delivered us from so great a death, and doth
deliver, on whom we trust, that yet hereafter he will deliver us, by
the help of your prayer for us: That by the means of many occasions,
thanks may be given of many on our behalf, For the grace given unto
us.
    Our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience, that we
with out doubleness, but with godly pureness: not in fleshly wisdom,
but by the grace of God, have had our conversation in the world, and
most of all to youwards. We write no other things unto you, than that
ye read and also know. Yee and I trust ye shall find us unto the end
even as ye have found us partly, for we are your rejoicing, even as
ye are ours in the day of the lord Iesus.
    And in this confidence was I minded the other time to have come
unto you (that ye might have had a double pleasure,) and to have
passed by you into Macedonia, and to have come again out of Macedonia
unto you, and to have been led forth to Iewryward of you.
    When I thuswise was minded: Did I use lightness? Or think I
carnally those things which I think? that with me should be yea yea,
and nay nay. God is faithful: For our preaching unto you, was not yea
and nay. For God's son Iesus Christ which was preached among you by
us (that is to say by me and Silvanus and Thimotheus) was not yea and
nay: but in him it was Yea: For all the promises of God, in him are
Yea: and are in him Amen, unto the laud of God thorow us. It is God
which stablisheth us and you in Christ, and hath anointed us, which
hath also sealed us, and hath given the earnest of the spirit into
our hearts.
    I call God for a record unto my soul, that for to favor you with
all, I came not any more unto Corinthum. Not that we be lords over
your faith: but helpers of your joy. For by faith ye stand.

The .ij. Chapter.
But I determined this in myself, that I would not come again to you
in heaviness. For if I make you sorry: who is it that should make me
glad, but the same which is made sorry by me? And I wrote this same
pistel unto you, lest if I came, I should take heaviness of them, of
whom I ought to rejoice. Certainly this confidence have I in you all,
that my joy is the joy of you all. For in great affliction and
anguish of heart I wrote unto you with many tears: not to make you
sorry, but that ye might perceive the love which I have most
specially unto you.
    If any man hath caused sorrow, the same hath not made me sorry:
but partly, lest I should grieve you all. It is sufficient unto the
same man that he was rebuked of many. So that now contrarywise ye
ought to forgive him and comfort him: lest that same should be
swallowed up with overmuch heaviness. Wherefore I exhort you, that
love may have strength over him. For this cause verily did I write,
that I might know the proof of you, whether ye should be obedient in
all things. To whom ye forgive any thing, I forgive also. And verily
if I forgive any thing, to whom I forgave it for your sakes forgave I
it, in the room of Christ, lest Satan should prevent us. For his
thoughts are not unknown unto us.
    When I was come to Troada for Christ's Gospel's sake (and a great
door was opened unto me of the lord) I had no rest in my spirit,
because I found not Titus my brother: but took my leave of them and
went away into Macedonia. Thanks be unto God which always giveth us
the victory in Christ, and openeth the savor of his knowledge by us
in every place. For we are unto God the sweet savor of Christ, both
among them that are saved, and also among them which perish: to the
one part are we the savor of death unto death: unto the other part
are we the savor of life unto life. And who is meet unto these
things? For we are not as many are which chop and change with the
word of God: but as they which speak of pureness, and as they which
speak off God in the sight of God, so speak we in Christ.

The .iij. Chapter.

    We begin to praise ourselves again. Need we as some other of
pistels of recommendation unto you? or letters of recommendation from
you? Ye are our pistel written in our hearts, which is understood and
read of all men, in that ye are known, how that ye are the pistel of
Christ, ministered by us and written, not with ink: but with the
spirit of the living God, not in tables of stone, but in fleshly
tables of the heart. Such trust have we thorow Christ to Godward, not
that we are sufficient of ourselves to think any thing as it were of
ourselves: but our ableness cometh of God, which hath made us able to
minister the new testament, not of the letter, but of the spirit: For
the letter killeth, but the spirit giveth life.
    If the ministration of death thorow the letters figured in stones
was glorious, so that the children of Israel could not behold the
face of Moses for the glory of countenance (which glory nevertheless
is done away) why shall not the ministration of the spirit be much
more glorious? For if the ministering of condemnation be glorious:
much more doth the administration of righteousness exceed in glory.
For no doubt that which was there glorified is not once glorified in
respect of this exceeding glory. Then if that which is destroyed was
glorious, much more shall that which remaineth be glorious.
    Seeing then that we have such trust we use great boldness, and do
not as Moses, which put a veil over his face that the children of
Israell should not see for what purpose that served which is put
away. But their minds were blinded. For until this day remaineth the
same covering untaken away in the old testament when they read it,
which in Christ is put away: But even unto this day, when Moses is
read the veil hangeth before their hearts. Nevertheless when they
turn to the lord, the veil shall be taken away. The lord no doubt is
a spirit. And where the spirit of the lord is, there is liberty. And
now the lordis glory appeareth in us all, as in a glass: and we are
changed unto the same similitude, from glory to glory, even of the
lord which is a spirit.

The .iiij. Chapter.

    Therefore seeing that we have such an office, even as mercy is
come on us, we faint not: but have cast from us the cloaks of
unhonesty, and walk not in craftiness, neither corrupt we the word of
God: but walk in open truth, and report ourselves to every man's
conscience in the sight of God.
    If our gospel be yet hid, it is hid among them that are lost, in
whom the God of this world hath blinded the minds of them which
believe not, lest should shine unto them the light of the glorious
gospel of Christ, which is the image of God, for we preach not
ourselves, but Christ Iesus the lord, and preach ourselves your
servants for Iesus' sake. For it is God that commanded the light to
shine out of darkness, which hath shined in our hearts, for to give
the light of knowledge of the glorious God, in the face of Iesus
Christ.
    But we have this treasure in earthen vessels that the excellent
power of it might appear to be of God, and not of us. We are troubled
on every side, yet are we not without shift. We are in poverty: but
not utterly without somewhat. We are persecuted: but are not
forsaken. We are cast down: nevertheless we perish not. And we always
bear in our bodies the dying of the lord Iesus, that the life of Iesu
might appear in our bodies. For we which live, are always delivered
unto death for Iesus' sake, that the life also of Iesu might appear
in our mortal flesh. So then death worketh in us, and life in you.
Seeing then that we have the same spirit of faith, according as it is
written (I believed and therefore have I spoken) we also believe, and
therefore speak. For we know that he which raised up the lord Iesus,
shall raise up us also by the means of Iesus, and shall set us with
you, for all things I do for your sakes, that the plenteous grace by
thanks given of many, may redound to the praise of God.
    Wherefore we are not wearied, but though our outward man perish,
yet the inward man is renewed day by day. For our exceeding
tribulation, which is momentary and light, prepareth an exceeding,
and eternal weight of glory unto us, while we look not on the things
which are seen, but on the things which are not seen. For things
which are seen, are temporal: but things which are not seen are
eternal.

The .v. Chapter.

    We know surely if our earthy mansion wherein we now dwell were
destroyed, that we have a building ordained of God, an habitation not
made with hands, but eternal in heaven: And herefore sigh we,
desiring to be clothed with our mansion which is from heaven: if it
happen that we be found clothed, and not naked. For as long as we are
in this tabernacle, we sigh and are grieved: for we would not be
unclothed: but would be clothed upon, that mortality might be
swallowed up of life. He that hath ordained us for this thing, is
God: which very same hath given unto us the earnest of the spirit.
    We are always of good cheer, and know well that as long as we are
at home in the body we are absent from God. For we walk in faith and
see not. Nevertheless we are of good comfort, and had lever to be
absent from the body and to be present with God. Wherefore we
endeavor ourselves, whether we be at home or from home, to please
God. For we must all be brought before the judgement seat of Christ
that every man may receive the works of his body according to that he
hath done, whether it be good or bad? Seeing then that we know how
the lord is to be feared, we fare fair with men. For we are known
well enough unto God. I trust also that we are known in your
consciences.
    We praise not ourselves again unto you, but give you an occasion
to rejoice of us, that ye may have somewhat against them, which
rejoice in the face, and not in the heart. For if we be too fervent,
to God are we to fervent: if we keep measure, for your cause keep we
measure. For the love of Christ constraineth us, because we thus
judge, if one be dead for all, that then are all dead, and that he
died for all, because that they which live, should not henceforth
live unto themselves: but unto him which died for them and rose
again.
    Wherefore henceforth know we no man after the flesh. Insomuch
that though we have known Christ after the flesh, now henceforth know
we him so no more. Therefore if any man be in Christ, he is a new
creature. Old things are passed away, behold all things are become
new. Nevertheless all things are of God, which hath reconciled us
unto himself by Iesus Christ, and hath given unto us the office to
preach the atonement. For God was in Christ, and made agreement
between the world and him self, and imputed not their sins unto them:
and hath committed to us the preaching of the atonement.
    Now then are we messengers in the room of Christ: even as though
God did beseech you thorow us: So pray we you in Christe's stead,
that ye be at one with God: for he hath made him to be sin for us,
which knew no sin, that we by his means should be that righteousness
which before God is allowed.

The .vj. Chapter.

    We as helpers therefore exhort you, that ye receive not the grace
of God in vain. For he saith: I have heard thee in a time accepted:
and in the day of health, have I succoured thee. Behold now is that
well accepted time: behold now is the day of health. Let us give no
man occasion of evil, that in our office be found no fault: but in
all things let us behave ourselves as the ministers of God.
    In much patience, in afflictions, in necessity, in anguish, in
stripes, in prisonment, in strife, in labour, in watch, in fasting,
in pureness, in knowledge, in longsuffering, in kindness, in the holy
ghost, in love unfeigned, in the words of truth, in the power of God,
by the armour of righteousness of the right hand and on the left
hand, in honour and dishonour, in evil report and good report, as
deceivers and yet true, as unknown, and yet known: as dying and
behold we yet live: as chastened and not killed: as sorrowing and yet
alwaye merry: as poor and yet make many rich: as having no thing and
yet possessing all things.
    O ye Corinthians, our mouth is open unto you. Our heart is made
large: ye are not brought into cumbrance by us, though that ye vex
yourselves of a true meaning. I speake unto you as unto children,
which have like reward with us: Stretch yourselves therefore out.
bear not the yoke with the unbelievers. For what fellowship hath
righteousness with unrighteousness? What company hath light with
darkness? What concord hath Christ with beliall? Either what part
hath he that believeth with an infidel? how agreeth the temple of God
with images? And ye are the temple of the living God, as said God: I
will dwell among them, and walk among them, and will be their God:
and they shall be my people. Wherefore come out from among them, and
separate yourselves (saith the lord) and touch none unclean thing: so
will I receive you, and will be a father unto you, and ye shall be
unto me sons and daughters, saith the lord almighty.

The .vij. Chapter.

    Seeing that we have such promises derely beloved, let us cleanse
ourselves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, and grow up to
full holiness in the fear of God. Understand us: we have hurt no man:
we have corrupted no man: we have defrauded no man. I speak not this
to condemn you: for I have shewed you before that ye are in our
hearts to die and live with you. I am very bold over you, and rejoice
greatly in you. I am filled with comfort, my joy exceeding in all our
tribulations. For when we were come into Macedonia, our flesh had no
rest, but we were troubled on every side: Outward was fighting,
inward was fear. Nevertheless he that comforteth the abject,
comforted us at the coming of Titus.
    And not with his coming only: but also with the consolation
wherewith he was comforted of you. For he told us your desire, your
mourning, your fervent mind to meward: So that I now rejoice the
more. Wherefore though I made you sorry with a letter I repent not:
though I did repent. For I perceive that that same Epistle made you
sorry though it were but for a season. But I now rejoice, not that ye
were sorry, but that ye so sorrowed, that ye repented. For ye
sorrowed godly: so that in nothing were ye hurt by us. For godly
sorrow causeth repentance unto health, not to be repented of: when
worldly sorrow causeth death.
    Behold what diligence this godly sorrow that ye took hath wrought
in you: yee it caused you to clear yourselves. It caused indignation,
it caused fear, it caused desire, it caused a fervent mind, it caused
punishment. For in all things ye have shewed yourselves that ye were
clear in that business. Wherefore though I have written unto you, I
did it not for his cause that did hurt, neither for his cause that
was hurt: but that our good mind which we have toward you in the
sight of God, might appear unto you.
    Therefore we are comforted, because ye are comforted: yee and
exceedingly the more joyed we, for the joy that Titus had: because
his spirit was refreshed of you all. I am therefore not now ashamed,
though I boasted myself to him of you. For as all things which I
preached unto you are true, even so is our boasting, that I boasted
myself to Titus with all, found true. And now is his inward affection
more abundant toward you, when he remembereth the obedience of every
one of you: how with fear and trembling ye received him. I rejoice
that I may be bold over you in all things.

The .viij. Chapter.

    I do you to wit brethren of the grace of God, which is given in
the congregations of Macedonia, how that the abundance of their
rejoicing is, that they are tried with much tribulation. And how that
their poverty, though it be deep, yet hath followed over, and is be
come unto them riches in singleness. For to their powers (I bear them
record) yee and beyond their power, they were willing of their own
accord, and prayed us with great instance, that we would receive
their benefit, and suffer them to be part takers with other in
ministering to the saints. And this they did, not as we looked for:
but gave their own selves first to the lord, and after unto us by the
will of God: so that we could not but desire Titus to accomplish the
same benevolence among you also, even as he had begun.
    Now therefore, as ye are rich in all parts, in faith, in word, in
knowledge, in all ferventness, and in love, which ye have to us: even
so see that ye be plenteous in this benevolence. This say I not as
commanding: but because other are so fervent, therefore prove I your
love, whether it be perfect or no. Ye know the liberality of our lord
Iesus Christ, which though he were rich, yet for your sakes became
poor: that ye thorow his poverty might be made rich.
    And I give counsel hereto: For this is expedient for you, which
began, not to do only: but also to will, a year ago. Now therefore
perform the deed, that as there was in you a readiness to will, even
so ye may perform the deed, of that which ye have. For if there be
first a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man hath,
and not according to that he hath not.
    It is not my mind that other be set at ease, and ye brought into
cumbrance: but that there be egalness. Let your abundance succour
their lack at this present time of dearth: that their abundance may
supply your lack: that there may be equality, agreeing to that which
is written: He that gathered much had never the more abundance, and
he that gathered little, had nevertheless. Thanks be unto God, which
put in the heart of Titus the same good mind toward you. For he
accepted our request. yee rather he was so well willing, that of his
own accord came unto you.
    We have sent with him that brother whose laud is in the gospel
thorow out all the congregations: and not so only, but is also chosen
of the congregations to be a fellow with us in our journey, as
concerning this benevolence that is ministered by us unto the praise
of the lord, and to stir up your prompt mind. And this we eschew that
any man should rebuke us in this abundance, that is ministered by us,
and make provision for honest things, not in the sight of God only,
but also in the sight of men.
    We have sent with them a brother of ours whom we have oft times
proved diligent in many things, but now much more diligent. The great
confidence which I have in you hath caused me this to do: partly for
Titus' sake which is my fellow, and helper as concerning you: partly
because of other which are our brethren, and the messengers of the
congregations, and the glory of Christ. Wherefore shew unto them the
proof of your love, and of the rejoicing that we have of you, that
the congregations may see it.

The .ix. Chapter.

    Of the ministering to the saints, it is but superfluous for me to
write unto you: for I know your readiness of mind, whereof I boast
myself unto them of Macedonia, and say that Achaia was prepared a
year ago, and your ferventness hath provoked many. Nevertheless yet
have I sent these brethren, lest our rejoicing over you should be in
vain in this behalf, and that ye (as I have said) prepare yourselves,
lest peradventure if they of Macedonia come with me and find you
unprepared, the boast that I made in this matter should be a shame to
us: I say not unto you.
    Wherefore I thought it necessary to exhort the brethren, to come
before hand unto you, for to prepare your good blessing promised
afore, that it might be ready: so that it be a blessing, and not a
defrauding. This yet remember, how that he which soweth little, shall
reap little: and he that soweth plenteously shall reap plenteously.
And let every man do according as he hath purposed in his heart, not
grudgingly, or of necessity. For God loveth a cheerful giver.
    God is able to make you rich in all grace, that ye in all things
having sufficient unto the utmost, may be rich unto all manner good
works, as it is written: He that sparse abroad and hath given to the
poor, his righteousness remaineth for ever. He that findeth the sower
seed, shall minister bread for food, and shall multiply your seed,
and increase the fruits of your righteousness that on all parts, ye
may be made rich in all singleness, which causeth thorow us, thanks
giving unto God.
    For the office of this ministration, not only supplieth the need
of the saints: but also is abundant herein, that for this laudable
ministering, thanks might be given to God of many, which praise God
for the obedience in knowledging the gospel of Christ, and for your
singleness, in distributing to them, and to all men. and in their
prayers to God for you, long after you, for the abundant grace of God
given unto you. Thanks be unto God for his ineffable gift.

The .x. Chapter.

    I Paul myself beseech you by the meekness and softness of Christ,
which when I am present among you, am of no reputation, but am bold
toward you being absent. I beseech you that I need not to be bold
when I am present (with that same confidence, wherewith I am supposed
to be bold) against some which repute us as though we walked
carnally. Nevertheless though we walk compassed with the flesh, yet
we war not fleshly. For the weapons of our war are not carnal things,
but things mighty in God to cast down strongholds, wherewith we
overthrow imaginations, and every high thing that exalteth itself
against the knowledge of God, and bring into captivity all
understanding to the obedience of Christ, and are ready to take
vengeance on all disobedience, when your obedience is fulfilled. Look
ye on things after the utter appearance.
    If any man trust in himself that he is Christi's, let the same
also consider of himself, that as he is Christi's, even so are we
Christe's. And though I should boast myself somewhat more of our
authority which the lord hath given us to edify and not to destroy
you, it should not be to my shame. This say I, lest I should seem as
though I went about to make you afraid with letters. For the pistels
(saith he) are sore and strong: but his bodily presence is weak, and
his speech homely. Let him that is such think on this wise, that as
we are in words by letters when we are absent, such are we in deeds
when we are present.
    For we cannot find in our hearts to make ourselves of the number
of them, or to compare ourselves to them, which laud themselves: but
while they measure themselves with themselves, and compare themselves
with themselves, they understand nought. But we will not rejoice
above measure: but according to the quantity of the measure which God
hath distributed unto us, a measure that reacheth even unto you. For
we stretch not out ourselves beyond measure as though we had not
reached unto you. For even unto you have we come with the gospel of
Christ, and we boast not ourselves out of measure in other men's
labors: yee and we hope, When your faith is increased among you, to
be magnified according to our measure more largely: And to preach the
gospel in those regions which are beyond you: and not to rejoice of
that which is by another man's measure prepared all ready. Let him
that rejoiceth, rejoice in the lord. For he that praiseth himself, is
not allowed: but he whom the lord praiseth.

The .xj. Chapter.

    Would to God, ye could suffer me a little in my foolishness: yee,
and I pray you forbear me. For I am jealous over you with godly
jealousy. For I coupled you to one man, to make you a chaste virgin
to Christ: But I fear lest as the serpent beguiled Eve, thorow his
subtlety, even so your wits should be corrupt from the singleness
that is in Christ. For if he that cometh to you preach another Iesus
than him whom we preached: or if ye receive another spirit than that
which ye have received: either another gospel than that ye have
received, ye might right well have been content.
    I suppose that I was not behind the chief Apostles. Though I be
rude in speaking, yet I am not so in knowledge. How be it among you
we are known to the utmost what we are in all things. Did I therein
sin, because I submitted myself, that ye might be exalted? and
because I preached the gospel to you free? I robbed other
congregations, and took wages of them, to do you service with all.
And when I was present with you and had need, I was grievous to no
man. For that which was lacking unto me, the brethren which came from
Macedonia supplied: and in all things I kept myself that I should not
be grievous to you: and so will I keep myself.
    If the truth of Christ be in me, this rejoicing shall not be
taken from me in the regions of Achaia. Wherefore? because I love you
not? God knoweth. Nevertheless what I do, that will I do to cut away
occasion from them which desire occasion, that they might be found
like unto us in that wherein they rejoice: For these false apostles
are deceitful workers, and fashion them selves like unto the Apostles
of Christ. And no marvel, for Satan himself is changed into the
fashion of an angel of light. Therefore it is no great thing, though
his ministers fashion themselves as though they were the ministers of
righteousness: whose end shall be according to their deeds.
    I say again lest any man think that I am foolish: or else even
now take me as a fool, that I may boast myself a little. That I
speak, I speak it not after the ways of the lord: but as it were
foolishly, while we are now come to boasting. Seeing that many
rejoice after the flesh I will rejoice also. For ye suffer fools
gladly because that ye yourselves are wise. For ye suffer even if a
man bring you into bondage: if a man devour: if a man take: if a man
exalt himself: if a man smite you on the face. I speak as concerning
rebuke, as though we had been weak.
    Whereinsoever any man dare be bold (I speak foolishly) I dare be
bold also. They are Hebrews, so am I: They are Israelites, even so am
I: They are the seed of Abraham, even so am I. They are the ministers
of Christ (I speak as a fool) I am more: In labors more abundant: In
stripes above measure: In prison more plenteously: In death often. Of
the Iewes five times received I every time  xl. stripes, one except.
Thrice was I beaten with rods. I was once stoned. I suffered thrice
shipwreck. Night and day have I been in the deep of the sea. In
journeying often: In perils of waters In perils of robbers. In
jeopardies of mine own nation: In jeopardies among the heathen. I
have been in perils in cities, in perils in wilderness, in perils in
the sea, in perils among false brethren, in labour and travail, in
watching often, in hunger, in thirst, in fastings often, in cold and
in nakedness.
    Beside the things which outwardly happen unto me, I am cumbered
daily and do care for all congregations. Who is sick: and I am not
sick? Who is hurt in the faith: and my heart burneth not? If I must
needs rejoice, I will rejoice of mine infirmities.
    God the father of our lord Iesus Christ, which is blessed for
evermore, knoweth that I lie not. In the city of Damaschon, the
governor of the people under king Aretas, laid watch in the city of
the Damascens, and would have caught me, and at a window was I let
down in a basket thorow the wall, and so escaped his hands.

The .xij. Chapter.

    It is not expedient for me no doubt to rejoice, Nevertheless I
will come to visions and revelations of the lord. I know a man in
Christ above xiiij years agone (whether he were in the body I cannot
tell, or whether he were out of the body I cannot tell, God knoweth)
which was taken up into the third heaven. And I know the same man
(whether in the body, or out of the body, I cannot tell, God knoweth)
how that he was taken up into paradise, and heard words not to be
spoken, which no man can utter. Of this man will I rejoice, of myself
will I not rejoice, except it be of mine infirmities: and yet though
I would rejoice I should not be a fool: for I would say the truth.
Nevertheless I spare, lest any man should think of me above that he
seeth me to be, or heareth of me.
    And lest I should be exalted out of measure thorow the abundance
of revelations, there was given unto me of God unquietness of the
flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet me: because I should not be
exalted out of measure. For this thing besought I the lord thrice,
that it might depart from me: and he said unto me: my grace is
sufficient for thee. For my strength is made perfect thorow weakness.
Very gladly therefore will I rejoice of my weakness, that the
strength of Christ may dwell in me. Therefore have I delectation in
infirmities, in rebukes, in need, in persecutions, in anguish, for
Christi's sake. For when I am weak, then am I strong.
    I am made a fool in boasting myself. Ye have compelled me: I
ought to have been commended of you. For in nothing was I inferior
unto the chief apostles, though I be nothing, yet the tokens of an
apostle were wrought among you with all patience: with signs, and
wonders, and mighty deeds. For what is it wherein ye were inferiors
unto other congregations? except it be therein that I was not
grievous unto you. Forgive me this wrong done unto you. Behold now
the third time I am ready to come unto you, neither will I be
grievous unto you. For I seek not yours but you. Also the children
ought not to lay up for the fathers and mothers: but the fathers and
mothers for the children.
    I will very gladly bestow, and will be bestowed for your souls:
though the more I love you, the less I am loved again. But be it that
I grieved you not: nevertheless I was crafty and took you with guile.
Did I pill you by any of them which I sent unto you? I desired Titus,
and with him I sent a brother: Did Titus defraud you of any thing?
walked we not in one spirit? walked we not in like steps? Again,
think ye that we excuse ourselves? we speak in Christ in the sight of
God.
    But we do all things dearly beloved for your edifying. For I fear
lest it come to pass, that when I come, I shall not find you such as
I would: and I shall be found unto you such as ye would not: I fear
lest there be found among you lawynge, envying, wrath, strife,
backbitings, whisperings, swellings, and debate. I fear lest when I
come again, God bring me low among you, and I be constrained to
bewail many of them which have sinned already, and have not repented
of the uncleanness, and fornication, and wantonness which they have
committed.

The .xiij. Chapter.

    Now come I the third time unto you: in the mouth of two or three
witnesses shall every word stand. I told you before, and tell you
before, as I said when I was present with you the second time, so
write I now being absent to them which in time past have sinned, and
to all other: If I come again, I will not spare seeing that ye seek
experience of Christ which speaketh in me, which among you is not
weak, but is mighty in you. And verily though it came of weakness
that he was crucified, yet liveth he thorow the power of God: and we
no doubt are weak in him: but we shall live with him, by the might
that God gave us to youward.
    Prove yourselves whether ye are in the faith or not. Examine your
own selves: know ye not your own selves, how that Iesus Christ is in
you? except ye be castaways. I trust that ye shall know that we are
not castaways. I desire before God that ye do none evil, not that we
should seem commendable: but that ye should do, that which is honest:
and let us be counted as lewd persons. We can do nothing against the
truth, but for the truth. We are glad when we are weak, and ye
strong. This also we wish for, even that ye were perfect. Therefore
write I these things being absent, lest when I am present I should
use sharpness according to the power which the lord hath given me, to
edify, and not to destroy.
    Furthermore brethren fare ye well, be perfect, be of good
comfort, be of one mind, live in peace, and the God of love and
peace, shall be with you. Greet one another in an holy kiss. All the
saints salute you. The faveour of our lord Iesus Christ, and the love
of God, and the fellowship of the holy ghost, be with you all Amen

The second pistle to the Corinthians. Sent from Phillippos a citie in
Macedonia by Titus and Lucas.


The pistel of S. Paul to the Galathians.

The first Chapter.

    Paul an Apostle, not of men, neither by man, but by Iesus Christ,
and by God the father which raised him from death, and all the
brethren which are with me.
    Unto the congregations of Galacia. Grace be with you and peace
from God the father, and from our lord Iesus Christ, which gave
himself for our sins, to deliver us from this present evil world,
thorow the will of God our father, to whom be praise for ever and
ever Amen.
    I marvel that ye are so soon turned from him that called you in
the grace of Christ, unto another gospell, which is nothing else, but
that there be some which trouble you, and intend to pervert the
gospell of Christ. Nevertheless though we ourselves, or an angel from
heaven, preach any other gospell unto you than that which we have
preached unto you, hold him as accursed. As I said before, so say I
now again, if any man preach any other thing unto you, than that ye
have received, hold him accursed. Seek I now the faveour {or
doctrine} of men, or of God? Other go I about to please men? If I
studied to please men, I were not the servant of Christ.
    I certify you brethren, that the gospell which was preached of
me, was not after the manner of men, neither received I it of man,
neither was I taught it: but received it by the revelation of Iesus
Christ. Ye have heard of my conversation in times past in the Iewes'
ways, how that beyond measure I persecuted the congregation of God,
and spoiled it: and prevailed in the jewes' law, above many of my
companions, which were of mine own nation, and was a much more
fervently maintained the traditions of the elders.
    But when it pleased God, which separated me from my mother's
womb, and called me by his grace, for to declare his son by me, that
I should preach him among the heathen: Immediately I commended not of
the matter with flesh and blood, neither returned to Ierusalem to
them which were Apostles before me: but went my ways into Arabia, and
came again unto Damascus. Then after three years, I returned to
Ierusalem unto Peter and abode with him xv days, no other of the
Apostles saw I, save Iames the lord's brother. The things which I
write, behold, God knoweth I lie not.
    After that I went into the coasts of Siria and Cicill: and was
unknown as touching my person unto the congregations of Iewry, which
were in Christ. But they heard only, that he which persecuted us in
time past, now preacheth the faith, which before he destroyed. And
they glorified God in me.

The second Chapter.

    Then xiiij. years there after, I went up again to Ierusalem with
Barnabas, and took with me Titus also. Yee, and I went up by
revelation, and commended with them of the gospell, which I preach
among the gentiles: but apart with them that are counted chief, lest
it should have been thought that I should run, or had run in vain.
Also Titus which was with me, though he were a greek, yet was not
compelled to be circumcised, and that because of incomers being false
brethren, which came in among others to spy out our liberty which we
have in Christ Iesus, that they might bring us into bondage. To whom
we gave no room, no not for the space of an hour, as concerning to be
brought into subjection: and that because that the truth of the
gospell might continue with you.
    Of them which seemed to be great (what they were in time passed
it maketh no matter to me: God looketh on no man's person)
nevertheless they which seem great, added nothing to me: But
contrariwise, when they saw that the gospell over the uncircumcision
was committed unto me, as the gospell over circumcision was unto
Peter (For he that was mighty in Peter in the Apostleship over the
circumcision, the same was mighty in me among the gentiles:) and as
soon as Iames, Cephas, and Ihon, which seemed to be pillars,
perceived the grace that was given unto me, they gave to me and
Barnabas their hands, and agreed with us that we should preach among
the heathen, and they among the Iewes: warning only that we should
remember the poor, which thing also I was diligent to do.
    When Peter was come to Antioch, I withstood him in the face, for
he was worthy to be blamed. For yer that certain came from Iames, he
ate with the gentiles: but when they were come, he withdrew and
separated himself, fearing them which were of the circumcision, and
the other Iewes dissembled likewise, In so much that Barnabas was
brought into their simulation also. But when I saw that they went not
the right way after the truth of the gospell, I said unto Peter,
before all men, if thou being a Iewe, livest after the manner of the
gentiles, and not as do the Iewes: why causest thou the gentiles to
follow the Iewes? we which are Iewes by nature and not sinners of the
gentiles, know that a man is not justified by the deeds of the law:
but by the faith of Iesus Christ: and we have believed on Iesus
Christ, that we might be justified by the faith of Christ and not by
the deeds of the law: because that no flesh shall be justified by
the deeds of the law: If then while we seek to be made righteous by
Christ, we ourselves are found sinners, is not then Christ the
minister of sin? God forbid. For if I build again that which I
destroyed, then make I my self a trespasser. But I thorow the law am
dead to the law, that I might live unto God. I am crucified with
Christ. I live verily, yet now not I, but Christ liveth in me. The
life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the son of
God, which loved me, and gave himself for me. I despise not the grace
of God: For if righteousness come of the law, then is Christ dead in
vain.

The .iij. Chapter.

    O foolish Galatians: who hath bewitched you, that ye should not
believe the truth? to whom Iesus Christ was described before the
eyes, and among you crucified? This only would I learn of you,
received ye the spirit by the deeds of the law? or else by preaching
of the faith? Are ye so unwise, that after ye have begun in the
spirit, ye would now end in the flesh? So many things ye have
suffered in vain. If it be so that ye have suffered in vain. Which
ministered to you the spirit, and worketh miracles among you doth he
it thorow the deeds of the law? or by preaching of the faith? Even as
Abraham believed God, and it was ascribed to him for righteousness.
Understand therefore, that they which are of faith, are the children
of Abraham.
    The scripture saw aforehand, that God would justify the heathen
thorow faith, and shewed beforehand glad tidings unto Abraham: In
thee shall all nations be blessed. So then they which be of faith,
are blessed with faithful Abraham. For as many as are under the deeds
of the law, are under malediction. For it is written: cursed is every
man that continueth not in all things which are written in the book
of the law to fulfil them. That no man is justified by the law in the
sight of God is evident. For the just shall live by faith. The law is
not of faith: but the man that fulfilleth the things contained in the
law, shall live in them. Christ hath delivered us from the curse of
the law, and was made a cursed for us (for it is written: Cursed is
everyone that hangeth on tree) that the blessing of Abraham might
come on the gentiles thorow Iesus Christ, that we might receive the
promise of the spirit thorow faith.
    Brethren I will speak after the manner of men. Though it be but a
man's testament, yet no man despiseth it, or addeth any thing thereto
when it is once allowed. To Abraham and his seed were the promises
made. He saith not, in thy seeds as in many: But in thy seed, as in
one, which is Christ. This I say that the law which began afterward,
beyond iiij. C. and xxx. years, doth not disannul the testament, that
was confirmed of God unto Christward, to make the promise of none
effect. For if the inheritance come of the law, it cometh not of
promise: but God gave it unto Abraham by promise.
    Wherefore then serveth the law? The law was added because of
transgression (till the seed came to which the promise was made) and
it was ordained by angels in the hand of a mediator. A mediator is
not a mediator of one. But God is one. Is the law then against the
promise of God? God forbid. If there had been a law given which could
have given life: then no doubt righteousness should have come by the
law: but the scripture concluded all things under sin, that the
promise by the faith of Iesus Christ, should be given unto them that
believe. Before that faith came, we were kept and shut up under the
law, unto the faith which should afterward be declared.
    Wherefore the law was our schoolmaster unto the time of Christ,
that we might be made righteous by faith. But after that faith is
come, now are we no longer under a schoolmaster. For ye are all the
sons of God, by the faith which is in Christ Iesus. For all ye that
are baptised, have put Christ on you. Now is there no Iewe, neither
greek: there is neither bond, neither free: there is neither man,
neither woman: for all are one thing in Christ Iesu. If ye be
Christe's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs by promise.

The .iiij. Chapter.

    And I say that the heir as long as he is a child differeth not
from a servant, though he be lord of all, but is under tutors and
governors, until the time appointed of the father. Even so we, as
long as we were children, were in bondage under the ordinances of the
world: But when the time was full come, God sent his son born of a
woman, and made bond unto the law, to redeem them which were under
the law: that we thorow election should receive the inheritance that
belongeth unto the natural sons. Because ye are sons, God hath sent
the spirit of his son into our hearts, which crieth Abba father.
Wherefore now art thou not a servant, but a son. If thou be the son,
thou art also the heir of God thorow Christ.
    Notwithstanding, when ye knew not God, ye did service unto them,
which by nature were no goddes: But now seeing ye know God (yee
rather are known of God) how is it that ye turn again unto the weak
and beggarly ceremonies, whereunto again ye desire afresh to be in
bondage? Ye observe the days, and months, and times, and years. I
fear of you, lest I have bestowed on you labour in vain.
    Brethren I beseech you, be ye as I am: for I am as ye are. Ye
have not hurt me. Ye know well how that thorow infirmity of the
flesh, I preached the gospell unto you at the first: and my
temptation which I suffered by reason of my flesh, ye despised not,
neither abhorred: but received me as an Angel of God: yee as Christ
Iesus. How happy were ye then? for I bear you record that if it had
been possible, ye would have digged out your own eyes, and have given
them to me. Am I so greatly become your enemy, because I tell you the
truth?
    They are jealous over you amiss. Yee they intend to exclude you
that ye should be fervent to themward. It is good always to be
fervent, so it be in a good thing, and not only when I am present
with you.
    My little children (of whom I travail in birth again until Christ
be fashioned in you) I would I were with you now, and could change my
voice, for I stand in a doubt of you. Tell me ye that desire to be
under the law: have ye not heard of the law? For it is written that
Abraham had two sons, the one by a bondmaid, the other by a free
woman. Yee and he which was of the bondwoman, was born after
the flesh: but he which was of the freewoman, was born by promise.
Which things betoken mystery. For these women are two testaments, the
one from the mount Sina, which gendreth unto bondage, which is Agar.
(For mount Sinai is called Agar in Arabia, and bordereth upon the
city which is now Ierusalem) and is in bondage with her children.
    But Ierusalem, which is above, is free: which is the mother of us
all. For it is written: rejoice thou barren, that bearest no
children: break forth and cry, thou that travailest not. For the
desolate hath many more children, than she which hath an husband.
Brethren we are after the manner of Isaac children of promise: But as
then he that was born carnally, persecuted him that was born
spiritually, Even so is it now. Nevertheless what saith the
scripture: Cast a way the bondwoman and her son. For the son of the
bondwoman shall not be heir with the son of the free woman. So then
brethren we are not children of the bondwoman: but of the freewoman.

The .v. Chapter.
Stand fast therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ hath made us
free, and wrap not yourselves again in the yoke of bondage. Be hold I
Paul say unto you, that if ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit you
nothing at all. I testify again to every man which is circumcised
that he is bound to keep the whole law. Ye are gone quite from Christ
as many as are justified by the law, and are fallen from grace. We
look for and hope to be justified by the spirit which commeth of
faith. For in Iesu Christ, neither is circumcision anything worth,
neither yet uncircumcision, but faith which by love is mighty in
operation. Ye did run well. Who was a lett unto you, that ye should
not obey the truth? Even that counsel that is not of him that called
you. A little leaven doth leaven the whole lump of dough.
    I have trust toward you in God, that ye will be none otherwise
minded. He that troubleth you shall bear his judgement, whatsoever he
be. Brethren if I yet preach circumcision: why do I then yet suffer
persecution? For then had the offense which the cross giveth ceased.
I would to God they were sundered from you which trouble you.
Brethren ye were called into liberty, only let not your liberty be an
occasion unto the flesh but in love serve one another. For all the
law is fulfilled in one word, which is this: Thou shalt love thine
neighbour as thyself. If ye bite and devour one another: take heed
lest ye be consumed one of another.
    I say walk in the spirit, and fulfil not the lusts of the flesh.
For the flesh lusteth contrary to the spirit, and the spirit contrary
to the flesh. These are contrary one to the other, so that ye cannot
do that which ye would. But and if ye be led of the spirit, then are
ye not under the law. The deeds of the flesh are manifest, which are
these, advoutry, fornication, uncleanness, wantonness, idolatry,
witchcraft, hatred, lawyinge, zeal, wrath, strife, sedition, parte
takings, envying, murder, drunkenness, gluttony, and such like: of
the which I tell you before, as I have told you in time past, that
they which commit such things shall not be inheritors the kingdom of
God: but the fruit of [the] spirit is, love, joy, peace, 
longsuffering gentleness, goodness, faithfulness, meekness, 
temperancy: Against such there is no law. They that are Christi's, 
have crucified the flesh with the appetites and lusts. If we live in
 the spirit let us walk in the spirit. Let us not be vain glorious, 
 provoking one another, and envying one another.

The .vj. Chapter.

    Brethren, if any man be fallen by chance into any fault: ye which
are spiritual, help to amend him, in the spirit of meekness:
considering thyself, lest thou also be tempted. Bear ye one another's
burden: and so fulfil the law of Christ. If a man seem to himself
that he is somewhat when indeed he is nothing, the same deceiveth
himself in his imagination. Let every man prove his own work, and
then shall he have rejoicing in his own self, and not in another. For
every man shall bear his own burden.
    Let him that is taught in the word, minister unto him that
teacheth him in all good things. Be not deceived, God is not mocked.
For whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he reap. He that soweth in
his flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption: but he that soweth in
the spirit shall, of the spirit reap life everlasting. Let us do
good, and let us not faint. For when the time is come we shall reap
without weariness. While we have therefore time let us do good unto
all men, and specially, unto them which are of the household of
faith.
    Behold how large a letter I have written unto you with mine own
hand. As many as desire with utward appearance to please carnally,
they constrain you to be circumcised, only because they would not
suffer persecution with the cross of Christ. For they them selves
which are circumcised keep not the law: but desire to have you
circumcised that they might rejoice in your flesh. God forbid that I
should rejoice but in the cross of our lord Iesu Christ, whereby the
world is crucified as touching me, and I as concerning the world. For
in Christ Iesu nether circumcision availeth any thing at all nor
uncircumcision: but a new creature. And as many as walk according to
this rule, peace be on them, and mercy, and upon Israhel that
pertaineth to God. From hence forth, let no man put me to business.
For I bear in my body the marks of the lord Iesu. Brethren the grace
of our lord Iesu Christe be with your spirit, Amen.

Unto the Galathyans written from Rome.


The pistel of S. Paul to the Ephesians.

The first Chapter.

    Paul an apostle of Iesu Christ, by the will of God.
    To the saints at Ephesus, and to them which believe on Iesus
Christ.
    Grace be with you and peace from God our father, and from the
lord Iesus Christ.
    Blessed be God the father of our lord Iesus Christ, which hath
blessed us with all manner of spiritual blessings in heavenly things
by Christ, according as he had chosen us in him thorow love, before
the foundation of the world was laid, that we should be saints, and
without blame in his sight. And ordained us before unto him self that
we should be chosen to heirs thorow Iesus Christ, according to the
pleasure of his will, to the praise of his glorious grace, where with he
hath made us accepted in the beloved.
    By whom we have redemption thorow his blood, that is to say the
forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of his grace, which
grace he shed on us abundantly in all wisdom, and prudency. And hath
opened unto us the mystery of his will according to his pleasure, and
purposed the same in himself to have it declared when the time were
full come, that all things, both the things which are in heaven, and
also the things which are in earth, should be gathered together, even
in Christ: that is to say in him in whom we are made heirs, and were
thereto predestinate according to the purpose of him which worketh
all things after the purpose of his own will: that we should be unto
the praise of his glory, which before hoped in Christ.
    In whom also ye (after that ye heard the word of truth, I mean
the gospell of your health, wherein ye believed) were sealed with the
holy spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance, to
redeem the possession purchased unto the laud of his glory.
    Wherefore even I (after that I heard of the faith which ye have
in the lord Iesu, and love unto all the saints) cease not to give
thanks for you, making mention of you in my prayers, that the God of
our lord Iesus Christ, and the father of glory, might give unto you
the spirit of wisdom, and open to you the knowledge of himself, and
lighten the eyes of your minds, that ye might know what thing that
hope is, whereunto he hath called you, and how glorious the riches of
his inheritance is upon the saints, and what is the exceeding
greatness of his power to usward, which believe according to the
working of that his mighty power, which he wrought in Christ, when he
raised him from death, and set him on his right hand in heavenly
things, above all rule, power, and might, and domination, and above
all names that are named, not in this world only, but also in the
world to come. And hath put all things under his feet, and hath made
him above all things, the head of the congregation, which is his
body, and fullness of him, that filleth all in all things.

The .ij. Chapter.

    And hath quickened you also that were dead in trespass and sin,
in the which in time passed ye walked, according to the course of
this world, and after the governor, that ruleth in the air, the
spirit that now worketh in the children of unbelief, among which we
also had our conversation in time past, in the lusts of our flesh,
and fulfilled the will of the flesh, and of the mind: and were
naturally the children of wrath, even as well as other.
    But God which is rich in mercy thorow his great love wherewith he
loved us, even when we were dead by sin, hath quickened us with
Christ (For by grace are ye saved) and with him hath raised us up,
and with him hath made us sit in heavenly things, thorow Iesus
Christ, For to shew in times to come the exceeding riches of his
grace, in kindness to usward, thorow Christ Iesus. For by grace are
ye made safe thorow faith, and that not of your selves: For it is the
gift of God, and cometh not of works, lest any man should boast
himself. For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Iesu unto good
works, unto the which God ordained us before, that we should walk in
them.
    Wherefore remember that ye being in time past gentiles in the
flesh, and were called uncircumcision of them which are called
circumcision in the flesh, which circumcision is made by hands:
Remember I say, that ye were at that time without Christ, and were
reputed aliens from the common wealth of Israhel, and were fremed
from the testaments of promise, and had no hope, and were without God
in this world. But now in Christ Iesu, ye which a while ago were far
off, are made nigh by the blood of Christ.
    For he is our peace, which hath made of both one, and hath broken
down the wall in the midst, that was a stop between us, and hath also
put away thorow his flesh, the cause of hatred (that is to say, the
law of commandments contained in the law written,) for to make of
twain one new man in himself, so making peace: and to reconcile both
unto God in one body thorow his cross, and slew hatred thereby: and
came and preached peace to you which were afar off, and to them that
were nigh. For thorow him we both have an open way in, in one spirit
unto the father.
    Now therefore ye are no more strangers and foreigners: but
citizens with the saints, and of the household of God: and are built
upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Iesus Christ being
the head cornerstone, in whom every building coupled together,
groweth unto an holy temple in the lord, in whom ye also are built
together, and made an habitation for God in the spirit.

The .iij. Chapter.

    For this cause I Paul the servant of Iesus am in bonds, For your
sakes which are gentiles. If ye have heard of the ministration of the
grace of God which is given me to youward: For by revelation shewed
he this mystery unto me, as I wrote above in few words, whereby, when
ye read ye may know mine understanding in the ministry of Christ,
which mystery in times passed was not opened unto the sons of men as
it is now declared unto his holy apostles and prophets by the spirit:
that the gentiles should be inheritors also, and of the same body,
and partakers of his promise that is in Christ, by the means of the
gospell, whereof I am made a minister, by the gift of the grace of
God given unto me, after the working of his power.
    Unto me the least of all saints is this grace given, that I
should preach among the gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ,
and to give light to all men, that they might know what is the
fellowship of the mystery, which from the beginning of the world hath
been hid in God which made all things thorow Iesus Christ, to the
intent, that now unto the rulers and powers in heaven might be known
by the congregation the manyfold wisdom of God, according to that
eternal purpose, which he purposed in Christ Iesu our lord, by whom
we are bold to draw nigh in that trust, which we have by faith on
him. Wherefore I desire, that ye faint not because of mine
tribulations which I suffer for you: which is your praise.
    For this cause I bow my knees unto the father of our lord Iesus
Christ, which is father over all that is called father In heaven and
in earth, that he would grant you according to the riches of his
glory, that ye may be strengthened with might by his spirit in the
inner man, that Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith, that ye
being rooted and grounded in love, might be able to comprehend with
all saints, what is that breadth and length, depth and height: and to
know what is the love of Christ, which love passeth knowledge: that
ye might be fulfilled with all manner of fullness which cometh of
God.
    Unto him that is able to do exceeding abundantly, above all that
we ask or think, according to the power that worketh in us, be praise
in the congregation by Iesus Christ, thorow out all generations from
time to time. Amen.

The .iiij. Chapter.

    I therefore which am in bonds for the lord's sake exhort you,
that ye walk worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are called, in all
humbleness of mind, and meekness, and long suffering, forbearing one
another thorow love, and that ye be diligent to keep the unity of the
spirit in the bond of peace, being one body, and one spirit, even as
ye are called in one hope of your calling. Let there be but one lord,
one faith, one baptism: one God and father of all, which is above
all, thorow all, and in us all.
    Unto every one of us is given grace according to the measure of
the gift of Christ. Wherefore he saith: He is gone up on high, and
hath led captivity captive, and hath given gifts unto men. That he
ascended: what meaneth it, but that he also descended first into the
lowest parts of the earth? He that descended, is even the same also
that ascended up, even above all heavens, to fulfil all things.
    And the very same, made some Apostles, some prophets, some
Evangelists, some Shepherds, some Teachers: that the saints might
have all things necessary to work and minister withall, to the
edifying of the body of Christ, till we everyeachone (in the unity of
faith, and knowledge of the son of God) grow up unto a perfect man,
after the measure of age which is in the fullness of Christ: That we
henceforth be no more children wavering and carried with every wind
of doctrine, by the wiliness of men and craftiness, whereby they lay
a wait for us to deceive us.
    But let us follow the truth in love, and in all things grow in
him which is the head, that is to say Christ, in whom all the body is
coupled and knit together, in every joint, wherewith one ministereth
to another (according to the operation as every part hath his
measure) and increaseth the body, unto the edifying of itself in
love.
    This I say herefore, and testify in the lord, that ye henceforth
walk not as other gentiles walk, in vanities of their mind, blinded
in their understanding, being strangers from the life which is in
God, thorow the ignorancy that is in them, because of the blindness
of their hearts: which being past repentance have given themselves
unto wantonness, to work all manner of uncleanness even with
greediness. But ye have not so learned Christ, If so be ye have heard
of him, and are taught in him, even as the truth is in Iesu: so then
as concerning the conversation in time past, lay from you that old
man, which is corrupt thorow the deceivable lusts, and be ye renewed
in the spirit of your minds, and put on that new man, which after a
godly wise, is shapen in righteousness, and true holiness. Wherefore
put away lying, and speak every man truth unto his neighbor, for as
much as we are members one of another. Be angry, but sin not: let not
the son go down upon your wrath, give no place unto the backbiter,
let him that stole steal no more, but let him rather labour with his
hands some good thing, that he may have to give unto him that
needeth.
    Let no filthy communication proceed out of your mouths: but that
which is good to edify withall, when need is: that it may have favour
with the hearers. And grieve not the holy spirit of God, by whom ye
are sealed unto the day of redemption. Let all bitterness, fierceness
and wrath, roaring and cursed speaking, be put away from you, with
all maliciousness. Be ye courteous one to another, be merciful
forgiving one another, even as God for Christe's sake forgave you.

The .v. Chapter.

    Be ye followers of God as dear children, and walk in love even as
Christ loved us, and gave himself for us, an offering and a sacrifice
of a sweet savour to God. So that fornication, and all uncleanness,
or covetousness, be not once, named among you, as it becometh saints:
neither filthiness, neither foolish talking, neither jestings, which
are not comely: but rather giving of thanks. For this ye know, that
no whoremonger, either unclean person, or covetous person (which is
the worshipper of images) hath any inheritance in the kingdom of
Christ, and of God.
    Let no man deceive you with vain words. For thorow such things
cometh the wrath of God upon the children of unbelief. Be not
therefore companions with them. Ye were once darkness, but are now
light in the lord.
    Walk as children of light. For the fruit of the spirit is, in all
goodness, righteousness, and truth. Accept that which is pleasing to
the lord: and have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of
darkness: but rather rebuke them. For it is shame even to name those
things which are done of them in secret: but all things, when they
are rebuked of the light, are manifest. For whatsoever is manifest,
that same is light. Wherefore he saith: awake thou that sleepest, and
stand up from death, and Christ shall give thee light.
    Take heed therefore that ye walk circumspectly: not as fools: but
as wise, redeeming the time: for the days are evil: wherefore, be ye
not unwise, but understand what the will of the lord is, and be not
drunk with wine, wherein is excess: but be fulfilled with the spirit,
speaking unto yourselves in psalms, and hymns, and spiritual songs,
singing and playing to the lord in your hearts, giving thanks allways
for all things in the name of our lord Iesu Christ to God the father:
submitting yourselves one to another in the fear of God.
    Women submit yourselves unto your own husbands, as unto the lord.
For the husband is the wife's head, even as Christ is the head of the
congregation, and the same is the saviour of the body. Therefore as
the congregation is in subjection to Christ, likewise let the wives
be in subjection to their husbands in all things. Husbands love your
wives, even as Christ loved the congregation, and gave himself for
it, to sanctify it, and cleansed it in the fountain of water thorow
the word, to make it unto himself, a glorious congregation without
spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing: but that it should be holy and
without blame.
    So ought men to love their wives, as their own bodies. He that
loveth his wife, loveth himself. For no man ever yet, hated his own
flesh: But nourisheth, and cherisheth it: even as the lord doth the
congregation: for we are members of his body, of his flesh, and of
his bones. For this cause shall a man leave father and mother, and
shall continue with his wife, and two shall be made one flesh. This
is a great secret, but I speak between Christ and the congregation.
Nevertheless do ye so that every one of you love his wife truly even
as himself: And let the wife see that she fear her husband.

The .vj. Chapter.

    Children obey your fathers and mothers in the lord: for so is it
right. Honour father and mother, that is the first commandment that
hath any promise, that thou mayst be in good estate, and live long on
the earth. Fathers, move not your children to wrath: but bring them
up with the nurture and information of the lord. Servants be obedient
unto your carnal masters, with fear and trembling, in singleness of
your hearts, as unto Christ: not with service in the eye sight, as
men pleasers: but as the servants of Christ, doing the will of God
from the heart with good will, even as though ye served the lord, and
not men. And remember that whatsoever good thing any man doeth, that
shall he receive again of the lord, whether he be bond or free. And
ye masters, do even the same things unto them, putting away
threatenings: and remember that even your master also is in heaven,
neither is there any respect of person with him.
    Finally, my brethren be strong in the lord, and in the power of
his might. Put on the armour of God, that ye may stand steadfast
against the crafty assaults of the devil. For we wrestle not against
flesh and blood: but against rule, against power, and against worldly
rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in
heavenly things.
    For this cause take unto you the armour of God, that ye may be
able to resist in the evil day, and to stand perfect in all things.
    Stand therefore and your loins gird about with verity, having on
the breastplate of righteousness, and shod with shoes prepared by the
gospell of peace. Above all take to you the shield of faith,
wherewith ye may quench all the fiery darts of the wicked. And take
the helmet of health, and the sword of the spirit, which is the word
of God, and pray always with all manner prayer and supplication: and
that in the spirit: and watch thereunto with all instance and
supplication for all saints, and for me, that utterance may be given
unto me, that I may open my mought boldly, to utter the secrets of the
gospell, whereof I am a messenger in bonds, that therein I may speak
freely, as it becometh me to speak.
    But that ye may also know that condition I am in, and what I do,
Tichicus my dear brother and faithful minister in the lord, shall
shew you of all things, whom I sent unto you for the same purpose,
that ye might know what case I stand in, and that he might comfort
your hearts.
    Peace be with the brethren, and love with faith from God the
father, and from the lord Iesu Christ. Grace be with all them which
love our lord Iesus Christ in pureness, Amen.

Sent from Rome unto the Ephesyans by Tichicus.


The pistel of S. Paul to the Philippians

The first Chapter.
Paul and Timotheus the servants of Iesu Christ. To all the saints in
Christ Iesu which are at Philippos, with the bishops and deacons.
    Grace be with you and peace from God our father, and from the
lord Iesus Christe.
    I thank my God with all remembrance of you, always in all my
prayers for you all, and pray with gladness, because of the
fellowship which ye have in the gospell from the first day unto now,
and am surely certified of this, that he which began a good work in
you shall perform it until the day of Iesus Christ, as it becometh me
so to judge of you all, because I have you in my heart, and have you
also every one companions of grace with me, even in my bonds as I
defend, and stablish the gospell.
    God beareth me record how greatly I long after you all from the
very heart root in Iesus Christ. And this I pray, that your love may
increase more and more in knowledge, and in all fealing, that ye
might accept things most excellent, that ye might be pure and such as
should hurt no man's conscience, until the day of Christ, filled with
the fruits of righteousness, which fruits come by Iesus Christ unto
the glory and laud of God.
    I would ye understood brethren that my business is happened unto
the greater furthering of the gospell. So that my bonds in Christ are
manifest thorow out all the judgement hall: and in all other places,
In so much that many of the brethren in the lord are boldened thorow
my bonds, and dare more largely speak the word without fear. Some
there are which preach Christ of envy and strife, and some of
goodwill. The one part preacheth Christ of strife, and not purely,
supposing to add more adversity to my bonds. The other part of love,
because they see that I am set to defend to Gospell.
    What thing is this? Notwithstanding by all manner ways, whether
it be by occasion or of truth, yet Christ is preached: and therefore
I joy. Yee and will joy. For I know that this shall be for my health,
thorow your prayer, and ministering of the spirit of Iesu Christ, as
I heartily look for and hope, that in nothing I shall be ashamed: but
that with all confidence, as always in times past, even so now Christ
shall be magnified in my body, whether it be thorow life, or else
death. For Christ is to me life, and death is to me advantage.
    If it chance me to live in the flesh, that is to me fruitful for
to work, and what to choose I wot not. I am constrained of two
things: I desire to be lowsed, and to be with Christ, which thing is
best of all: Nevertheless to abide in the flesh is more needful for
you. And this am I sure of, that I shall abide, and with you all
continue, for the furtherance and joy of your faith, that ye may more
abundantly rejoice in Iesus Christ thorow me, by my coming to you
again.
    Only let your conversation be, as it becometh the gospell of
Christ: that whether I come and see you, or else be absent, I may yet
hear of you, that ye continue in one spirit, and in one soul laboring
as we do to maintain the faith of the gospell, and in nothing fearing
your adversaries: which is to them a token of perdition, and to you a
sign of health, and that of God. For unto you it is given, that not
only ye should believe on Christ: but also suffer for his sake, and
have even the same fight which ye saw me have and now hear of me.

The .ij. Chapter.

    If there be among you any consolation in Christ, if there be any
comfortable love, if there be any fellowship of the spirit, if there
be any compassion of mercy: fulfil my joy, that ye draw one way,
having one love, being of one accord, and of one mind, that nothing
be done thorow strife or vain glory, but in meekness of mind. Let
every person think every other man better than himself, so that ye
consider every man, not what is in himself: But what is in other men.
    Let the same mind be in you the which was in Christ Iesu: Which
being in the shape of God, and thought it not robbery to be equal
with God. Nevertheless he made himself of no reputation, and took on
him the shape of a servant, and became like unto men, and was found
in his apparel as a man. He humbled himself and became obedient unto
the death, even the death of the cross. Wherefore God hath exalted
him, and given him a name above all names: that in the name of Iesus
should every knee bow, both of things in heaven, and things in earth
and things under earth, and that all tongues should confess that
Iesus Christ is the lord unto the praise of God the father.
    Wherefore my dearly beloved, as ye have always obeyed, not when I
was present only, but now much more in mine absence, even so perform
your own health with fear and trembling. For it is God which worketh
in you, both the will and also the deed, even of good will.
    Do all thinge without murmuring and disputing, that ye may be
faultless, and pure, and the sons of God, without rebuke, in the
midst of a crooked, and a perverse nation, among which see that ye
shine as lights in the world, holding fast the word of life, unto my
rejoicing in the day of Christ, that I have not run in vain, neither
have laboured in vain. Yee and though I be offered up on your
sacrifice and of your serving of God in the faith: I rejoice and
rejoice with you all. For the same cause also, rejoice ye, and
rejoice ye with me.
    I trust in the lord Iesus for to send Timotheus shortly unto you,
that I also may be of good comfort, when I know what case ye stand
in. For I have no man that is so like minded to me, which with so
pure affection careth for your matters. For all others seek their
own, and not that which is Iesus Christe's. Ye know the proof of him,
how that as a son with the father, so with me bestowed he his labour
upon the gospell. Him I hope to send as soon as I know how it will go
with me. I trust in the lord that I also myself shall come shortly.
    I supposed it necessary to send brother Epaphreditus unto you, my
companion in labour and fellowsoldier, your Apostle, and my minister
at my needs. For he longed after you, and was full of heaviness,
because that ye had heard say that he should be sick, and no doubt he
was sick, and that nigh unto death, but God had mercy on him: not on
him only, but on me also, lest I should have had sorrow upon sorrow.
    I sent him therefore the diligentlier, that when ye should see
him, ye might rejoice again, and I might be the less sorrowful.
Receive him therefore in the lord with all gladness, and make much of
such: because that for the work of Christ he went so far, that he was
nigh unto death, and regarded not his life, to fulfil that service
which was lacking on your part toward me.

The .iij. Chapter.

    Moreover brethren mine, rejoice in the lord. It grieveth me not
to write the very same things unto you. For to you it is a sure
thing. Beware of dogs, beware of evil workers. Beware of dissension:
For we are circumcision which worship God in the spirit, and rejoice
in Christ Iesu, and have no confidence in the flesh: though I have
whereof I might rejoice in the flesh. If any other man thinketh that
he hath whereof he might trust in the flesh: much more I: circumcised
the eighth day, of the kindred of Israhell, of the tribe of Benjamin
an Hebrew born of the Hebrews: as concerning the law, a Pharisee, and
as concerning ferventness I persecuted the congregation, and as
touching the righteousness which is in the law I was such a one as no
man could complain on.
    But the things that were winning unto me I counted loss for
Christe's sake. Yee I think all things but loss for that excellent
knowledge's sake of Christ Iesu my lord. For whom I have counted all
thing loss, and do judge them but dung, that I might win Christ, and
might be found in him, not having mine own righteousness which is of
the law: But that which springeth of the faith which is in Christ. I
mean the righteousness which cometh of God thorow faith in knowing
him, and the virtue of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his
passions, that I might be conformable unto his death, if by any means
I might attain unto the resurrection from death.
    Not as though I had all ready received it, either were all ready
perfect: but I follow, if that I may comprehend that, wherein I am
comprehended of Christ Iesu. Brethren I count not myself that I have
gotten it: but one thing I say: I forget that which is behind me, and
stretch myself unto that which is before me and press unto that mark
appointed, to obtain the reward of the high calling of God in Christ
Iesu. Let us therefore as many as be perfect be thus wise minded: and
if ye be other wise minded, I pray God open even this unto you.
Nevertheless in that whereunto we are come, let us proceed by one
rule, that we may be of one accord.
    Brethren be followers of me, and look on them which walk even so,
as ye have us for an ensample. For many walk (of whom I have told you
often, and now tell you weeping) that they are the enemies of the
cross of Christ, whose end is damnation, whose God is their belly and
glory to their shame, which are worldly minded. But our conversation
is in heaven, from whence we look for the saviour Iesus Christ, which
shall change into another fashion our vile bodies, that they may be
fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to the working
whereby he is able to subdue all things unto himself.

The .iiij. Chapter.

    Herefore brethren dearly beloved and longed for, my joy and
crown, so continue beloved in the lord. I pray Euodias, and beseech
Sintiches that they be of one accord in the lord. Yee and I beseech
thee faithful yokefellow, help the women which laboured with me in
the gospell, and with Clement also, and with other my labourfellows,
whose names are in the book of life. Rejoice in the lord alway, and
again I say rejoice. Let your softness be known unto all men. The
lord is even at hand. Be not carefull: but in all things shew your
petition unto God in prayer and supplication with giving of thanks.
And the peace of God which passeth all understanding keep your
hearts, and minds in Christ Iesu.
    Furthermore brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever
things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are
pure, whatsoever things pertain to love, whatsoever things are of
honest report, if there be any virtuous thing, if there be any
laudable thing, those same have ye in your mind, which ye have both
learned and received, heard and also seen in me: those things do, and
the God of peace shall be with you. I rejoice in the lord greatly,
that now at the last ye are revived, and are waxed mindfull of me
again in that wherein ye were also mindfull, but ye lacked
opportunity. I speak not because of necessity. For I have learned in
whatsoever estate I am, therewith to be content. I can both cast down
myself, I can also exceed. Everywhere, and in all things I am
instructed, both to be full, and to be hungry: to have plenty, and to
suffer need. I can do all things thorow the help of Christ, which
strengtheneth me. Notwithstanding ye have well done, that ye bare
part with me in my tribulation.
    Ye of Philippos know that in the beginning of the gospell, when I
departed from Macedonia, no congregation bare part with me as
concerning giving and receiving but ye only. For when I was in
Thessalonica, ye sent once, and afterward again, unto my needs: not
that I desire gifts: but I desire abundant fruit on your part. I
received all, and have plenty. I was even filled after that I had
received of Epaphroditus, that which came from you, an odor that
smelleth sweet, a sacrifice accepted and pleasant to God. My God
fulfil all your needs thorow his glorious riches in Iesu Christ.
    Unto God and our father be praise for ever more Amen. Salute all
the saints in Christ Iesu. The brethren which are with me greet you.
All the saints salute you: and most of all they which are of the
emperors household. The grace of our lord Iesu Christ be with you all
Amen.

Sent from Rome by Epaphroditus.


The pistel of S. Paul to the Collossians

The first Chapter.

    Paul an apostle of Iesu Christ by the will of God, and brother
Timotheus.
    To the saints which are at Colossa, and brethren that believe in
Christ.
    Grace be with you and peace from God our father, and from the
lord Iesu Christ.
    We give thanks to God the father of our lord Iesus Christ alway
praying for you in our prayers, since we heard of your faith which ye
have in Christ Iesu: and of the love which ye bear to all saints for
the hope's sake which is laid up in store for you in heaven, of which
hope ye have heard by the true word of the gospell, which is come
unto you, even as it is into all the world, and is fruitful as it is
among you, from the first day in the which ye heard of it, and had
experience in the grace of God in the truth, as ye learned of Epaphra
our dear fellow servant, which is for you a faithful minister in
Christ, which also declared unto us your love, which ye have in the
spirit.
    For this cause we also, since the day we heard of it have not
ceased praying for you, and desiring that ye might be fulfilled with
the knowledge of his will, in all wisdom and spiritual understanding,
that ye might walk worthy of the lord in all things that please,
being fruitful in all good works and increasing in the knowledge of
God strengthed with all might, thorow his glorious power, unto all
patience, and long suffering, with joyfulness, giving thanks into the
father which hath made us meet to be part takers of the inheritance
of saints in light.
    Which hath delivered us from the power of darkness, and hath
translated us into the kingdom of his dear son, in whom we have
redemption thorow his blood, that is to say, forgiveness of sins,
which is the image of the invisible God, first begotten before all
creatures: for by him were all things created, things that are in
heaven, and things that are in earth: things visible, and things
invisible: whether they be majesty or lordship, either rule or power.
All things are created by him, and in him, and he is before all
things, and in him all things have their being.
    And he is the head of the body, that is to wit of the
congregation, he is the beginning and first begotten of the dead,
that in all things he might have the preeminence. For it pleased the
father that in him should all fullness dwell, and by him to reconcile
all thinge unto himself, and to set at peace by him thorow the blood
of his cross both things in heaven and things in earth.
    And you (which were in times past strangers and enemies, because
your minds were set in evil works) hath he now reconciled in the body
of his flesh thorow death, to make you holy, and such as no man could
complain on, and without fault in his own sight, if ye continue
grounded and stablished in the faith, and be not moved away from the
hope of the gospell, whereof ye have heard, how that it is preached
among all creatures, which are under heaven, whereof I Paul am made a
minister.
    Now joy I in my passions which I suffer for you, and fulfil that
which is behind of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh for his
body's sake, which is the congregation, whereof am I made a minister
according to the ordinance of God, which ordinance was given me unto
you ward, to fulfil the word of God, that mystery hid since the world
began, and since the beginning of generations: But now is opened to
his saints, to whom God would make known the glorious riches of this
mystery among the gentiles, which riches is Christ in you, the hope
of glory, whom we preach warning all men, and teaching all men in all
wisdom, to make all men perfect in Christ Iesu: Wherein I also labour
and strive, even as far forth as his working worketh in me mightily.

The second Chapter.

    I would ye knew what fighting I have for your sakes and for them
of Laodicia, and for as many as have not seen my person in the flesh,
that their hearts might be comforted and knit together in love, and
in all riches of full understanding, for to know the mystery of God
the father and of Christ in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom
and knowledge. This I say lest any man should beguile you with
enticing words. For though I be absent in the flesh, yet am I present
with you in the spirit joying and beholding the order that ye keep,
and your steadfast faith in Christ. As ye have therefore received
Christ Iesu the lord, even so walk rooted and built in him, and
steadfast in the faith, as ye have learned: and therein be plenteous
in giving thanks.
    Beware lest any man come and spoil you thorow philosophy and
deceitful vanity, thorow the traditions of men, and ordinances after
the world, and not after Christ. For in him dwelleth all the fullness
of the Godhead bodily, and ye are full in him, which is the head of
all rule and power, in whom also ye are circumcised with circumcision
made without hands, by putting off the sinful body off the flesh,
thorow the circumcision that is in Christ, in that ye are buried with
him thorow baptism, in whom ye are also risen again thorow faith,
that is wrought by the operation of God which raised him from death.
    And hath with him quickened you also which were dead in sin in
the uncircumcision of your flesh, and hath forgiven our trespasses,
and hath put out the obligation that was against us, made in the law
written, and that hath he taken out of the way, and hath fastened it
on his cross, and hath spoiled rule and power, and hath made a shew
of them openly, and hath triumphed over them in his own person.
    Let no man therefore trouble your consciences about meat and
drink: or for a piece of an holyday, as the holyday of the new moon
or of the saboth daye, which are nothing but shadows of things to
come: but the body is in Christ. Let no man make you shoot at a wrong
mark, which after his own imagination walketh in the humbleness and
holiness of angels, things which he never saw: causeless puffed up
with his fleshly mind, and holdeth not the head, whereof all the body
by joints and couples receiveth nourishment, and is knit together,
and increaseth with the increasing that cometh of God.
    Wherefore if ye be dead with Christ from doctrine of the world:
Why as though ye yet lived in the world, are ye led with traditions
of them that say? Touch not, Taste not, Handle not: which all perish
with the using of them, and are after the commandments, and doctrines
of men: which things have the similitude of wisdom in chosen
holiness, and humbleness, and in that they spare not the body, and do
the flesh no worship unto his need.

The .iij. Chapter.

    If ye be then risen again with Christ seek those things which are
above, where Christ sitteth on the right hand of God. Set your
affection on things that are above, and not on things which are on
the earth. For ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God.
When Christ which is our life shall shew himself, then shall ye also
appear with him in glory.
    Mortify therefore your members which are on the earth,
fornication, uncleanness, unnatural lust, evil concupiscence, and
covetousness which is worshipping of idols: for which thing's sakes
the wrath of God falleth on the children of unbelief. In which things
ye walked once, when ye lived in them.
    But now put ye also away from you all things, wrath, fierceness,
maliciousness, cursed speaking, filthy speaking out of your mouths.
Lie not one to another, seeing that ye have put off the old man with
his works, and have put on the new, which is renewed in knowledge,
after the image of him that made him, where is neither greek nor
jewe, circumcision nor uncircumcision, Barbarous or Sithian, bond or
free: But Christe is all in all things.
    Now therefore as elect of God, holy and beloved, put on tender
mercy, kindness, humbleness of minde, meekness, long suffering,
forbearing one another, and forgiving one another (if any man have a
quarrel to another) even as Christ forgave you, even so do ye. Above
all these things put on love, which is the bond of perfectness, and
the peace of God rule in your hearts, to the which peace ye are
called in one body: and see that ye be thankful.
    Let the word of God dwell in you plenteously in all wisdom. Teach
and exhort your own selves, in psalms, and hymns, and spiritual songs
which have favour with them, singing in your hearts to the lord. And
all things (whatsoever ye do in word or deed) do in the name of the
lord Iesu, giving thanks to God the father by him.
    Wives submit your own selves unto your own husbands, as it is
comely in the lord. Husbands love your wives and be not bitter unto
them. Children obey your fathers and mothers, in all things, for that
is well pleasing unto the lord. Fathers rate not your children, lest
they be of a desperate mind. Servants be obedient unto your bodily
masters in all things: not with eye service as men pleasers, but in
singleness of heart fearing God. And whatsoever ye do, do it heartily
as though ye did it to the lord, and not unto men, remembering that
of the lord ye shall receive the reward of inheritance, for ye serve
the lord Christ. But he that doth wrong shall receive for the wrong
that he hath done: for there is no respect of persons.

The .iiij. Chapter.

Ye masters do unto your servants that which is just and egal,
remembering that ye have also a master in heaven.
    Continue in prayer and watch in the same with thanksgiving,
praying also for us that God open unto us the door of utterance, that
we may speak the mystery of Christ (wherefore I am also in bonds)
that I may utter it, as it becometh me to speak. Walk wisely to them
that are without, and redeem the time. Let your speech alwaye have
faveoure with it and be salted, that ye may know how to answer every
man.
    The dear brother Tichicos shall tell you of all my business,
which is a faithful minister, and fellow servant in the lord, whom I
have sent unto you for the same purpose, that he might know how ye
do, and might comfort your hearts, with one Onesimus a faithful, and
a beloved brother, which is one of you. They shall shew you of all
things which are a doing here.
    Aristarchus my prison fellow saluteth you, And Marcus Barnabas'
sister's son: touching whom, ye received commandments. If he come
unto you receive him: and Iesus which is called Iustus, which are of
the circumcision. These only are my workfellows unto the kingdom of
God, which were unto my consolation. Epaphras the servant of Christ,
which is one of you, saluteth you, and always laboureth fervently for
you in prayers that ye may stand perfect, and full in all that is the
will of God. I bear him record that he hath a fervent mind toward
you, and toward them of Laodicia and them of Hierapolis. Dear Lucas
the physician greeteth you, and Demas. Salute the brethren which are
of Laodicia, and salute Nymphas, and the congregation which is in his
house. And when the pistel is read of you, make that it be read in
the congregation of the Laodicians also: and that ye likewise read
the pistel of Laodicia. And say to Archippus: Take heed to thine
office that thou hast received in the lord, that thou fulfil it. The
salutation by the hand of me Paul. Remember my bonds Grace be with
you, Amen.

Sent from Rome by Tichicus, and Onesimus.


The first pistel of S. Paul unto the Tessalonians

The first Chapter.

    Paul Silvanus and Timotheus.
    Unto the congregation of the Thessalonians, in God the father,
and in the lord Iesus Christ. Grace be with you, and peace from God
our father, and from the lord Iesus Christ.
    We give God thanks alwaye for you all, making mention of you in
our prayers without ceasing, and call to remembrance your work in the
faith, and labour in love and perseverance in the hope of our lord
Iesus Christ, in the sight of God our father: because we know
brethren beloved of God, how that ye are elect. For our gospell came
not unto you in word only, but also in power, and also in the holy
ghost and in much certainty, as ye know that we behaved ourselves
among you, for your sakes.
    And ye counterfeited us, and of the lord: and received the word
in much affliction, with joy of the holy ghost: so that ye were an
example to all that believe in Macedonia, and Achaia. For from you
sounded out the word of the lord, not in Macedonia and in Achaia
only: but your faith also which ye have unto God, spread herself
abroad in all quarters, so greatly that it needeth not us to speak
anything at all: for they themselves shew of you what manner of
entering in we had unto you, and how ye turned to God from images for
to serve the living and true God, and for to look for his son from
heaven, whom he raised from death: I mean Iesus which delivereth us
from wrath to come.

The .ij. Chapter.

    For ye yourselves brethren know of our entrance in unto you, how
that it was not in vain: but even after that we had suffered before
and were shamefully entreated at Philippos (as ye well know) then
were we bold in our God to speak unto you the gospell of God, with
much striving. Our exhortation was not to bring you to error, nor yet
to uncleanness, neither was it with guile: but as we were allowed of
God, that the gospell should be committed unto us: even so we speak,
not as though we intended to please men, but God, which trieth our
hearts.
    Neither was our conversation at any time with flattering words
(as ye well know) neither in cloaked covetousness, God is record:
neither sought we praise of men, neither of you, nor yet of any
other, when we might have been chargable, as the Apostles of Christ:
but were tender among you, even as a nurse cherisheth her children,
so was our affection toward you our good will was to have dealt unto
you, not the gospell of God only: but also our own souls, because ye
were dear unto us.
    Ye remember brethren our labour and travail. For we laboured day
and night, because we would not be grievous unto any of you, and
preached you the gospell of God. Ye are witnesses, and so is God, how
holily and justly (that no man could blame us) we behaved ourselves
among you that believe, as ye know how that we exhorted and
comforted, and besought every one of you, as a father his children,
that ye would walk worthy of the lord, which hath called you unto his
kingdom and glory.
    For this cause thank we God without ceasing, because that when ye
received of us the word, wherewith God was preached, ye received it
not as the word of man: but even as it was in deed, the word of God,
which worketh in you that believe. For ye brethren did counterfeit
the congregations of God which in jewry are in Christ Iesu: for ye
have suffered like things of your kinsmen, as we our selves have
suffered of the Iewes, which as they killed the lord Iesus and their
own prophets, even so have they persecuted us, and God they please
not, and are contrary to all men: and forbid us to preach unto the
gentiles, that they might be saved, to fulfil their sins: For the
wrath of God is come on them, even to the utmost.
    For as much brethren as we are kept from you for a season, as
concerning the bodily presence but not in the heart, we enforced the
more to see you personally with great desire, and therefore we would
have come unto you, I Paul once and again: but Satan withstood us.
For what is our hope or joy, or crown of rejoicing? are not ye it in
the presence of our lord Iesus Christ at his coming? yes ye are our
glory and joy.

The .iij. Chapter.

    Wherefore since we could no longer forbear, it pleased us to
remain at Athens alone, and sent Timotheus our brother and minister
of God, and our labourfellow in the gospell of Christ, to stablish
you, and to comfort you over your faith, that no man should be moved
in these afflictions. For ye yourselves know that we are even
appointed thereunto. For verily when I was with you, I told you
before that we should suffer tribulation even as it came to pass, and
as ye know. For this cause, when I could no longer forbear, I sent
that I might have knowledge of your faith, lest haply the tempter had
tempted you, and that our labour had been bestowed in vain.
    Now lately when Timotheus came from you unto us and declared to
us your faith, and your love, and how that ye have good remembrance
of us always, desiring to see us, as we desire to see you. Therefore
brethren had I consolation in you, in all our adversity, and
necessity through your faith. For now are we alive if ye stand
steadfast in the lord. For what thanks can we recompense to God again
for you, over all the joy that we joy for your sakes before our God,
while we night and day pray exceedingly, that we might see you
presently, and might fulfil that which is lacking in your faith.
    God himself our father, and our lord Iesus Christ guide our
journey unto you: and the lord increase you, and make you flow over
in love one toward another, and toward all men, even as we do toward
you, to stablish your hearts that they might be without ought to be
complained on, in sanctifying {holiness} before God our father, at 
the coming of our lord Iesus Christ, with all his saints.

The .iiij. Chapter.

    Furthermore we beseech you brethren, and exhort you in the lord
Iesus, that ye increase more and more, even as ye have received of
us, how ye ought to walk and to please God. Ye remember what
commandments we gave you in the name of our lord Iesu. For this is
the will of God, which is your sanctifying, that ye should abstain
from fornication, that every one of you should know how to keep his
vessel in holiness and honour, and not in the lust of concupiscence,
as do the heathen, which know not God, that no man go beyond, and
defraud his brother in bargaining, because the lord is avenger of all
such things: as we told you before time, and testified unto you. For
God hath not called us unto uncleanness: but unto sanctifying. He
therefore that despiseth, despiseth not man, but God, which hath sent
his holy spirit among you.
    But as touching brotherly love, ye need not that I write unto
you. For ye are taught of God to love one another. Ye and that thing
verily ye do unto all the brethren, which are thorowout all
Macedonia. We beseech you brethren that ye increase, more and more,
and that ye study to be quiet, and to meddle with your own business,
and to work with your own hands, as we commanded you: that ye may
behave yourselves honestly toward them that are without and that
nothing be lacking unto you.
    I would not brethren have you ignorant concerning them which are
fallen asleep, that ye sorrow not as other do which have no hope. For
if we believe that Iesus died, and rose again: even so them also
which sleep by Iesus, will God bring again with him. And this say we
unto you in the word of the lord, that we which live and are
remaining in the coming of the lord, shall not come yer they, which
sleep. For the lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout,
and the voice of the archangel, and trompe of God. And the dead in
Christe shall arise first: then shall we which live and remain, be
caught up with them also in the clouds to meet the lord in the air.
And so shall we ever be with the lord. Wherefore comfort your selves
one another with these words.

The .v. Chapter.

    Of the times and seasons brethren ye have no need that I write
unto you: for ye your selves know perfectly, that the day of the lord
shall come even as a thief in the night. When they shall say peace
and no danger, then cometh on them sudden destruction, as the
travailing of a woman with child, and they shall not escape. But ye
brethren are not in darkness, that that day should come on you as it
were a thief. Ye are all the children of light, and the children of
the day: we are not of the night, neither of darkness.
    Therefore let us not sleep as do other: but let us watch and be
sober. For they that sleep, sleep in the night: and they that be
drunken, are drunken in the night. But let us which are of the day be
sober, armed with the breast plate of faith and love, and with hope
of health, as an helmet. For God hath not appointed us unto wrath:
but to obtain health by the means of our lord Iesu Christ, which died
for us: that whether we wake or sleep, we should live together with
him.
    Wherefore comfort yourselves together, and edify one another,
even as ye do.
    We beseech you brethren, that ye know them which labour among
you, and have the oversight of you in the lord, and give you
exhortation, that ye have them the more in love: For their work's
sake, and be at peace with them. We desire you brethren warn them
that are unruly, comfort the feeble minded, forbear the weak have
continual patience toward all men. See that none recompense evil for
evil unto any man: but ever follow that which is good, both among
yourselves, and to all men. Rejoice ever. Pray continually. In all
thing give thanks. For this is the will of God in Christ Iesu toward
you.
    Quench not the spirit, despise not prophesying. Examine all
things. Reap that which is good. Abstain from all suspicious things.
The very God of peace sanctify you thorowout. And I pray God that
your whole spirit, soul, and body, be kept faultless unto the coming
of our lord Iesus Christ. Faithful is he, which called you: which
will also do it. Brethren, pray for us. Greet all the brethren with
an holy kiss. I charge you in the lord, that this pistel be read unto
all the wholly brethren. The grace of the lord Iesus Christe be with
you. Amen.

The first pistle unto the Tessalonyans written from Athens.


The second pistel of S. Paul to the Tessalonians

The first Chapter.

    Paul, Sylvanus and Timotheus.
    Unto the congregation of the Thessalonians, which are in God our
father, and in the lord Iesus Christ.
    Grace be with you and peace from God our father, and from the
lord Iesus Christ.
    We are bound to thank God always for you brethren, as it is meet,
because that your faith groweth exceedingly, and every one of you
swimmeth in love toward another between yourselves, so that we
ourselves rejoice of you in the congregations of God, over your
patience and faith in all your persecutions, and tribulations that ye
suffer: which is a token of the righteous judgment of God, that ye
are counted worthy of the kingdom of God, for which ye also suffer.
It is verily a righteous thing with God, to recompense tribulation to
them that trouble you: and to you which are troubled rest with us,
when the lord Iesus shall shew himself from heaven, with his mighty
angels, in flaming fire, rendering vengeance unto them that know not
God, and to them that obey not unto the gospell of our lord Iesus
Christ, which shall be punished with everlasting damnation, from the
presence of the lord, and from the glory of his power, when he shall
come to be glorified in his saints, and to be made marvelous in all
them that believe: because our testimony that we had unto you, was
believed even the same day that we preached it. Wherefore we pray
always for you that our God make you worthy of the calling, and
fulfil all delectation of goodness, and the work of faith, with
power: that the name of our lord Iesus Christ may be glorified in
you, and ye in him, thorow the grace of our God, and of the lord
Iesus Christ.

The second Chapter.

    We beseech you brethren by the coming of our lord Iesu Christ,
and in that we shall assemble unto him, that ye be not suddenly moved
from your mind, and be not troubled, neither by spirit, neither by
words, nor yet by letter, which should seem to come from us, as
though the day of Christ were at hand. Let no man deceive you by any
means, for the lord cometh not, except there come a departing first,
and that that sinful man be opened, the son of perdition which is an
adversary, and is exalted above all that is called God, or that is
worshipped: so that he shall sit in the temple of God, and shew
himself as God.
    Remember ye not, that when I was yet with you, I told you these
things? And now ye know what withholdeth: even that he might be
uttered at his time. For already the mystery of iniquity worketh.
Only he that holdeth, let him now hold, until it {hit} be taken out 
of the way, and then shall that wicked be uttered, whom the lord shall
consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the
appearance of his coming, even him whose coming is by the working of
Satan, with all lying power, signs, and wonders: and in all
deceivableness of unrighteousness, among them that perish: because
they received not the love of the truth, that they might have been
saved. And therefore God shall send them strong delusion, that they
should believe lies: that all they might be damned which believed not
the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness.
    We are bound to give thanks alwaye to God for you brethren
beloved of the lord, for because that God hath from the beginning
chosen you to health, thorow sanctifying of the spirit, And thorow
believing the truth: whereunto he called you by our gospell, to
obtain the glory that cometh of our lord Iesu Christ.
    Therefore brethren stand fast and keep the ordinations, which ye
have learned: whether it were by our preaching, or by oour pistel:
Our lord Iesu Christ himself, and God our father, which hath loved
us, and hath given us everlasting consolation, and good hope thorow
grace, comfort your hearts, and establish you in all saying, and good
doing.

The .iij. Chapter.

    Furthermore brethren pray for us, that the word of God may have
free passage, and be glorified, as it is with you: and that we may be
delivered from unreasonable and evil men. For all men have not faith:
but the lord is faithful, which shall stablish you, and keep you from
evil. We have confidence thorow the lord to youward, that ye both do,
and will do, that which we command you. And the lord guide your
hearts unto the love of God, and patience of Christ.
    We require you brethren in the name of our lord Iesu Christ, that
ye withdraw yourselves from every brother that walketh inordinately,
and not after the institution which ye received of us. Ye yourselves
know how ye ought to counterfeit us: For we behaved not ourselves
inordinately among you. Neither took we bread of any man for nought:
but wrought with labour and travail night and day, because we would
not be grievous to any of you: not but that we had authority: but to
make ourselves an ensample unto you, to counterfeit us. For when we
were with you, this we warned you of, that if there were any which
would not work, that the same should not eat. We have heard say no
doubt that there are some which walk among you inordinately, and work
not at all, but are busybodies. Them that are such, we command and
exhort in the name of our lord Iesu Christ, that they work with
quietness, and eat their bread. Brethren be not weary in well doing.
If any man obey not our sayings, send us word of him by a letter: and
have no company with him, that he may be ashamed: And count him not
as an enemy: but warn him as a brother.
    The very lord of peace, give you peace always, by all means. The
lord be with you all. The salutation of me Paul with mine own hand.
This is the token in all pistels. So I write. The grace of our lord
Iesus be with you all Amen.

Sent from Athens.


The first pistel of S. Paul to Timothe.

The first Chapter.

    Paul an Apostle of Iesus Christ, by the commandment of God our
saviour, and of the lord Iesu Christ, which is our hope.
    Unto Timothy his natural son in the faith.
    Grace mercy and peace from God our father, and from the lord Iesu
Christ.
    As I besought thee to abide still in Ephesus when I departed into
Macedonia, even so do that thou command some that they teach no other
wise: neither give heed to fables and genealogies, which are endless,
and breed doubts, more than Godly edifying which is by faith: for the
end of the commandment is love that cometh of a pure heart and of a
good conscience, and of faith unfeigned: from the which things, some
have erred, and have turned unto vain jangling, because they would
be doctors in the scripture, and yet understand not what they speak,
neither whereof they affirm.
    We know that the law is god, {good} if a man use it lawfully,
understanding this, how that the law is not given unto a righteous
man, but unto the unrighteous and disobedient, to the ungodly and to
sinners, to unholy and unclean, to murderers of fathers and murderers
of mothers, to manslayers and whoremongers: to them that defile
themselves with mankind: to menstealers: to liars and to perjured,
and so forth if there be any other thing that is contrary to
wholesome doctrine according to the glorious gospell of the holy God,
which gospel is committed unto me.
    And I thank him that hath made me strong in Christ Iesu our lord:
for he counted me true, and put me in office, when before I was a
blasphemer, and a persecuter, and a tyrant. Nevertheless I obtained
mercy because I did it ignorantly, in unbelief: but the grace of our
lord was more abundant, with faith and love, which is in Christ Iesu.
    This is a true saying, and by all means worthy to be received,
that Christ Iesus came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am
chief: Notwithstanding unto me was mercy given, that Iesus Christ
should first shew on me all long patience, unto the ensample of them
which shall in time to come believe on him unto eternal life. So then
unto God, king everlasting, immortal, invisible, and wise only, be
honour and praise for ever and ever Amen.
    This commandment commit I unto thee son Timotheus, according to
the prophecies which in time past were prophesied of thee, that thou
in them shouldest fight a good fight, having faith and good
conscience, which some have put away from them, and as concerning
faith have made shipwreck. Of whose number is Himeneus, and
Alexander, which I have delivered unto Satan, that they might be
taught not to blaspheme.

The .ij. Chapter.

    I exhort therefore that above all things prayers, supplications,
petitions, and giving of thanks, be had for all men: for kings, and
for all that are in preeminence, that we may live a quiet and a
peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty. For that is good and
accepted in the sight of god our saviour, which would have all men
saved, and come unto the knowledge of the truth. For there is one
god, and one mediator between God and man, which is the man Christ
Iesus, which gave himself a ransom for all men, that it should be
preached at his time, whereunto I am appointed a preacher, and an
apostle (I tell the truth in Christ and lie not) being the teacher of
the gentiles in faith and verity.
    I woll therefore that the men pray every where, lifting up pure
hands without wrath, or arguing. Likewise also the women that they
array themselves in mannerly apparel with shamefastness, and honest
behavior, not with broided hair, other gold, or pearls, or costly
array: but with such as becometh women that profess the worshipping
of God thorow good works. Let the woman learn in silence with all
subjection. I suffer not a woman to teach, neither to have authority
over the man: but for to be in silence. For Adam was first formed,
and then Eve. Also Adam was not deceived, but the woman was deceived,
and was in transgression. Notwithstanding they shall be saved thorow
bearing of children, if they continue in the faith and in love, and
in sanctifying.

The .iij. Chapter.

    This is a true saying: If a man covet the office of a bishop, he
desireth a good work. Yea and a bishop must be faultless, the husband
of one wife, sober, of honest behavior, honestly apparelled,
harbourous, apt to teach, not drunken, no fighter, not given to
filthy lucre: but gentle, abhorring fighting, abhorring covetousness,
and one that ruleth his own house honestly, having children under
obedience, with all honesty. For if a man cannot rule his own house,
how shall he care for the congregation of God. He may not be a young
man, lest he swell and fall into the judgment of the evil speaker. He
must also be well reported of among them which are without forth,
lest he fall into rebuke, and into the snare of the evil speaker.
    Likewise must the deacons be honest, not double tongued, not
given unto much drinking, neither unto filthy lucre: but having the
mystery of the faith in pure conscience. And let them first be
proved, and then let them minister, if they be found faultless.
    Even so must their wives be honest, not evil speakers: but sober,
and faithful in all things. Let the deacons be the husbands of one
wife and such as rule their children well, and their own households.
For they that minister well, get themselves good degree, and great
liberty in the faith, which is in Christ Iesu.
    These things write I unto thee, trusting to come shortly unto
thee. And if I come not, that thou mayst yet have knowledge how thou
oughtest to behave thyself in the house of God, which is the
congregation of the living God, the pillar and ground of truth. And
without nay great is that mystery of godliness. God was shewed in the
flesh, was justified in the spirit, was seen of angels, was preached
unto the gentiles, was believed on in earth and received up in glory.

The .iiij. Chapter.

    The spirit speaketh evidently that in the latter times some shall
depart from the faith, and shall give heed unto spirits of error, and
devilish doctrine of them which speak false thorow hypocrisy, and
have their consciences marked with an hot iron, forbidding to marry,
and commanding to abstain from meats, which God hath created to be
received with giving thanks, of them which believe, and know the
truth, for all the creatures of God are good: and nothing to be
refused, if it be received with thanksgiving: For it is sanctified by
the word of God, and prayer. If thou shalt put the brethren in
remembrance of these things, thou shalt be a good minister of Iesu
Christ which hast been nourished up in the words of the faith, and
good doctrine, which doctrine thou hast continually followed. But
cast away unghostly and old wives' fables.
    Exercise thyself unto godliness. For bodily exercise profiteth
little: But godliness is good unto all things, as a thing which hath
promises of the life that is now, and of the life to come. This is a
sure saying, and of all parties worthy to be received. For therefore
we labour and suffer rebuke, because we believe in the living God,
which is the saviour of all men: but specially of those that believe.
Such things command and teach. Let no man despise thy youth: but be
unto them that believe, an ensample, in word, in conversation, in
love, in spirit, in faith and in pureness.
    Till I come give attendance to reading, to exhortation, and to
doctrine. Despise not the gift that is in thee, which was given thee
thorow prophecy, and with laying on of the hands of a senior. These
things exercise, and give thyself unto them, that all men may see how
thou profitest. Take heed unto thyself and unto learning, and
continue therein. For if thou shalt so do thou shalt save thyself,
and them that hear thee.

The .v. Chapter.

    Rebuke not a senior: but exhort him as a father, and the younger
men as brethren, the elder women as mothers, the younger as sisters,
with all pureness. Honour widows which are true widows. If any widow
have children or nephews, let them learn first to rule their own
houses godly, and to recompense their elders. For that is good and
acceptable before God. She that is a very widow, and friendless,
putteth her trust in God, and continueth in supplication and prayer
night and day: but she that liveth in pleasure, is dead even yet
alive. And such things command, that they may be without fault. If
there be any that provideth not for his own, and namely for them of
his household, the same denieth the faith, and is worse than an
infidel.
    Let no widow be chosen under threescore year old, and such a one
as was the wife of one man, and well reported of in good works: if
she have nourished children, if she have been liberal to strangers,
if she have washed the saints' feet, if she have ministered unto them
which were in adversity, if she were continually given unto all
manner good works. The younger widows refuse. For when they have
begun to wax wanton, to the dishonour of Christ, then will they
marry, having damnation, because they have despised their first
faith. And also they learn to go from house to house idle, yee not
idle only, but also trifling and busybodies, speaking things which
are not comely.
    I will therefore that the younger women marry and bear children,
and guide the house, and give none occasion to the adversary to speak
evil. For many of them are all ready turned back, and are gone after
Satan. And if any man or woman that believeth have widows, let them
minister unto them, and let not the congregation be charged: that it
may have sufficient for them that are widows in deed.
    The seniors that rule well are worthy of double honour, most
specially they which labour in the word and in teaching. For the
scripture saith: Thou shalt not muzzle the mouth of the ox that
treadeth out the corn. And the laborer is worthy of his reward.
Against an senior receive none accusation: but under two or three
witnesses. Them that sin rebuke openly that other may fear.
    I testify before God, and the lord Iesus Christ, and the elect
angels, that thou observe these things without hasty judgment, and do
nothing partially. Lay hands suddenly on no man neither be part taker
of other men's sins: Keep thyself pure. Drink no longer water, but
use a little wine, for thy stomach's sake, and thine often diseases.
    Some men's sins are open beforehand and go before unto judgement:
some men's sins follow after. Likewise also good works are manifest
beforehand, and they that are otherwise, cannot be hid.

The .vj. Chapter.

    Let as many servants as are under the yoke count their masters
worthy of all honour, that the name of God, and his doctrine be not
evil spoken of. See that they which have believing masters despise
them not because they are brethren: but so much the rather do
service, for as much as they are believing and beloved and part
takers of the benefite.
    These things teach and exhort. If any man teach otherwise, and is
not content with the wholesome words of our lord Iesu Christ, and
with the doctrine of godliness, he is puffed up and knoweth nothing:
but wasteth his brains about questions, and strife of words, whereof
spring envy, strife, railings, evil surmisings superfluous disputings
in scowls of men with corrupt minds, and destitute of the truth,
which think that lucre is godliness. From such separate thyself.
Godliness is great riches, if a man be content with that he hath. For
we brought nothing into the world, and it is a plain case that we can
carry nothing out.
    When we have food and raiment, let us therewith be content. They
that will be rich, fall into temptation and snares, and into many
foolish and noisome lusts, which drown men in perdition, and
destruction. For covetousness is the root of all evil, which while some
lusted after, they erred from the faith, and tangled themselves with
many sorrows. But thou which art the man of God, fly such things.
Follow righteousness, godliness, love, patience, meekness. Fight the
good fight of faith. Lay hand on eternal life, whereunto thou art
called, and hast professed a good profession before many witnesses.
    I give thee charge in the sight of God, which quickeneth all
things, and before Iesus Christ, which under Pontius Pilate witnessed
a good witnessing, that thou keep the commandment without spot, so
that no man find fault with thee, until the appearing of our lord
Iesus Christ, which appearing (when the time is come) he shall shew
that is blessed and mighty only, king of kings, and lord of lords,
which only hath immortality, and dwelleth in light that no man can
obtain, whom never man saw, neither can see: unto whom be honour and
rule everlasting Amen.
    Charge them that are rich in this world, that they be not
exceeding wise, and that they trust not in the uncertain riches, but
in the living God, which giveth us abundantly all things to enjoy
them, and that they do good and be rich in good works, and ready to
give and to distribute, laying up in store for themselves, a good
foundation against the time to come, that they may obtain eternal
life.
    O Timothy save that which is given thee to keep, and avoid
unghostly vanities of voices, and oppositions of science falsely so
called, which science, while some professed, they have erred as
concerning the faith. Grace be with thee Amen.

Sent from Laodicea, which is the chefest cite of Phrigia Pacaciana.


The second pistel of S. Paul to Timothe.

The first Chapter.

    Paul an Apostle of Iesu Christ, by the will of God, to preach the
promise of life, which life is in Christ Iesu.
    To Timothy his beloved son. Grace, mercy, and peace, from God the
father, and from Iesus Christ our lord.
    I thank God, whom I serve from mine elders with pure conscience,
that without ceasing I make mention of thee in my prayers night and
day, desiring to see thee, mindful of thy tears: so that I am filled
with joy, when I call to remembrance the unfeigned faith that is in
thee, which dwelt first in thy grandmother Lois, and in thy mother
Eunica: and am assured that it dwelleth in thee also.
    Wherefore I warn thee that thou stir up the gift of God which is
in thee, by the putting on of my hands. For God hath not given to us
the spirit of fear: but of power, and of love, and of honest
behavior. Be not ashamed to testify our lord, neither be ashamed of
me, which am bound for his sake: but suffer adversity with the
gospell also thorow the power of God, which saved us, and called us
with an holy calling, not after our deeds, but for his purpose and
grace, which grace was given us thorow Christ Iesu before the world
was, but is now declared openly by the appearing of our saviour Iesu
Christ, which hath put away death, and hath brought life and
immortality unto light thorow the gospell, whereunto I am appointed a
preacher, and an Apostle, and a teacher of the gentiles: for the
which cause I also suffer this. Nevertheless I am not ashamed. For I
know whom I have believed, and am sure that he is able keep that
which I have committed to his keeping against that day.
    See thou have the example of the wholesome words which thou
heardest of me, in faith and love which is in Iesu Christ. That good
thing which was committed to thy keeping, keep in the holy ghost
which dwelleth in us. This thou knowest how that all they which are
in Asia be turned from me. Of which sort are Phigellos and
Hermogenes. The lord give mercy unto the house of Onesiphorus, for he
often refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my chain: but when he was
at Rome he sought me out very diligently, and found me. The lord
grant unto him that he may find mercy with the lord at that day. And
in how many things he ministered unto me at Ephesus thou knowest very
well.

The second Chapter.

    Thou therefore my son be strong in the grace that is in Christ
Iesu. And what things thou hast heard of me, many bearing witness,
the same deliver to faithful men, which are apt to teach other. Thou
therefore suffer affliction as a good soldier of Iesu Christ. No man
that warreth, entangleth himself with worldly business, and that
because he would please him that hath chosen him to be a soldier. And
though a man strive for a mastery, yet is he not crowned, except he
strive lawfully. The husbandman that laboureth must first receive of
the fruits. Consider what I say. The lord give thee understanding in
all things.
    Remember that Iesus Christ being of the seed of David, rose again
from death according to my gospell, wherein I suffer trouble as an
evil doer, even unto bonds. But the word of God was not bound.
Herefore I suffer all things, for the elects' sakes, that they might
also obtain that health which is in Christ Iesu, with eternal glory.
    It is a true saying, if we be dead with him, we also shall live
with him. If we be patient, we shall also reign with him. If we deny
him, he also shall deny us. If we believe not, yet abideth he
faithful. He cannot deny himself. Of these things put them in
remembrance, and testify before the lord, that they strive not about
words, which is to no profit, but to pervert the hearers.
    Study to shew thyself laudable unto God, a workman that needeth
not to be ashamed, dividing the word of truth justly. Unghostly and
vain voices pass over. For they shall increase unto greater
ungodliness, and their words shall fret even as doth a cancre: of
whose number is Hymeneos and Philetos, which as concerning the truth
have erred, saying that the resurrection is past all ready, and do
destroy the faith of diverse persons.
    But the sure ground of God remaineth, and hath this seal: the
lord knoweth them that are his, and let every man that calleth on the
name of Christ, depart from iniquity. Notwithstanding in a great
house are not only vessels of gold and of silver: but also of wood
and of earth: Some for honour, and some unto dishonour. If a man
purge himself from such fellows, he shall be a vessel sanctified unto
honour meet for the lord, and prepared unto all good works.
    Lusts of youth avoid, and follow righteousness, faith, love, and
peace, with them that call on the lord with pure heart. Foolish and
unlearned questions put from thee, remembering that they do but make
strife. But the servant of the lord must not strive: but must be
peaceable unto all men, and ready to teach, and one that can suffer
the evil in meekness, and can inform them that resist, if that God at
any time will give them repentance for to know the truth: that they
may wake out of sleep again, out of the snare of the devil, which are
now taken of him at his will.

The .iij. Chapter.

    This understand, that in the last days shall come parlous times:
For the men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters,
proud, cursed speakers, disobedient to father and mother, unthankful,
unholy, churlish, stubborn, false accusers, rioters, fierce,
despisers of them which are good, traitors, heady, high minded,
greedy upon voluptuousness more than the lovers of God, having a
similitude of godly living, but have denied the power there of. Such
abhor. For of this sort are they which enter into houses, and bring
into bondage women laden with sin, which women are led of divers
lusts, ever learning, and never able to come unto the knowledge of
the truth.
    As Iannes and Iambres withstood Moses, even so do these resist
the truth, men they are of corrupt minds, and lewd as concerning the
faith: but they shall prevail no longer. For their madness shall be
uttered unto all men as theirs was: but thou hast seen the experience
of my doctrine, ordinance, purpose, faith, long suffering, love,
patience, persecutions, and afflictions which happened unto me at
Antioche, at Iconium, and at Lystra: which persecutions I suffered
patiently, And from them all the lord delivered me. Yea and all that
will live godly in Christ Iesu, must suffer persecutions. But the
evil men and deceivers, shall wax worse and worse, while they
deceive, and are deceived themselves.
    But continue thou in the things which thou hast learned, which
also were committed unto thee seeing thou knowest of whom thou hast
learned them. and for as much also as thou hast known holy scripture
of a child, which is able to make thee wise unto health thorow faith,
which is in Christ Iesu. For all scripture given by inspiration of
God, is profitable to teach, to improve, to inform, and to instruct
in righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, and prepared
unto all good works.

The .iiij. Chapter.

    I testify therefore before God, and before the lord Iesu Christ,
which shall judge quick and dead at his appearing in his kingdom,
preach the word, be fervent, be it in season, or out of season.
Improve, rebuke, exhort with all long suffering. For the time will
come, when they will not suffer wholesome doctrine: but after their
own lusts shall they (whose ears itch) get them an heap of teachers,
and shall turn their ears from the truth, and shall be given unto
fables: But watch thou in all things, and suffer adversity, and do
the work of an evangelist, fulfil thine office unto the utmost.
    For I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my departing is
at hand. I have fought a good fight, and have fulfilled my course,
and have kept the faith. From henceforth is laid up for me a crown of
righteousness, which the lord that is a righteous judge shall give me
at that day: not to me only: but unto all them that love his coming.
Make speed to come unto me at once.
    For Demas hath left me, and hath loved this present world, and is
departed into Thessalonica. Crescens is gone to Galatia, and Titus
unto Dalmacea. Only Lucas is with me. Take Mark and bring him with
thee, for he is necessary unto me for to minister. And Tychicus have
I sent to Ephesus. The cloak that I left at Troada with Carpus when
thou comest bring with thee, and the books, but specially the
parchment. Alexander the coppersmith did me much evil, the lord
reward him according to his deeds, of whom be thou ware also. For he
withstood our preaching sore.
    At my first answering for myself, no man assisted me, but all
forsook me. I pray God, that it may not be laid to their charges:
notwith standing the lord assisted me, and strengthed me, that by me
the preaching should be fulfilled to the utmost and that all the
gentiles should hear. And I was delivered out of the mouth of the
lion. And the lord shall deliver me from all evil doing, and shall
keep me unto his heavenly kingdom. To whom be praise for ever and
ever Amen.
    Salute Prisca and Aquila, and the household of Onesiphorus.
Erastus abode at Corinthum. Trophimos I left at Miletum sick. Make
speed to come before winter. Eubolus greeteh thee, and Pudes, and
Linus, and Claudia, and all the brethren. The lord Iesus Christ be
with thy spirit. Grace be with you Amen.

The second pistle written from Rome unto Timothy, when Paul was
presented the second time up, before the Emperor Nero.


The pistel of S. Paul to Titus

The first Chapter.

    Paul the servant of God and an Apostle of Iesu Christ, to preach
the faith of God's elect, and the knowledge of that truth, which
truth is in serving God in hope of eternal life, which life God
cannot lie, hath promissed before the world began: but hath at the
time appointed opened his word by preaching, which preaching is
committed unto me, by the commandment of God our saviour.
    To Titus his natural son in the common faith.
    Grace mercy and peace from God the father, and from the lord Iesu
Christ our saviour.
    For this cause left I thee in Creta, that thou shouldest perform
that which was lacking and shouldest ordain seniors in every city as
I appointed thee. If any be such as no man can complain on, the
husband of one wife, having faithful children, which are not
sclandred of riot, neither are disobedient. For a bishop must be such
as no man can complain on, as it be cometh the minister of God not
stubborn, not angry, no drunkard, no fighter, not given to filthy
lucre: but harbourous, one that loveth goodness, of honest behavior,
righteous, holy temperate, and such as cleaveth unto the true word of
doctrine, that he may be able to exhort with wholesome learning, and
to improve them that say against it.
    For there are many disobedient and talkers of vanity, and
deceivers of minds, namely they of the circumcision, whose mouths
must be stopped, which pervert whole houses, teaching things which
they ought not, because of filthy lucre. One being of themselves,
which was a poet of their own said: The Cretans are always liars,
evil beasts, and slowbellies. This witness is true, wherefore rebuke
them sharply, that they may be sound in the faith, and not taking
heed to jewes fables, and commandments of men, which turn from the
truth. Unto the pure, are all things pure: but unto them that are
defiled, and unbelieving, is nothing pure: but even the very minds
and consciences of them are defiled. They confess that they know God:
but with deeds they deny him and are abominable, and disobedient, and
unto all good works discommendable.

The .ij. Chapter.

    But speak thou that which becometh wholesome learning: That the
elder men be sober, honest, discreet, sound in the faith, in love and
in patience. And the elder women likewise that they be in such
raiment, as becometh holiness, not false accusers, not given to much
drinking, but teachers of honest things, that they nurture the young
women to love their husbands, to love their children, to be of honest
behaviour, chaste, housewifely, good, and obedient unto their own
husbands, that the word of God be not evil spoken of. Young men
likewise exhort that they be of honest manners.
    Above all things shew thyself an ensample of good works in the
doctrine, shew uncorruption, honesty, and the wholesome word which
cannot be rebuked, that he which withstandeth may be ashamed, having
no thing in you that he may dispraise. The servants exhort to be
obedient unto their own masters, and to please in all things, not
answering again, neither be pickers, but that they shew all good
faithfulness, that they may do worship to the doctrine of God our
saviour in all things. For the grace of God, that bringeth health
unto all men, hath appeared and teacheth us that we should deny
ungodliness and worldly lusts, and that we should live honestly,
righteously, and godly in this present world, looking for that
blessed hope and glorious appearing of the mighty God, and of our
saviour Iesu Christ: which gave himself for us, to redeem us from all
unrighteousness, and to purge us a peculiar people unto himself,
fervently given unto good works. These things speak, and exhort, and
rebuke, with all commanding. See that no man despise thee.

The .iij. Chapter.

    Warn them that they submit themselves to rule and power, to obey
the officers, that they be prompt unto all good works, that they
speak evil of no man, that they be no fighters, but soft, shewing all
meekness unto all men. For we ourselves also were in times past,
unwise, disobedient, deceived, in danger to lusts, and to divers
manners of voluptuousness, living in maliciousness and envy, full of
hate, hating one another.
    But after that the kindness and love of our saviour to manward
appeared, not of the deeds of righteousness which we wrought, but of
his mercy, he saved us, by the fountain of the new birth, and with
the renewing of the holy ghost, which he shed on us abundantly,
thorow Iesus Christ our saviour, that we once justified by his grace,
should be heirs of eternal life, thorow hope. This is a true saying.
    Of these things I would thou shouldest certify, that they which
believe God, might be studious to go forward in good works. These
things are good and profitable unto men. Foolish questions, and
genealogies, and brawlings and strife about the law avoid, for they
are unprofitable, and superfluous. A man that is the author{aucthor}
of sects, after the first and the second admonition avoid, remembering
 that he that is such, is perverted, and sinneth, even damned by his 
 own judgement.
    When I shall send Artemas unto thee or Tichicus be diligent to
come to me unto Nichopolis. For I have determined there to winter.
Bring Zenas the lawyer and Apollos on their journey diligently, that
nothing be lacking unto them. And let ours also learn to excel in
good works as far forth as need requireth, that they be not
unfruitful. All that are with me salute thee. Greet them that love us
in the faith. Grace be with you all, Amen.

Written from Nichopolis a citie of Macedonia.


The pistel of S. Paul unto Philemon

The first Chapter.

    Paul the prisoner of Iesu Christ, and brother Timotheus.
    Unto Philemon the beloved, and our helper, and to the beloved
Appia, and to Archippus our fellow soldier, and to the congregation
of thy house.
    Grace be with you and peace, from God our father, and from the
lord Iesus Christ.
    I thank my God always making mention always of thee in my
prayers, when I hear of thy love and faith, which thou hast toward
the lord Iesu, and toward all saints: so that the fellowship that
thou hast in the faith is fruitful thorow knowledge of all good
things, which are in you by Iesus Christ. And we have great joy and
consolation over thy love: For by thee brother, the saints' hearts
are comforted.
    Wherefore though I be bold in Christ to enjoin thee, that which
becometh thee: yet for love's sake I rather beseech thee, though I be
as I am, even Paul aged, and now in bonds for Iesu Christ's sake. I
beseech thee for my son Onesimus, whom I begat in my bonds, which in
time passed was to thee unprofitable: but now profitable both to thee
and also to me, whom I have sent home again. Thou therefore receive
him, that is to say mine own bowels, whom I would fain have retained
with me, that in thy stead he might have ministered unto me in the
bonds of the gospell. Nevertheless, without thy mind, would I do
nothing, that that good which springeth of thee should not be as it
were of necessity, but willingly.
    Haply he therefore departed for a season, that thou shouldest
receive him for ever, not now as a servant: but above a servant, I
mean a brother beloved, specially to me: but how much more unto thee,
both in the flesh, and also in the lord? If thou count me a fellow,
receive him as myself. If he have hurt thee or oweth thee ought, that
lay to my charge. I Paul have written it with mine own hand. I will
recompense it. So that I do not say to thee how that thou owest unto
me even thine own self. Even so brother, let me enjoy thee in the
lord. Comfort my bowels in the lord. Trusting in thine obedience, I
wrote unto thee, knowing that thou wilt do more than I say for.
Moreover prepare me lodging: for I trust thorow the help of your
prayers, I shall be given unto you. There salute thee, Epaphras my
fellow prisoner in Christe Iesu, Marcus, Aristarchus, Demas, Lucas,
my helpers. The grace of our lord Iesu Christ be with your spirits,
Amen.

Sent from Rome by Onesimus a servant.


The first pistel of S. Peter

The first Chapter.

    Peter an Apostle of Iesu Christ, to them that dwell here and
there as strangers thorow out, Pontus, Galacia, Capadocia, Asia, and
Bethinia, elect by the foreknowledge of God the father, thorow the
sanctifying of the spirit, unto obedience and sprinkling of the blood
of Iesus Christ. Grace be with you, and peace be multiplied.
    Blessed be God the father of our lord Iesus Christ, which thorow
his abundant mercy begat us again unto a lively hope, by the
resurrection of Iesus Christ from death, to enjoy an inheritance
immortal, and undefiled, and that putrifieth not, reserved in heaven
for you which are kept by the power of God thorow faith, unto health,
which health is prepared allready to be shewed in the last time, in
the which time ye shall rejoice, though now for a season (if need
require) ye are in heaviness, thorow many fold temptations, that your
faith once tried being much more precious than gold that perisheth
(though it be tried with fire) might be found unto laud, glory, and
honour, when Iesus Christ shall appear: whom ye have not seen and yet
love him, in whom even now, though ye see him not, yet ye believe,
and rejoice with joy ineffable, and glorious: receiving the end of
your faith, the health of your souls. Of which health, have the
prophets enquired, and sought, which prophesied of the grace that
should come unto you, searching when, or at what time the spirit of
Christ which was in them should signify, which spirit testified
before, the passions that should come unto Christ, and the glory that
should follow after: unto which prophets it was declared, that not
unto themselves, but unto us, they should minister the things which
are now shewed unto you, of them which by the holy ghost sent down
from heaven, have preached unto you the things which the angels
desire to behold.
    Wherefore gird up the loins of your minds, be sober, and trust
perfectly on the grace that is brought unto you, in that Iesus Christ
is opened, as obedient children, not fashioning yourselves unto your
old lusts of ignorance: But as he which called you is holy, even so
be ye holy in all manner of conversation, because it is written: Be
ye holy, for I am holy.
    And if so be that ye call on the father which without respect of
person judgeth according to every man's works, see that ye pass the
time of your pilgrimage in fear. For as much as ye know how that ye
were not redeemed with corruptible gold and silver from your vain
conversation, which ye received by the traditions of the fathers: but
with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb undefiled, and
without spot, which was ordained before the world was made: but was
declared in the last times for your sakes, which by his means have
believed on God that raised him from death, and glorified him, that
ye might have faith and hope toward God.
    And for as much as ye have purified your souls thorow the spirit,
in obeying the truth for to love brotherly without feigning, see that
ye love one another with a pure heart fervently: for ye are born a
new, not of mortal seed, but of immortal seed, by the word of God
which liveth, and lasteth for ever, because that all flesh is as
grass, and all the glory of man is as the flower of grass, the grass
is withered, and the flower is faded away, but the word of the lord
endureth ever. And this is the word which by the gospell was preached
among you.

The .ij. Chapter.

    Wherefore lay a side all maliciousness, and all guile, and
dissimulation, and envy, and all backbiting: and as new born babes,
desire that reasonable milk which is without corruption, that ye may
be grown therein. If so be that ye have tasted how pleasant the lord
is, to whom ye come as unto a living stone disallowed of men, but
elect of God and precious: and ye as living stones, are made a
spiritual house, and an holy priesthood, for to offer up spiritual
sacrifice, acceptable to God by Iesus Christ.
    Wherefore it is contained in the scripture: behold, I put in Sion
an head corner stone, elect and precious: and he that believeth on
him shall not be ashamed. Unto you therefore which believe is he
precious: but unto them which believe not the same stone which the
builders refused, is made the head stone in the corner, and a stone
to stumble at, and a rock to offend them which stumble at the word,
and believe not that where on they were set. But ye are a chosen
generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, and a peculiar
people, that ye should shew the vertues of him that called you out of
darkness into his marvelous light, which in time past were not a
people, yet are now the people of God, which were not under mercy:
but now have obtained mercy.
    Derly beloved I beseech you as strangers, and pilgrims, abstain
from fleshly lusts which fight against the soul, and see that ye have
honest conversation among the gentiles, that they which backbite you
as evil doers, may see your good works and praise God in the day of
visitation.
    Submit yourselves unto all manner ordinance of man for the lord's
sake, whether it be unto the King as unto the chief head: other unto
rulers, as unto them that are sent of him, for the punishment of evil
doers: but for the laud of them that well do. For so is the will of
God, that with well doing ye should stop the mouths of ignorant men:
as free, and not as though ye took liberty for a cloak of
maliciousness: but even as the servants of God. See that ye honour
all men. Love brotherly fellowship, fear God, honour the king.
    Servants obey your masters with all fear, not only if they be
good and courteous: but also though they be froward. For it commeth
of grace, if a man for conscience toward God endure grief, suffering
wrongfully. For what praise is it, if when ye be buffeted for your
faults, ye take it patiently? But and if when ye do well, ye suffer
wrong and take it patiently, then is there thanke with God.
    Hereunto verily were ye called, for Christ also suffered for our
sakes: leaving us an ensample that ye should follow his steps, which
did no sin, neither was there guile found in his mouth: which when he
was reviled, reviled not again: when he suffered, he threatened not:
but committed the cause to him that judgeth righteously, which his
own self bare our sins in his body on the tree, that we should be
delivered from sin and should live in righteousness. By whose stripes
ye were healed. For ye were as sheep which go astray: but are now
returned unto the shepherd, and bishop of your souls.

The .iij. Chapter.

    Likewise let the women be in subjection to their husbands, that
even they which believe not the word, may without the word be won by
the conversation of the wives: while they behold your pure
conversation coupled with fear. Whose apparel shall not be outward
with broided hair, and hanging on of gold, other in putting on of
gorgeous apparel: but let the hid man of the heart be uncorrupt, with
a meek and a quiet spirit, which spirit is before God a thing much
set by. For after this manner in the old time did the wholy women
which trusted in God tire themselves, and were obedient to their
husbands, even as Sara obeyed Abraham and called him lord: whose
daughters ye are as long as ye do well, and be not afraid of every
shadow.
    Likewise ye men dwell with them according to knowledge, giving
honour unto the wife, as unto the weaker vessel, and as unto them
that are heirs also of the grace of life, that your prayers be not
let.
    In conclusion, be ye all of one mind, one suffer with another,
love as brethren, be pitiful, be courteous, not rendering evil for
evil, neither rebuke for rebuke: but contrariwise, bless: remembering
that ye are thereunto called, even that ye should be heirs of
blessing. For whoso listeth to love life, and to see good days, let
him refrain his tongue from evil, and his lips, that they speak not
guile: Let him eschew evil and do good: let him seek peace, and ensue
it. For the eyes of the lord are over the righteous, and his ears are
open unto their prayers: but the face of the lord beholdeth them that
do evil.
    Moreover who is it that will harm you if ye follow that which is
good? notwithstanding happy are ye if ye suffer for righteousness'
sake. Nevertheless fear not though they seem terrible unto you,
neither be troubled: but sanctify the lord God in your hearts. Be
ready always to give an answer to every man that asketh you a reason
of the hope that ye have, and that with meekness and fear: having a
good conscience, that when they backbite you as evil doers, they may
be ashamed, for as much as they have falsely accused your good
conversation in Christ.
    It is better (if the will of God be so) that ye suffer for well
doing, than for evil doing. For as much as Christ hath once suffered
for sins, the just for the unjust, for to bring us to God, and was
killed, as pertaining to the flesh: but was quickened in the spirit.
    In which spirit, he also went and preached unto the spirits that
were in prison, which were in time past disobedient, when the long
suffering of God abode exceeding patiently in the days of Noah, while
the ark was a preparing, wherein few (that is to say viij. souls)
were saved by water, which signifieth baptism that now saveth us, not
the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but in that a good
conscience consenteth to God, by the resurrection of Iesus Christ,
which is on the right hand of God, and is gone into heaven, angels,
power, and might, subdued unto him.

The .iiij. Chapter.

    For as much as Christ hath suffered for us in the flesh, arm
yourselves likewise with the same mind: for he which suffereth in the
flesh ceaseth from sin, that he henceforward should live as much time
as remaineth in the flesh, not after the lusts of men: but after the
will of God. For it is sufficient for us that we have spent the time
that is past of the life, after the will of the gentiles, walking in
wantonness lusts, drunkenness, in eating, drinking, and in abominable
idolatry.
    And it seemeth to them a strange thing that ye run not also with
them unto the same excess of riot, and therefore speak they evil of
you, which shall give acomptes to him that is ready to judge quick
and dead. For unto this purpose verily was the gospel preached unto
the dead, that they should be judged after the manner of men in the
flesh, but should live godly in the spirit. The end of all things is
at hand.
    Be ye therefore discreet, and sober, that ye may be apt to
prayers. But above all things have fervent love among you. For love
covereth the multitude of sins. Be ye harbourous, and that without
grudging. As every man hath received the gift, minister the same one
to another as good ministers of the manyfold grace of God. If any man
speak, let him talk as though he speake the words of God. If any man
minister, let him do it as of the ability which God ministreth unto
him. That God in all things may be glorified thorow Iesus Christ, to
whom be praise and dominion for ever and while the world standeth
Amen.
    Derly beloved, be not troubled in this heat, which now is come
among you to try you, as though some strange thing had happened unto
you: but rejoice in as much as ye are partakers of Christ's passions,
that when his glory appeareth, ye may be merry and glad.
    Happy are ye when ye suffer rebuke for the name of Christ. For
the spirit of glory and the spirit of God resteth upon you. On their
part he is evil spoken of: but on your part he is glorified.
    See that none of you suffer as a murderer, or as a thief, or an
evil doer, or as a busybody in other men's matters. If any man suffer
as a Christian man, let him not be ashamed: but let him glorify God
on his behalf. For the time is come that judgement must begin at the
house of God. If it first begin at us, what shall the end be of them
which believe not the gospel of God? And if the righteous scarcely be
saved: where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear? Wherefore let
them that suffer according to the will of God, commit their souls to
him with well doing, as unto a faithful creator.

The .v. Chapter.

    The seniors which are among you I exhort, which am also an
senior, and a witness of the afflictions of Christ, and also a part
taker of the glory that shall be opened: see that ye feed Christe's
flock, which is among you, taking the oversight of them, not as
though ye were compelled thereto: but willingly: Not for the desire
of filthy lucre: but of a good mind. Not as though ye were lords over
the parishes: but that ye be an ensample to the flock. And when the
chief shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive an incorruptible crown
of glory.
    Likewise ye younger submit your selves unto the elder. Submit
yourselves every man, one to another. Knit yourselves together in
lowliness of mind. For God resisteth the proud and giveth grace to
the humble. Submit your selves therefore under the mighty hand of
God, that he may exalt you, when the time is come. Cast all your care
to him: for he careth for you.
    Be sober and watch, for your adversary the devil as a roaring
lion walketh about, seeking whom he may devour: whom resist steadfast
in the faith, remembering that ye do but fulfil the same afflictions
which are appointed to your brethren that are in the world. The God
of all grace, which called you unto his eternal glory by Christ
Iesus, shall his own self after a little affliction make you perfect:
shall settle, strengthe, and establishe you. To him be glory and
dominion for ever, and while the world endureth Amen. By Silvanus a
faithful brother unto you (as I suppose) have I written brevely,
exhorting and testifying how that this is the true grace of God,
wherein ye stand. The congregation that is gathered together in
Babylon, saluteth you, and Marcus my son. Greet ye one another with
the kiss of love. Peace be with you all which are in Christ Iesus,
Amen.


The second pistel of S. Peter

The first Chapter.

    Simon Peter a servant and an Apostle of Iesus Christ, to them
which have obtained like precious faith with us in the righteousness
that cometh of our God, and of the saviour Iesus Christ.
    Grace with you, and peace be multiplied in the knowledge of God,
and of Iesus our lord. According as his godly power hath given unto
us all things that pertain unto life and to serve God with all,
thorow the knowledge of him that hath called us by virtue and glory,
by the means whereof, are given unto us excellent and most great
promises, that by the help of them ye should be part takers of the
godly nature, in that ye fly the corruption of worldly lust.
    And hereunto give all diligence: in your faith minister virtue,
and in virtue knowledge, and in knowledge temperancy, and in
temperancy patience, in patience godliness, in godliness brotherly
kindness, in brotherly kindness love. For if these things be among
you, and are plenteous, they will make you that ye neither shall be
idle nor unfruitful unto the knowledge of the our lord Iesus Christ.
He that lacketh these things is blind and gropeth for the way with
his hand, and hath forgotten that he was purged from his old sins.
    Wherefore brethren give the more diligence for to make your
calling and election sure. For if ye do such things, ye shall never
err. Yee and by this means an entering in shall be ministered unto
you abundantly into the everlasting kingdom of our lord and saviour
Iesus Christ.
    Wherefore I will not be negligent to put you allways in
remembrance of such things, though that ye know them yourselves and
be also stablished in the present truth. Notwithstanding I think it
mete (as long as I am in this tabernacle) to stir you up by putting
you in remembrance, for as much as I am sure how that the time is at
hand that I must put off this my tabernacle, even as our lord Iesus
Christ hath shewed me. I will enforce therefore, that on every side
ye might have wherewith to stir up the remembrance of these things
after my departing.
    For we followed not deceivable fables when we opened unto you the
power, and coming of our lord Iesus Christ: but with our eyes we saw
his majesty. Even then verily when he received of God the father
honour and glory, and when there came such a voice to him from that
excellent glory. This is my dear beloved son, in whom I have delight,
this voice we heard when it came from heaven, being with him in the
holy mount.
    We have also a more sure word of prophecy, whereunto if ye take
heed, as unto a light that shineth in a dark place, ye do well, until
the day dawn and the day star arise in your hearts. So that ye first
know this, that no prophecy in the scripture hath any private
interpretation. For the scripture came never by the will of man: but
wholy men of God spake as they were moved by the wholy ghost.

The .ij. Chapter.

    There were false prophets among the people even as there shall be
false teachers among you: which privily shall bring in damnable
sects, even denying the lord that hath bought them, and bring on
their own heads swift damnation, and many shall follow their damnable
ways, by which the way of truth shall be evil spoken of, and thorow
covetousness shall they with feigned words make merchandise of you,
whose judgment is not far off, and their damnation sleepeth not.
    For if God spared not the angels that sinned but cast them down
into hell, and put them in chains of darkness, there to be kept unto
judgement: neither spared the old world: but saved Noah the eighte
preacher of righteousness, and brought in the flood into the world of
the ungodly, and turned the cities of Zodom and Gomor into ashes:
overthrew them, damned them, and made of them an ensample unto all
that after should live ungodly. And just Lot vexed with the uncleanly
conversation of the wicked, delivered he. For he being righteous and
dwelling among them, in seeing and hearing, vexed his righteous soul
from day to day with their unrighteous deeds. The lord knoweth how to
deliver the godly out of temptation, and how to reserve the unjust
unto the day of judgment for to be punished: namely them that walk
after the flesh in the lust of uncleanness, and despise the rulers.
Presumptuous are they, and stubborn and fear not to speak evil of
them that are in authority. When the angels which are greater both in
power and might, receive not of the lord railing judgement against
them. But these as brute beasts, naturally made to be taken and
destroyed, speak evil of that they know not, and shall perish through
their own destruction, and receive the reward of unrighteousness.
    They count it pleasure to live deliciously for a season. Spots
they are and filthiness: and of you they make a mockingstock feasting
together in their deceivable ways: having eyes full of advoutry, and
that cannot cease to sin, beguiling unstable souls. Hearts they have
exercised with covetousness. They are cursed children, and have
forsaken the right way, and are gone astray following the way of
Balaam the son of Bosor, which loved the reward of unrighteousness:
but was rebuked of his iniquity. The tame and dumb beast, speaking
with man's voice forbade the foolishness of the prophet.
    These are wells without water, and clouds carried about of a
tempest, to whom the mist of darkness is reserved for ever. For when
they have spoken the swelling words of vanity, they beguile with
wantonness thorow the lusts of the flesh them that were clean
escaped: but now are wrapped in errors. They promise them liberty,
and are them selves the bondservants of corruption. For of whomsoever
a man is overcome, unto the same is he in bondage. For if they, after
they have escaped from the filthiness of the world thorow the
knowledge of the lord, and of the saviour Iesus Christ, they are yet
tangled again therein and overcome: then is the latter end worse with
them than the beginning. For it had been better for them, not to have
known the way of righteousness, than after they have known it, to
turn from the holy commandment given unto them. It is happened unto
them according to the true proverb: The dog is turned to his vomit
again, and the sow after she is washed, is returned to her wallowing
in the mire.

The .iij. Chapter.

    This is the second pistel that I now write unto you, my derly
beloved, wherewith I stir up and warn your pure minds, to call to
remembrance the words which were told before of the holy prophets,
and also the commandment of us the apostles of the lord and saviour.
    This first understand, that there shall come in the last days
mockers, which will walk after their own lusts and say: Where is the
promise of his coming? For since the fathers died all things continue
in the same estate wherein they were at the beginning. This they know
not (and that willingly) how that the heavens a great while ago were,
and the earth that was in the water, appeared up out of the water by
the word of God: by the which things the world that then was perished
overflowen with the flood. But the heavens verily and earth which are
now, are kept by the same word in store, and reserved unto fire,
against the day of judgment and perdition of ungodly men.
    Derely beloved be not ignorant of this one thing, how that one
day is with the lord, as a thousand year, and a thousand year as one
day. The lord is not slack to fulfil his promise as some men count
slackness: but is patient to us ward and would have no man lost, but
would receive all men to repentance. Nevertheless the day of the lord
will come as a thief in the night, in the which day, the heavens
shall perish with terrible noise, and the elements shall melt with
heat, and the earth with the works that are therein shall burn.
    If all these things shall perish, what manner persons ought ye to
be in holy conversation, and godliness: looking for, and hasting unto
the coming of the day of God, in which the heavens shall perish with
fire, and the elements shall be consumed with heat. Nevertheless we
look for a new heaven, and a new earth, according to his promise,
wherein dwelleth righteousness.
    Wherefore derly beloved, seeing that ye look for such things, be
diligent that ye may be found of him in peace, without spot and
undefiled: And suppose that the long suffering of the lord is health,
even as our derely beloved brother Paul, according to the wisdom
given unto him, wrote to you, yee, almost in every pistel speaking of
such things: among which are many things hard to be understood, which
they that are unlearned, and unstable pervert, as they do other
scriptures unto their own destruction. Ye therefore beloved seeing ye
are warned, Beware lest ye be also plucked away with the error of the
wicked, and [fall from your] own steadfastness: but grow in grace,
and in the knowledge of our lord, and saviour Iesus Christ. To whom
be glory both now and for ever, Amen.


The first pistel of S. Ihon

The first Chapter.

    That which was from the beginning declare we unto you, which we
have heard which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked
upon, and our hands have handled, of the word of life. For the life
appeared, and we have seen, and bear witness, and shew unto you that
eternal life, which was with the father, and appeared unto us. That
which we have seen and heard declare we unto you that ye may have
fellowship with us, and that our fellowship may be with the father,
and his son Iesus Christ. And this write we unto you, that our joy
may be full.
    And this is the tidings which we have heard of him, and declare
unto you, that God is light, and in him is no darkness at all. If we
say that we have fellowship with him, and yet walk in darkness, we
lie, and do not the truth: but and if we walk in light even as he is
in light, then have we fellowship with him, and the blood of Christ
his son cleanseth us from all sin.
    If we say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and truth is
not in us. If we knowledge our sins, he is faithful and just, to
forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. If
we say we have not sinned, we make him a liar, and his word is not in
us.

The second Chapter.

    My little children, these things write I unto you, that ye should
not sin: and if any man sin, yet we have an advocate with the father,
Iesus Christ, which is righteous: and he it is that obtaineth grace
for our sins: not for our sins only: but also for the sins of all the
world. And hereby we know that we have known him, if we keep his
commandments. He that saith I know him, and keepeth not his
commandments is a liar, and the verity is not in him. Whosoever
keepeth his word, in him is the love of God perfect in deed. And
thereby know we that we are in him. He that saith he bideth in him,
ought to walk even as he walked.
    Brethren I write no new commandment unto you: but that old
commandment which ye heard from the beginning. The old commandment is
the word which ye heard from the beginning. Again a new commandment I
write unto you, a thing that is true in him, and also in you: for the
darkness is past, and the true light now shineth. He that saith how
that he is in the light, and yet hateth his brother, is in darkness
even until this time. He that loveth his brother, abideth in the
light, and there is none occasion of evil in him. He that hateth his
brother is in darkness, and walketh in darkness: and cannot tell
whither he goeth, because that darkness hath blinded his eyes.
    Babes I write unto you how that your sins are forgiven you for
his name's sake. I write unto you fathers, how that ye have known him
that was from the beginning. I write unto you young men, how that ye
have overcome the wicked. I write unto you little children, how that
ye have known the father. I write unto you fathers, how that ye have
known him that was from the beginning. I write unto you young men,
how that ye are strong: and the word of God abideth in you, and ye
have overcome that wicked.
    See that ye love not the world, neither the things that are in
the world. If any man love the world, the love of the father is not
in him. For all that is in the world (as the lust of the flesh, the
lust of the eyes, and the pride of goods) is not of the father: but
of the world. And the world vanisheth away, and the lust thereof: but
he that fulfilleth the will of God, abideth ever.
    Little children it is the last time, and as ye have heard how the
antichrist shall come: even now are there many antichrists come
already whereby we know that it is the last time. They went out from
us but they were not of us. For if they had been of us, they would no
doubt have continued with us. But that fortuned that it might appear,
that they were not of us.
    And ye have an ointment of the wholy ghost, and ye know all
things. I wrote not unto you, as though ye knew not the truth: but as
though ye knew it, and know also that no lie cometh of truth. Who is
a liar: but he that denieth that Iesus is Christ? he is the
antichrist that denieth the father and the son. Whosoever denieth the
son, the same hath not the father. Let therefore abide in you that
same which ye heard from the beginning. If that which ye heard from
the beginning shall remain in you, ye also shall continue in the son,
and in the father. And this is the promise that he hath promised us,
even eternal life.
    This have I written unto you, as concerning them that deceive
you. And the anointing which ye have received of him dwelleth in you.
And ye need not that any man teach you: but as that annointing
teacheth you all things, and is true, and is no lie: and as it taught
you, even so bide therein. And now babes abide in him, that when he
shall appear, we may be bold, and not be made ashamed of him at his
coming. If ye know that he is righteous, know also that he which
followeth righteousness, is born of him.

The .iij. Chapter.

    Behold what love the father hath shewed on us, that we should be
called the sons of God. For this cause the world knoweth you not
because it knoweth not him. Derely beloved, now are we the sons of
God, and yet it hath not appear what we shall be. But we know that
when it shall appear, we shall be like him. For we shall see him as
he is. And every man that hath this hope in him, purgeth himself,
even as he is pure. Whosoever committeth sin, committeth
unrighteousness also, for sin is unrighteousness. And ye know that he
appeared to take away our sins, and in him is no sin. As many as bide
in him, sin not: whosoever sinneth hath not seen him, neither hath
known him.
    Babes let no man deceive you, He that doth righteousness, is
righteous, even as he is righteous. He that committeth sin is of the
devil: for the devil sinneth since the beginning. For this purpose
appeared the son of God, to loose the works of the devil. Whosoever
is born of God, sinneth not: for his seed remaineth in him, and he
cannot sin, because he is born of God. In this are the children of
God known, and the children of the devil. Whosoever doth not
righteousness, is not of God, neither he that loveth not his brother.
    For this is the tidings, that ye heard from the beginning, that
we should love one another: not as Cain which was of the wicked and
slew his brother. And wherefore slew he him? because his own works
were evil, and his brother's good. Marvel not my brethren if the
world hate you. We know that we are translated from death unto life,
because we love the brethren. He that loveth not his brother, abideth
in death. Whosoever hateth his brother, is a man slayer. And ye know
that no man slayer hath eternal life abiding in him.
    Hereby perceive we love: that he gave his life for us: And we
ought also to give our lives for the brethren. Whosoever hath this
world's goods and seeth his brother in necessity, and shutteth up his
compassion from him: how dwelleth the love of God in him? My babes,
let us not love in word, neither in tongue: but with deed, and in
verity: And thereby we know that we are of the verity, and will
before him put our hearts out of doubt: For (if our hearts condemn
us) God is greater than our hearts, and knoweth all things. Tenderly
beloved, if our hearts condemn us not, then have we trust to God
ward: and whatsoever we ask, we shall receive of him: because we keep
his commandments, and do those things which are pleasing in his
sight.
    And this is his commandment, that we believe on the name of his
son Iesus Christ, and love one another, as he gave commandment. And
he that keepeth his commandments dwelleth in him, and he in him. And
hereby we know that there abideth in us of the spirit which he gave
us.

The .iiij. Chapter.

    Derely beloved believe not every spirit: but prove the spirits
whether they are of God, or no: for many false prophets are gone out
into the world. Hereby shall ye know the spirit of God. Every spirit
that confesseth that Iesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of God.
And every spirit which confesseth not that Iesus Christ is come in
the flesh, is not of God. And this is that spirit of antichrist, of
whom ye have heard, how that he should come: and even now already is
he in the world.
    Little children, ye are of God, and have overcome them: for
greater is he that is in you, then he that is in the world. They are
of the world, therefore speak they of the world, and the world
heareth them. We are of God. He that knoweth God heareth us: He that
is not of God, heareth us not. Hereby know we the spirit of verity,
and the spirit of error.
    Derely beloved, let us love one another: for love cometh of God.
And every one that loveth is born of God, and knoweth God. He that
loveth not, hath not known God: for God is love. In this appeared the
love of God to us ward, because that God sent his only begotten son
into the world, that we might live thorow him. Herein is love, not
that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his son to make
agreement for our sins.
    Derely beloved if God so loved us, we ought also to love one
another. No man hath seen God at any time. If we love one another,
God dwelleth in us, and his love is perfect in us. Hereby know we,
that we dwell in him, and he in us: because he hath given us of his
spirit. And we have seen and do testify that the father sent the son,
which is the saviour of the world. Whosoever confesseth that Iesus is
the son of God, in him dwelleth God, and he in God. And we have known
and believed the love that God hath to us.
    God is love, and he that dwelleth in love dwelleth in God, and
God in him. Herein is the love perfect in us, that we should have
trust in the day of judgment, that as he is, even so are we in this
world. There is no fear in love, but perfect love casteth out all
fear, for fear hath painfulness. He that feareth is not perfect in
love.
    We love him, for he loved us first. If a man say, I love God, and
yet hate his brother, he is a liar. How can he that loveth not his
brother whom he hath seen, love God whom he hath not seen? And this
commandment have we of him: that he which loveth God, should love his
brother also.

The .v. Chapter.

    Whosoever believeth that Iesus is Christ, is born of God. And
every one that loveth him which begat, loveth him also which was
begotten of him. In this we know that we love the children of God,
when we love God, and keep his commandments. This is the love of God,
that we keep his commandments, and his commandments are not grievous.
For all that is born of God, overcometh the world. And this is the
victory that overcometh the world, even our faith. Who is it that
overcometh the world: but he which believeth that Iesus is the son of
God?
    This Iesus Christ is he that came by water and blood, not by
water only: but by water and blood. And it is the spirit that beareth
witness, because the spirit is truth. For there are three which bear
record in heaven, the father, the word, and the holy ghost. And these
three are one. And there are three which bear record in earth: the
spirit, and water, and blood: and these three are one. If we receive
the witness of men, the witness of God is greater. For this is the
witness of God, which he testified of his son. He that believeth on
the son of God hath the witness in himself. He that believeth not
God, hath made him a liar, because he believed not the record that
God gave of his son. And this is that record, how that God hath given
unto us eternal life, and this life is in his son. He that hath the
son, hath life: and he that hath not the son of God, hath not life.
    These things have I written unto you that believe on the name of
the son of God, that ye may know how that ye have eternal life, and
that ye may believe on the name of the son of God. And this is the
trust that we have in him: that if we ask any thing according to his
will he heareth us. And if we know that he hear us whatsoever we ask,
we know that we shall have the petitions that we desire of him.
    If any man see his brother sin a sin that is not unto death, let
him ask, and he shall give him life for them that sin not unto death.
There is a sin unto death, for which say I not that a man should
pray. All unrighteousness is sin, and there is sin not unto death.
    We know that whosoever is born of God, sinneth not: but he that
is begotten of God keepeth himself, and that wicked twicheth him not.
We know that we are of God, and that the world is altogether set on
wickedness. We know that the son of God is come, and hath given us a
mind to know him which is true: and we are in him that is true,
through his son Iesu Christ. This same is very God, and eternal life.
Babes keep yourselves from images. Amen.


The second pistel of S. Ihon

The first Chapter.

    The senior to the elect lady and her children which I love in the
truth: And not I only, but also all that have known the truth, for
the truth's sake, which remaineth in us, and shall be in us for ever.
    With you be grace, mercy, and peace from God the father, and from
the lord Iesus Christ the son of the father, in truth and love.
    I rejoiced greatly, that I found of thy children walking in
trough, as we have received a commandment of the father. And now
beseech I thee lady, not as though I wrote a new commandment unto
thee, but that same, which we had from the beginning, that we should
love one another. And this is the love, that we should walk after his
commandments.
    This commandment is (that as ye have heard from the beginning) ye
should walk in it. For many deceivers are entered into the world,
which confess not that Iesus Christ is como in the flesh. This is a
deceiver and an antichrist. Look on yourselves, that we loose not
that we have wrought: but that we may have a full reward. Whosoever
transgresseth and bideth not in the doctrine of Christ, hath not God.
He that endureth in the doctrine of Christ, hath both the father, and
the son.
    If there come any unto you and bring not this learning, him
receive not to house: neither bid him God speed. For he that biddeth
him God speed, is part taker of his evil deeds. I had many things to
write unto you, nevertheless I would not write with paper and ink:
but I trust to come unto you, and speak with you mought to mouth,
that our joy may be full. The sons of thy elect sister greet thee
Amen.


The third pistel of S. Ihon

The first Chapter.
The senior unto the beloved Gaius, whom I love in the truth.
Wellbeloved I wish in all things that thou prosperedest and faredest
well, even as thy soul prospereth. I rejoiced greatly when the
brethren came and testified of the truth that is in thee, how thou in
troth walkest. I have no greater joy than for to hear how that my
sons walk in verity.
    Derely beloved thou dost faithfully what soever thou doest to the
brethren, and to strangers, which bare witness of thy love before all
the congregation. Which brethren when thou bringest forwards on their
journey (as it beseemeth God) thou shalt do well: because that for
his name's sake they went forth, and took nothing of the gentiles. We
therefore ought to receive such, that we also might be helpers to the
truth.
    I wrote unto the congregation: but Diotrephes which loveth to
have the preeminence among them, receiveth us not, wherefore if I
come I will declare his deeds which he doeth jesting on us with
malicious words, neither is therewith content. Not only he himself
receiveth not the brethren: but also he forbiddeth them that would,
and thrusteth them out of the congregation.
    Derely beloved counterfeit not that which is evil, but that which
is good: He that doeth well is of God: but he that doeth evil seeth
not God. Demetrius hath good report of all men, and of the truth. Yee
and we ourselves also bear record, and ye know that our record is
true. I have many things to write: But I will not with pen and ink
write unto thee. For I trust I shall speak mouth to mouth. Peace be
with thee. The lovers salute thee. Greet the lovers by name.


The pistel unto the Ebrues

The first Chapter.

    God in time past diversely and many ways, spake unto the fathers
by prophets: but in these last days he hath spoken unto us by his
son, whom he hath made heir of all things: by whom also he made the
world. Which son being the brightness of his glory, and very image of
his substance, bearing up all things with the word of his power, hath
in his own person purged our sins, and is sitten on the right hand of
the majesty on high, and is more excellent then the angels, in as
much as he hath by inheritance obtained an excellenter name than have
they.
    For unto which of the angels said he at any time: Thou art my
son, this day begat I thee? And again: I will be his father, and he
shall be my son. And again when he bringeth in the first begotten son
in the world, he saith: And all the angels of God shall worship him.
And unto {of} the angels he saith: He maketh his angels spirits, and 
his ministers flames of fire. But unto the son he saith: God thy seat
shall be for ever, and ever. The sceptre of thy kingdom is a right
sceptre. Thou hast loved righteousness and hated iniquity: Wherefore
hath God, which is thy God, anointed thee with the oil of gladness
above thy fellows.
    And thou lord in the beginning hast laid the foundation of the
earth: And the heavens are the works of thy hands. They shall perish,
but thou shalt endure. They all shall wax old as doth a garment: and
as a vesture shalt thou change them, and they shall be changed: but
thou art the same, and thy years shall not fail. Unto which of the
angels said he at any time? Sit on my right hand till I make thine
enemies thy footstool. Are they not all spirits to do service, sent
for to minister for their sakes, which shall be heirs of health?

The .ij. Chapter.

    Wherefore we ought much more to attend unto those things which we
have heard, lest we perish. For if the word which was spoken by
angels was steadfast: and every transgression and disobedience
received a just recompense to reward: how shall we escape if we
despise so great health? which at the first began to be preached of
the lord himself, and after ward was confirmed unto usward, by them
that heard it, God bearing witness thereto, both with signs and
wonders also, and with divers miracles, and gifts of the holy ghost,
according to his own will.
    He hath not unto the angels put in subjection the world to come,
whereof we speak: but one in a certain place witnessed, saying. What
is man, that thou art mindful of him: other the son of man, that thou
visitest him? After thou hadst for a season made him lower than the
angels: thou crownedst him with honour and glory, and hast set him
above the works of thy hands. Thou hast put all things in subjection
under his feet. In that he put all things under him, he left nothing
that is not put under him. Nevertheless we yet see not all things
subdued unto him: but that Iesus which for a season was made less
than the angels, we see thorow the punishment of death crowned with
glory and honour: that he by the grace of God, should taste of death
for all men.
    For it became him, for whom are all things, and by whom are all
things, after that he had brought many sons unto glory, that he
should make the lord of their health perfect thorow afflictions: For
as much as he which sanctifieth, and they which are sanctified, are
all of one. For which cause's sake he is not ashamed to call them
brethren saying: I will declare thy name unto my brethren, and in the
midst of the congregation will I praise thee. And again: I will put
my trust in him. And again: behold here am I and the children which
God hath given me.
    For as much then as the children were part takers of flesh and
blood, he also himself like wise took part with them, for to put down
thorow death him that had lordship over death that is to say the
devil. And that he might deliver them which thorow fear of death all
their life time were in danger of bondage. For he in no place taketh
on him the angels: but the seed of Abraham taketh he on him.
Wherefore in all things it became him to be made like unto his
brethren, that he might be merciful, and a faithful high priest in
things concerning God, for to purge the people's sins. For in that he
himself suffered, and was tempted, he is able to succour them that
are tempted.

The .iij. Chapter.

    Wherefore wholy brethren, partakers of the celestial callinge,
consider the ambassador and high priest of our profession Christ
Iesus, being faithful to him that sent him, even as was Moses in all
his house. And this man was counted worthy of more glory than Moses:
Inasmuch as he which hath prepared the house, hath most honour in the
house. Every house is prepared of some man. But he that ordained all
things is God. And Moses verily was faithful in all his house, as a
minister, to bear witness of those things which should be spoken
afterward. But Christ as a son hath rule over the house, whose house
we are, if we keep stedfast confidence and rejoicing in the faith
unto the end.
    Wherefore as the holy ghost saith: today if ye shall hear his
voice, harden not your hearts, as when ye provoked in time of
temptation in the wilderness, where your fathers tempted me, proved
me, and saw my works xl. years long. Wherefore I was grieved with
that generation and said: They ever err in their hearts: they verily
have not known my ways, so that I sware in my wrath, that they should
not enter into my rest. Take heed brethren that there be in none of
you an evil heart, in unbelief, that he should depart from the living
God: but exhort one another daily, while it is called today, lest any
of you wax hard hearted, and be deceived with sin.
    We are partakers of Christ, so that we keep sure unto the end the
beginning of the substance, so long as it is said: today if ye hear
his voice, harden not your hearts, as when ye provoked. For some,
when they heard, provoked: but not all that came out of Egypt under
Moses. But with whom was he displeased xl. years? was he not
displeased with them that sinned: whose bodies were overthrown in the
desert? To whom sware he that they should not enter into his rest:
but unto them that believed not? And we see that they could not enter
in, because of unbelief.

The .iiij. Chapter.

    Let us fear therefore lest any of us forsaking the promise of
entering into his rest, should seem to come behind. For unto us was
it declared, as well as unto them. But it profited not them that they
heard the word, because they which heard it coupled it not with
faith. We which have believed, do enter into his rest, as contrary
wise he said to the other: as I have sworn in my wrath, they shall
not enter into my rest. And that spake he verily long after that the
works were made, from the foundation of the world laid. For he spake
in a certain place of the seventh day, on this wise: And God did rest
the seventh day from all his works. And in this place again: They
shall not come into my rest.
    Seeing therefore it followeth that some must enter thereinto, and
they to whom it was first preached, entered not therein for
unbelief's sake. Again he appointeth in David a certain present day
after so long a time, saying as it is rehearsed: this day if ye hear
his voice, be not hard hearted. For if Iosue had given them rest,
then would he not afterward have spoken of another day. There
remaineth therefore yet a rest to the people of God. For he that is
entered into his rest doth cease from his own works, as God did from
his.
    Let us study therefore to enter into that rest, lest any man fall
into such an ensample of unbelief: for the word of God is quick, and
mighty in operation, and sharper than any two edged sword: and
entereth through, even unto the dividing a sunder of the soul and the
spirit and of the joints, and the mary: and judgeth the thoughts and
the intents of the heart. Neither is there any creature invisible in
the sight of it: but all things are naked and bare unto the eyes of
him, of whom we speak.
    Seeing then that we have a great high priest which is entered
into heaven (I mean Iesus the son of God) let us keep our profession.
For we have not an high priest, which cannot have compassion on our
infirmities: but was in all points tempted, in like manner: but yet
without sin. Let us therefore go boldly unto the seat of grace, that
we may receive mercy, and find grace to help in time of need.

The .v. Chapter.

    For every high priest that is taken from among men, is ordained
for men, in things pertaining to God: to offer gifts and sacrifices
for sins: which can have compassion on the ignorant, and on them that
are out of the high way, because that he himself also is compassed
with infirmity: For the which infirmity's sake, he is bound to offer
for sins, as well for his own part, as for the peoples. No man taketh
honour unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron.
    Even so likewise Christ honored not himself, that he might be the
high priest: but he glorified him that said unto him: thou art my
son, this day begat I thee. As he also in another place speaketh:
Thou art a priest for ever after the order of Melchisedech. Which in
the days of his flesh, did offer up prayers and supplications, with
strong crying and tears unto him that was able to save him from
death: and was also heard, because he had God in reverence. And
though he were God's son, yet learned he obedience, by those things
which he suffered, and was made perfect, and the cause of eternal
health unto all them that obey him: and is called of God the high
priest, after the order of Melchisedech.
    Whereof we have many things to say which are hard to be uttered:
because ye are dull of hearing. For when as concerning the time, ye
ought to be teachers, yet have ye need again that we teach you the
first principles of the word of God: and are become such as have need
of milk, and not of strong meat: For every man that is fed with milk
is inexpert in the word of righteousness: For he is but a babe. But
strong meat belongeth to them that are perfect, which thorow custom
have their wits exercised, to judge both good and evil also.

The .vj. Chapter.

    Wherefore let us leave the doctrine pertaining to the beginning
of a Christian man, and let us go unto perfection, and now no more
lay the foundation of repentance from dead works, and of faith toward
God, of baptism, of doctrine, and of laying on of hands, and of
resurrection from death, and of eternal judgement. And so will we do,
if God permit. For it is not possible that they, which were once
lighted, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were become
parttakers of the holy ghost, and have tasted of the good word of
God, and of the power of the world to come: if they fall, should be
renewed again unto repentance: For as much as they have (as
concerning them selves) crucified the son of God afresh, making a
mock of him.
    For that earth which drinketh in the rain which cometh often upon
it, and bringeth forth herbs meet for them that dress it, receiveth
blessing of God: but that ground, which beareth thorns and briars, is
reproved, and is nigh unto cursing: whose end is to be burned.
Nevertheless dear friends, we trust to see better of you, and things
which accompany health, though we thus speak. For God is not
unrighteous that he should forget your work, and labour that
proceedeth of love, which love shewed in his name, which have
ministered unto the saints, and yet minister. Yee, and we desire that
every one of you shew the same diligence, to the increase of the
faith, even unto the end: that ye faint not, but counterfeit them,
which thorow faith and patience inherit the promises.
    For when God made promise to Abraham, because he had no greater
thing to swear by, he sware by himself, saying: Surely I will bless
thee, and multiply thee in deed. And so after that he had tarried a
long time, he enjoyed the promises. Men verily swear by him that is
greater than themselves, And an oath to confirm the thing, is among
them an end of all strife. So God willing very abundantly to shew
unto the heirs of promise, the stableness of his counsel, he added an
oath, that by two immutable things (in which it was unpossible that
God should lie) we might have perfect consolation, which have fled,
for to hold fast the hope that is set before our faces, which hope we
have as an anchor of the soul, both sure and stedfast. Which hope
also entereth in, into those things which are within the veil,
whither the forerunner is for us entered in, I mean Iesus that is
made an high priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedech.

The .vij. Chapter.
This Melchisedech king of Salem (which being priest of the most high
God, met Abraham, as he returned again from the slaughter of the
kings, and blessed him: to whom also Abraham gave tithes of all
things) first is by interpretation king of righteousness, after that
he is king of Salem, that is to say king of peace, without father,
without mother, without kin, and hath neither beginning of his time,
neither yet end of his life: but is likened unto the son of God, and
remaineth a priest for ever.
    Consider what a man this was, unto whom the patriarch Abraham
gave tithes of the spoils. And verily those children of Levi, which
receive the office of the priests, have a commandment to take
according to the law, tithes of the people, that is to say, of their
brethren, yee though they sprung out of the loins of Abraham. But he
whose kindred is not counted among them, received tithes of Abraham,
and blessed him that had the promises. And no man denyeth but that
which is less, receiveth blessing of that which is greater. And here
men that die receive tithes. But there he receiveth tithes of whom it
is witnessed, that he liveth. And to say the truth, Levi him self
also which receiveth tithes, paid tithes in Abraham. For he was yet
in the loins of his father Abraham, when Melchisedech met him. If now
therefore perfection came by the priesthood of the levites (for under
that priesthood the people received the law) what needed it
furthermore that another priest should rise, after the order of
Melchisedech, and not after the order of Aaron? Now no doubt, if the
priesthood be translated, then of necessity must the law be
translated also.
    For he of whom these things are spoken, pertaineth unto another
tribe, of which, never man served at the altar. For it is evident
that our lord sprung of the tribe of Iuda, of which tribe spake Moses
nothing concerning priesthood.
    And it is yet a more evident thing, if after the similitude of
Melchisedech there arise another priest, which is not made after the
law of the carnal commandment: but after the power of the endless
life. For he testifieth: Thou art a priest for ever, after the order
of Melchisedech. Then the commandment that went afore, is
disannulled, because of his weakness and unprofitableness. For the
law made no thing perfect: but was an introduction of a better hope,
by which hope, we draw nigh unto God.
    And for this cause it is a better hope, that it was not promised
without an oath. Those priests were made without an oath: but this
priest with an oath, by him that said unto him: The lord sware, and
will not repent: Thou art a priest for ever after the order of
Melchisedech: And for that cause was Iesus a stablisher of a better
testament.
    And among them many were made priests, because they were not
suffered to endure by the reason of death. But this man, because he
endureth ever, hath an everlasting priesthood: Wherefore he is able
also ever to save them that come unto God by him, seeing he ever
liveth, to make intercession for us.
    Such an high priest it becommeth us to have, which is wholy,
harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher than
heaven. Which needeth not daily (as yonder high priests) to offer up
sacrifice, first for his own sins, and then for the people's sins.
For that did he at once for all, when he offered up himself: For the
law maketh men priests, which have infirmity: but the word of the
oath that came since the law, maketh the son priest, which is perfect
for evermore.

The .viij. Chapter.

    Of the things which we have spoken, this is the pith: that we
have such an high priest that is sitten on the right hand of the seat
of majesty in heaven, and is a minister of wholy things, and of the
very tabernacle, which God pyght, and not man. For every high priest
is ordained to offer gifts and sacrifices: wherefore it is of
necessity, that this man have some what also to offer. For he were
not a priest, if he were on the earth where are priests that
according to the law offer gifts, which priests serve unto the
ensample and shadow of heavenly things: even as the answer of God was
given unto Moses when he was about to finish the tabernacle: For take
heed (said he) that thou make all things according to the patrone
shewed to thee in the mount.
    Now hath he obtained a more excellent office, in as much as he is
the mediator of a better testament, which was made for better
promises. For if that first testament had been such a one that no man
could have found fault with it: then should no place have been sought
for the second. For in rebuking them he saith: Behold the days will
come (saith the lord) and I will finish upon the house of Israhel,
and upon the house of Iudah, a new testament: not like the testament
that I made with their fathers at that time, when I took them by the
hands, to lead them out of the land of Egypt, for they continued not
in my testament, and I regarded them not saith the lord.
    For this is the testament that I will make with the house of
Israhell: After those days (saith the lord:) I will put my laws in
their minds, and in their hearts, I will write them, and I will be
their God, and they shall be my people. And they shall not teach,
every man his neighbor, and every man his brother, saying: know the
lord: For they shall know me, from the least to the most of them: For
I will be merciful over their iniquities: and on their sins and on
their unrighteousness, will I not think any more. In that he saith a
new testament, he hath abrogate the old. Now that which is
disannulled and waxed old, is ready to vanish away.

The .ix. Chapter.
That first tabernacle verily had justifyings, and servings of God,
and worldly holiness. For that first tabernacle was made, wherein was
the candlestick, and the table, and the shew bread, which is called
wholy. Within the second veil was the tabernacle, which is called
holiest of all, which had the golden censer, and the ark of the
testament overlaid round about with gold, wherein was the golden pot
with Manna, and Aaron's rod that sprung, and the tables of the
testament. Over the ark were the cherubims of glory shadowing the
seat of grace. Of which things, we will not now speak particularly.
    When these things were thus ordained, the priests went allways
into the first tabernacle and executed the service of God: Into the
second went the high priest alone, once every year: but not without
blood, which he offered for himself, and for the ignorance of the
people: The holy ghost this signifying, that the way of holy things
was not yet opened, while as yet the first tabernacle was standing,
which was a similitude for {of} this present time, in which gifts 
and sacrifices are offered, which can not make them that minister
perfect, as pertaining to the conscience, with meats only and drinks,
and divers washings, and justifyings of the flesh, which were
ordained until the time of reformation.
    But Christ being an high priest of good things to come, came by a
greater, and a more perfect tabernacle, not made with hands: that is
to say, not of this manner building, neither by the blood of goats,
and calves: but by his own blood, he entered once for all into the
wholy place, and found eternal redemption. For if the blood of oxen,
and of goats, and the ashes of an heifer, when it was sprinkled,
purified the unclean, as touching the purifying of the flesh: How
much more shall the blood of Christ (which thorow the eternal spirit,
offered himself without spot to God) purge our {your} consciences 
from dead works, for to serve the living God?
    And for this cause is he the mediator of the new testament, that
as sone (as his death was fulfilled for the redemption of those
transgressions that were in the first testament) they which were
called, might receive the promise of eternal inheritance. For
wheresoever is a testament, there must also be the death of him that
maketh the testament. For the testament taketh authority when men are
dead: For it is of no value as long as he that made it is alive. For
which cause also, neither that first testament was ordained without
blood. For when all the commandments were read of Moses unto all the
people, he took the blood of calves, and of goats, with water and
purple wool and hyssop, and sprinkled both the book, and all the
people, saying this is the blood of the testament, which God hath
appointed unto you. Moreover, he sprinkled the tabernacle with blood
also, and all the ministering vessels. And almost all things,
according to the law, are cleansed with blood, and without effusion
of blood, is no remission.
    It is then need that the similitudes of heavenly things, be
purified with such things: but the heavenly things themselves are
purified with better sacrifices than are these. For Christ is not
entered into the holy places, that are made with hands, which are but
similitudes of true things: but is entered into very heaven, for to
appear now in the sight of God for us. Not to offer himself often, as
the high priest entereth into the holy place every year with strange
blood: for then must he have often suffered since the world began:
But now in the end of the world, hath he appeared once for all, to
put sin to flight, by the offering up of himself. And as it is
appointed unto men that they shall once die, and then cometh the
judgment, even so Christ was once offered to take away the sins of
many, and unto them that look for him, shall he appear again, without
sin unto their health.

The .x. Chapter.

    For the law which hath but the shadow of good things to come, and
not the things in their own fashion, can never with the sacrifices
which they offer year by year continually make the comers thereunto
perfect. For would not then those sacrifices have ceased to have been
offered? because that the offerers once purged, should have had no
more consciences of sins. Nevertheless in those sacrifices is there
mention made of sins every year. For it is unpossible that the blood
of oxen, and of goats should take away sins.
    Wherefore when he cometh into the world, he saith: Sacrifice and
offering thou wouldest not have: but a body hast thou ordained me,
holocaustes and sacrifice for sin thou hast not allowed. Then I said:
Lo I come, In the beginning of the book it is written of me, that I
should do thy will, o God. Above when he sayeth sacrifice, and
offering, and holocaustes, and sacrifice for sin, thou wouldest not
have, neither hast allowed (which are offered by the law) then he
said: Lo I am ready do thy will o God: he taketh away the first to
stablish the latter. By the which will we are sanctified, by the
offering of the body of Iesu Christ once for all.
    And every priest is ready daily ministering, and often times
offereth one manner of offering, which can never take away sins: but
this man after he had offered one sacrifice for sins, sat him down
for ever on the right hand of God, and from henceforth tarrieth till
his foes be made his footstool. For with one offering hath he made
perfect for ever them that are sanctified. And the holy ghost also
beareth us record of this, even when he told before: This is the
testament that I will make unto them after those days saith the lord.
And I will put my laws in their hearts, and in their minds I will
write them, and their sins and iniquities will I remember no more.
And where remission of these things is, there is no more offering for
sin.
    Seeing brethren that by the means of the blood of Iesu, we may be
bold to enter into that holy place, by the new and living way, which
he hath prepared for us, through the veil, that is to say by his
flesh. And seeing also that we have an high priest which is ruler
over the house of God, let us draw nigh with a true heart in a full
faith sprinkled in our hearts, from an evil conscience, and washed in
our bodies with pure water, and let us keep the profession of our
hope, without wavering (for he is faithful that promised) and let us
consider one another to provoke unto love, and to good works: and let
us not forsake the fellowship that we have among ourselves, as the
manner of some is: but let us exhort one another, and that so much
the more, because ye see that the day draweth nigh.
    For if we sin willingly after that we have received the knowledge
of the truth, there remaineth no more sacrifice for sins: but a
fearful looking for judgment, and violent fire, which shall devour
the adversaries. He that despiseth Moses' law, dieth without mercy
under two or three witnesses. Of how much sorer punishment suppose ye
shall he be counted worthy, which treadeth under foot the son of God:
and counteth the blood of the testament as an unholy thing, wherewith
he was sanctified, and doth dishonour to the spirit of grace. For we
know him that hath said, vengeance belongeth unto me, I will
recompense saith the lord. And again: the lord shall judge his
people. It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living
God.
    Call to remembrance the days that are passed in the which, after
ye had received light, ye abode a great fight in adversities, partly
while all men wondered and gazed at you for the shame and tribulation
that was done unto you, and partly while ye became companions of them
which so passed their time. For ye suffered also with my bonds, and
took a worth the spoiling of your goods, and that with gladness,
remembering in yourselves how that ye had in heaven a better, and an
enduring substance. Cast not away therefore your confidence, which
hath great reward to recompense. For ye have need of patience, that
after ye have done the will of God, ye might receive the promise. For
yet a very little while, and he that shall come will come, and will
not tarry: But the just shall live by faith. And if he withdraw
himself, my soul shall have no pleasure in him. We are not which
withdraw ourselves unto damnation, but pertain to faith, for to the
win our souls.

The .xj. Chapter.

    Faith is a sure confidence of things which are hoped for, and a
certainty of things which are not seen. By it the elders were well
reported of. Thorow faith we understand that the world was ordained,
by the word of God: That by the means of things which appear, things
which are invisible might be known. By faith Abel offered unto God a
more plenteous sacrifice than Cain: by which, he obtained witness
that he was righteous, God testifying of his gifts: by which also he
being dead, yet speaketh.
    By faith was Enoch translated that he should not see death:
neither was he found: for God had taken him away. Before he was taken
away, he obtained record, that he had pleased God: but without faith
it is unpossible to please him. For he that cometh to God, must
believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder of them that seek him.
    By faith Noah honoured God, after that he was warned of things
which were not seen, and prepared the ark to the saving of his
household, thorow the which ark he condemned the world, and became
heir of the righteousness which cometh by faith.
    By faith Abraham, when he was called obeyed to go out into a
place, which he should afterward receive to inheritance, and he went
out, not knowing whither he should go.
    By faith he removed into the land that was promised him, as into
a strange country, and dwelt in tabernacles: and so did Isaac, and
Iacob, heirs with him of the same promise. For he looked for a city
having a foundation, whose builder and maker is God.
    Thorow faith Sara also received strength to be with child, and
was delivered of a child when she was past age, because she judged
him faithful which had promised.
    And therefore sprang there of one (and of one which was as good
as dead) so many in multitude, as the stars of the sky, and as the
sand of the sea shore which is innumerable.
    And they all died in faith, and received not the promises: but
saw them afar off, and believed them, and saluted them: and confessed
that they were strangers and pilgrims on the earth. They that say
such things, declare that they seek a country. Also if they had been
mindful of that country, from whence they came, they had leisure to
have returned again. But now they desire a better, that is to say a
celestial. Wherefore God is not ashamed of them, even to be called
their God: for he hath prepared for them a city.
    In faith Abraham offered up Isaac, when he was tempted, and he
offered him being his only son, in whom he had received the promises:
Of whom it was said, in Isaac shall thy seed be called: for he
considered, that God was able to raise up again from death. Wherefore
received he him, as an ensample of the resurrection. In faith Isaac
blessed Iacob and Esau, as concerning things to come.
    By faith Iacob when he was a dying, blessed both the sons of
Ioseph, and worshipped on the top of his sceptre.
    By faith Ioseph when he died, remembered the departing of the
children of Israhel, and gave commandment of his bones.
    By faith Moses when he was born, was hid three months of his
father and mother, because they saw he was a proper child: neither
feared they the king's commandment.
    By faith Moses when he was of a great age, refused to be called
the son of Pharaoh's daughter, and chose rather to suffer adversity
with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a
season, and esteemed the rebuke of Christ greater riches, than the
treasure of Egypt. For he had a respect unto the reward.
    By faith he forsook Egypt, and feared not the fierceness of the
king. For he endured, even as he had seen him which is invisible.
Thorow faith he ordained the ester lamb, and the effusion of blood,
lest he that destroyed the first born should touch them.
    By faith they passed thorow the reed sea as by dry land, which
when the egyptians had assayed to do, they were drowned.
    By faith the walls of Iericho fell down after they were compassed
about, seven days.
    By faith the harlot Rahab perished not with them that believed
not, after she had received the spies to lodging peaceably.
    And what shall I more say, the time would be too short for me to
tell of Gideon, of Barach, and of Samson, and of Iephthae. Also of
David and Samuel, and of the prophets, which thorow faith subdued
kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained the promises, stopped the
mouths of lions, quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of
the sword, of weak were made strong, waxed valiant in fight, turned
to flight the armies of the aliens. The women received their dead
raised to life again.
    Other were racked, and would not be delivered, that they might
receive a better resurrection. Other tasted of mockings, and
scourgings, moreover of bonds and prisonment: were stoned, were hewn
asunder, were tempted, were slain with swords, walked up and down in
sheep skins, in goat skins, in need, tribulation, and vexation, which
the world was not worthy of: They wandered in wilderness, in
mountains, in dens and caves of the earth.
    And these all thorow faith obtained good report, and received not
the promise, God providing a better thing for us, that they without
us should not be made perfect.

The .xij. Chapter.

    Wherefore let us also (seeing that we are compassed with so great
a multitude of witnesses) lay away all that presseth down, and the
sin that hangeth on us, and let us run with patience, unto the battle
that is set before us, looking unto Iesus, the author and finisher of
our faith, which for the joy that was set before him, abode the
cross, and despised the shame, and is set down on the right hand of
the throne of God. Consider therefore how that he endured such
speaking against him of sinners, lest ye should be wearied and faint
in your minds. For ye have not yet resisted unto bloodshedding,
striving against sin. And ye have forgotten the consolation which
speaketh unto you, as unto children: My son despise not the
chastening of the lord, neither faint when thou art rebuked of him:
For whom the lord loveth, him he chasteneth: yee, and he scourgeth
every son that he receiveth.
    If ye shall endure chastening, God offereth himself unto you, as 
unto sons. What son is that whom the father chasteneth not? If ye be 
not under correction (where of all are part takers) then are ye 
bastards and not sons. Moreover seeing we had fathers of our flesh 
which corrected us, and we gave them reverence: shall not we much 
rather be in subjection unto the father of spiritual gifts that 
we might live? And they verily for a few days, nurtured us after 
their own pleasure: but he learneth us unto that which is profitable, 
that we might receive of his holiness. No manner learning for the 
present time seemeth to be joyous, but grievous: nevertheless 
afterward it bringeth the quiet fruit of righteousness unto them 
which are therein exercised.
    Stretch forth therefore again the hands which were let down, and
the weak knees, and see that ye have straight steps unto your feet,
lest any halting turn out of the way: yee, let it rather be healed.
Embrace peace with all men, and wholiness: without the which, no man
shall see the lord. And see that no man be destitute of the grace of
God, lest any root of bitterness spring up and trouble: and thereby
many be defiled. That there be no fornicator, or unclean person, as
Esau, which for one breakfast sold his right that belonged unto him,
in that he was the eldest brother. Ye know how that afterward when
that he would have inherited the blessing, he was put by. His
repentance found no grace, no though he desired that blessing with
tears.
    For ye are not come unto the mount that is touched, and unto
burning fire, nor yet to mist and darkness and tempest of weather,
neither unto the sound of a trumpet and the voice of words: which
voice they that heard it, wished away, that the communication should
not be spoken to them. For they were not able to abide that which was
spoken. If a beast had touched the mountain, it must have been
stoned, or thrust thorow with a dart: even so terrible was the sight
which appeared. Moses said I fear and quake. But ye are come unto the
mount Sion, and to the city of the living God, the celestial
Ierusalem: and to an innumerable sight of angels, and unto the
congregation of the first born sons, which are written in heaven, and
to God the judge of all, and to the spirits of Just and perfect men,
and to Iesus the mediator of the new testament, and to the sprinkling
of blood that speaketh better than the blood of Abel.
    See that ye despise not him that speaketh. For if they escaped
not which refused him that spake on earth: Much more shall we not
escape, if we turn away from him that speaketh from heaven: whose
voice then shook the earth, and now declareth saying: yet once more
will I shake, not the earth only, but also heaven. No doubt the same
that he sayeth, yet once more, signifieth the removing a way of those
things which are shaken, as of things which have ended their course:
that the things which are not shaken may remain. Wherefore if we
receive a kingdom which is not moved, we have grace, whereby we may
serve God and please him with reverence and godly fear. For our God
is a consuming fire.

The .xiij. Chapter.

    Let brotherly love continue. Be not forgetful to be kind to
strangers. For thereby have divers received angels into their houses
unawares. Remember them that are in bonds, even as though ye were
bound with them. Be mindful of them which are in adversity, as ye
which are yet in your bodies. Let wedlock be had in price in all
points, and let the chamber be undefiled: for whore keepers and
advoutrers God will judge. Let your conversation be without
covetousness, and be content with that ye have already. For he verily
said: I will not fail thee, neither forsake thee: that we may boldly
say: The lord is my helper, and I will not fear what man doeth unto
me. Remember them which have the oversight of you, which have
declared unto you the word of God: consider the conversation of their
living, and counterfeit their faith.
    Iesus Christ yesterday and today, and the same continueth for
ever. Be not carried thither with divers and strange learning. For it
is a good thing that the heart be stablished with grace, and not with
meats, which have not profited them that have had their pastime in
them. We have an altar whereof they may not eat which serve in the
tabernacle. For the bodies of those beasts (whose blood is brought
into the holy place by the high priest to purge sin) are burnt
without the tents. Therefore Iesus, to sanctify the people with his
own blood, suffered with out the gate. Let us go forth therefore out
of the tents, and suffer rebuke with him. For here have we no
continuing city: but we seek a city to come.
    For by him offer we the sacrifice of laud always to God: that is
to say the fruit of those lips, which confess his name. To do good,
and to distribute forget not, for with such sacrifices God is
pleased. Obey them that have the oversight of you, and submit
yourselves to them, for they watch for your souls, even as they
should give accounts for them: that they may do it with joy, and not
with grief. For that is an unprofitable thing for you. Pray for us.
We have confidence because we have a good conscience in all things,
and desire to live honestly. I desire you therefore somewhat the more
abundantly, that ye so do, that I may be restored to you quickly.
    The God of peace that brought again from death our lord Iesus
Christ, the great shepherd of the sheep, thorow the blood of the
everlasting testament, make you perfect in all works, to do his will,
and bring to pass, that whatsoever ye do, may be accepted in his
sight, by the means of Iesus Christ. To whom be praise for ever while
the world endureth Amen.
    I beseech you brethren, suffer the words of exhortation: For we
have written unto you in few words. Know the brother Timothy, whom we
have sent from us, with whom (if he come shortly) I will see you.
Salute them that have the oversight of you, and all the saints. They
of Italy, salute you. Grace be with you all Amen.

Sent from Italy by Timotheous.


The pistel of S. Iames

The first Chapter.

    Iames the servant of God, and of the lord Iesus Christ, sendeth
greeting to the xij. tribes which are scattered here and there. My
brethren, count it exceeding joy when ye fall into diverse
temptations, remembering how that the trying of your faith bringeth
patience: and let patience have her perfect work, that ye may be
perfect and sound, that nothing be lacking unto you.
    If any that is among you lack wisdom, let him ask of God (which
giveth to all men without doubleness, and casteth no man in the
teeth:) and it shall be given him: but let him ask in faith, and
waver not. For he that doubteth is like the waves of the sea, tossed
of the wind, and carried with violence. Neither let that man think
that he shall receive any thing of God. A wavering minded man is
unstable in all his ways.
    Let the brother of low degree rejoice in that he is exalted, and
the rich in that he is made low. For even as the flower of the grass
shall he vanish away. The son riseth with heat, and the grass is
withered, and his flower fallen away, and the beauty of the fashion
of it is perished: even so shall the rich man perish in his
abundance.
    Happy is the man that endureth in temptation, for when he is
tried he shall receive the crown of life, which the lord hath
promised to them that love him.
    Let no man say when he is tempted that he is tempted of God: for
God tempteth not unto evil: he tempteth no man: But every man is
tempted drawn away, and enticed of his own concupiscence. Then when
lust hath conceived, she bringeth forth sin, and sin when it is
finished bringeth forth death.
    Erre not my dear brethren. Every good gift, and every perfect
gift, is from above and cometh down from the father of light, with
whom is no variableness, neither is he changed unto darkness.
    Of his own will begat he us with the word of life, that we should
be the first [fruits] of his creatures.
    Wherefore dear brethren, let every man be swift to hear, slow to
speak, and slow to wrath. For the wrath of man worketh not that which
is righteous before God.
    Wherefore lay apart all filthiness, all superfluity of
maliciousness, and receive with meekness the word that is grafted in
you, which is able to save your souls: And see that ye be doers of
the word and not hearers only, deceiving your own selves [with
sophistry]. For if any hear the word, and do it not, he is like unto
a man that beholdeth his bodily face in a glass. For as soon as he
hath looked on himself, he goeth his way, and hath immediately
forgotten what his fashion was: but whosoever looketh in the perfect
law of liberty, and continueth therein (if he be not a forgetful
hearer, but a doer of the work) he shall be happy in his deed.
    If any man among you seem devout, and refrain not his tongue: but
deceive his own heart, this man's devotion is in vain. Pure devotion
and undefiled before God the father, is this: To visit the
friendless, {fatherless} and widows in their adversity, and 
to keep himself unspotted from {of} the world.

The .ij. Chapter.

    Brethren have not the faith of our lord Iesus Christ the lord of
glory in respect of persons. If there come into your company a man
with a golden ring, and in goodly apparel and there come in also a
poor man in vile raiment, and ye have a respect to him that weareth
the gay clothing and say unto him: Sit thou here in a good place: and
say unto the poor, stand thou there, or sit here under my footstool:
are ye not even partial in yourselves, and have judged after evil
thoughts?
    Hearken my dear beloved brethren, hath not God chosen the poor of
this world, which are rich in faith, and heirs of the kingdom, which
he promised to them that love him? But ye have despised the poor. Are
not the rich they which oppress you: and they which draw you before
judges? Do not they speak evil of that good name that is called on
over you?
    If ye fulfil the royal law according to the scripture which
saith: Thou shalt love thine neighbour as thyself, ye do well: but if
ye regard one person more than another, ye commit sin, and are
rebuked of the law as transgressors. Whosoever shall keep the whole
law, and yet fail in one point, he is guilty in all. For he that
said: Thou shalt not commit fornication, said also: thou shalt not
kill. Though thou shalt do no fornication, yet if thou kill, thou art
a transgressor of the law. So speak ye, and so do as they that shall
be judged by the law of liberty. For there shall be judgement
merciless to him that sheweth no mercy, and mercy rejoiceth against
judgement: What availeth it my brethren, though a man say he hath
faith, when he hath no deeds? Can faith save him? If a brother or a
sister be naked or destitute of daily food, and one of you say unto
them: Depart in peace, God send you warmness and food:
notwithstanding ye give them not those things which are needful to
the body: what helpeth it them? Even so faith, if it have no deeds is
dead in itself.
    But one shall say: Thou hast faith, and I have deeds: Shew me thy
faith by thy deeds: and I will shew thee my faith by my deeds.
Believest thou that there is one God? Thou doest well. The devils
also believe and tremble.
    Wilt thou understand o thou vain man, that faith without deeds is
dead? Was not Abraham our father justified of his deeds when he
offered Isaac his son upon the altar? Thou seest how that faith
wrought with in his deeds, and through the deeds was the faith made
perfect. And the scripture was fulfilled which saith: Abraham
believed God, and it was reputed unto him for righteousness: and he
was called the friend of God. Ye see then how that of deeds a man is
justified, and not of faith only. Likewise also was not Raab the
harlot justified when she received the messengers, and sent them out
another way? For as the body, without the spirit is dead, even so
faith without deeds is dead.

The .iij. Chapter.

    My brethren, be not every man a master, Remembering how that we
shall receive the more damnation. For in many things we sin all. If a
man sin not in word, he is a perfect man and able to tame all the
body. Behold we put bits into the horses' mouths that they should
obey us, and we turn about all the body. Behold also the ships, which
though they be so great, and are driven of fierce winds, yet are they
turned about with a very small helm, whithersoever the violence of
the governor will: even so the tongue is little member and boasteth
great things.
    Behold how great a thing a little fire kindleth, and the tongue
is fire, and a world of wickedness. So is the tongue set among our
members, that it defileth the whole body, and setteth a fire all that
we have of nature, and is itself set afire, even of hell.
    All the natures of beasts, and of birds, and of serpents, and
things of the sea, are meeked and tamed of the nature of man. But the
tongue can no man tame. It is an unruly evil full of deadly poison.
Therewith bless we God the father, and therewith curse we men which
are made after the similitude of God. Out of one mought proceedeth
blessing and cursing. My brethren these things ought not so to be.
Doth a fountain send forth at one place sweet water, and bitter also?
Can the fig tree, my brethren, bear olive berries: other a vine bear
figs? So can no fountain give both salt water and fresh also. Who is
wise and endued with learning among you? Let him shew the works of
his good conversation in meekness that is coupled with wisdom. But if
ye have bitter envying and strife in your hearts, rejoice not:
neither be liars against the truth. This wisdom descendeth not from
above: but is earthy, and natural, and devilish: For where envying
and strife is, there is unstableness, and all manner of evil works:
but the wisdom that is from above, is first pure, then peaceable,
gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits,
without judging, and without simulation: yee, and the fruit of
righteousness is sown in peace, of them that keep peace.

The .iiij. Chapter.

    From whence cometh war, and fighting among you? come they not
here hence? even of your voluptuousness that raineth in your members.
Ye lust, and have not. Ye envy and have indignation, and cannot come
by it. Ye fight and war, and have not, because ye ask not. Ye ask and
have not, because ye ask amiss, for to consume it upon your
voluptuousness. Ye advoutrers, and women that break matrimony: know
ye not how that the friendship of the world is enmity to godward?
Whosoever will be friend of the world, is made the enemy of God. Do
ye suppose that the scripture saith in vain: The spirit that dwelleth
in you, lusteth even contrary to envy: but giveth more grace.
    Submit yourselves to God, and resist the devil, and he will flye
from you. Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to you. Cleanse
your hands ye sinners, and purge your hearts ye wavering minded.
Suffer afflictions: sorrow ye and weep. Let your laughter be turned
to mourning, and your joy to heaviness. Cast down yourselves before
the lord, and he shall lift you up. Backbite not one another,
brethren. He that backbiteth his brother, and he that judgeth his
brother, backbiteth the law, and judgeth the law: but and if thou
judge the law, thou art not an observer of the law: but a judge.
There is one law giver, which is able to save and to destroy. What
art thou that judgest another man?
    Go to now ye that say: today and tomorrow let us go into such a
city and continue there a year and buy, and sell, and win: and yet
cannot tell what shall happen tomorrow. For what thing is your life?
it is even a vapor that appeareth for a little time, and then
vanisheth away: For that ye ought to say: if the lord will and if we
live, let us do this or that. But now ye rejoice in your boastings.
All such rejoicing is evil. Therefore to him that knoweth how to do
good, and doth it not, it is sin.

The .v. Chapter.

    Go to now ye rich men. Weep, and howl on your wretchedness that
shall come upon you. Your riches is corrupt, your garments are
motheaten. Your gold and your silver are cankered, and the rust of
them shall be a witness unto you, and shall eat your flesh as it were
fire. Ye have heaped treasure together in your last days: Behold the
hire of the laborers which have reaped down your fields (which hire
is of you kept back by fraud) crieth: and the cries of them which
have reaped, are entered into the ears of the lord Sabaoth. Ye have
lived in pleasure on the earth and in wantonness. Ye have nourished
your hearts, as in a day of slaughter. Ye have condemned and have
killed the just, and he hath not resisted you.
    Be patient therefore brethren, unto the coming of the lord.
Behold the husband man waiteth for the precious fruit of the earth,
and hath long patience there upon, until he receive the early and the
latter rain. Be ye also patient therefore, and settle your hearts,
for the coming of the lord draweth nigh. Grudge not one against
another brethren, lest ye be dampned. Behold the judge standeth
before the door. Take (my brethren) the prophets for an ensample of
suffering adversity, and of long patience, which spake in the name of
the lord. Behold we count them happy which endure. Ye have heard of
the patience of Iob, and have known what end the lord made. For the
lord is very pitiful, and merciful.
    But above all things my brethren, swear not, neither by heaven,
neither by earth, neither by any other oath. Let your saying be yee
yee, and nay nay: lest ye fall into hypocrisy. Is there any among of
you that is evil vexed? let him pray. Is there any among you that is
merry? let him sing psalms. Is there any man diseased among you? Let
him call for the seniors of the congregation, and let them pray over
him, and anoint him with oil in the name of the lord: and the prayer
of faith shall save the sick, and the lord shall raise him up: and if
he have committed sins, they shall be forgiven him.
    Knowledge your faults one to another: and pray one for another,
that ye may be healed. The prayer of a righteous man availeth much,
if it be fervent. Helias was a man in danger to tribulation as we
are, and he prayed in his prayer, that it might not rain: and it
rained not on the earth by the space of three years and six months.
And again he prayed, and the heaven gave rain, and the earth brought
forth her fruit.
    Brethren if any of you err from the truth, and another convert
him, let the same know, that he which converted the sinner from going
astray out of his way, shall save a soul from death, and shall hide
the multitude of sins.

The end of the pistle of Saynct Iames.


The pistel of sanct Iudas

The first Chapter.

    Iudas the servant of Iesus Christ, the brother of Iames. To them
which are called and sanctified in God the father, and preserved in
Christ Iesus. Mercy unto you, and peace and love be multiplied.
    Beloved, when I gave all diligence to write unto you of the
common health: it was needful for me to write unto you, to exhort
you, that ye should continually labour in the faith, which was once
given unto the saints. For there are certain craftily crept in, of
which it was written aforetime unto such judgement. They are ungodly,
and turn the grace of our lord God unto wantonness, And deny God the
only lord, and our lord Iesus Christ.
    My mind is therefore to put you in remembrance, for as much as ye
once know this, how that the lord (after that he had delivered the
people out of Egypt) destroyed them which afterward believed not: The
angels also, which kept not their first estate: but left their own
habitation, he hath reserved in everlasting chains under darkness
unto the judgment of the great day: even as Zodom, and Gomor, and the
cities about them (which in like manner defiled themselves, with
fornication, and followed strange flesh) are set forth for an
example, and suffer the vengeance of eternal fire. Likewise these
dreamers defile the flesh, despise rulers, and speak evil of them
that are in authority.
    Yet Michael the archangel (when he strove against the devil, and
disputed the body of Moses) durst not give railing sentence, but
said: The lord rebuke thee. But these speak evil of those things
which they know not. In those things which they know naturally (as
beasts which are without reason) they corrupt themselves. Woe be unto
them, for they have followed the way of Cain, and are spilt in the
error of Balaam for lucre's sake, and are cast away in the treason of
Core.
    These are spots which of your kindness feast together, without
fear, feeding themselves. Clouds they are without water, carried
about of winds: Trees rotten in autumn, unfruitfull, twice dead, and
plucked up by the roots. They are raging waves of the sea, foaming
out their own shame. They are wandering stars, to whom is reserved
the mist of darkness for ever.
    Enoch the seventh from Adam prophesied before of such saying.
Behold, the lord shall come with thousands of saints, to give
judgement against all men, and to rebuke all that are ungodly among
them, of all their ungodly deeds, which they have ungodly committed,
and of all their cruel speakings, which ungodly sinners have spoken
against him.
    These are murmurers, complainers, walking after their own lusts,
whose mouths speak proud things. They have men in great reverence
because of advantage. But ye beloved remember the words which were
spoken before of the Apostles of our lord Iesus Christ, how that they
told you that there should be beguilers in the last time, which
should walk after their own ungodly lusts. These are makers of sects,
naturall, {or fleshy, other carnal,} having no spirit.
    But ye derly beloved, edify yourselves in your most wholy faith,
praying in the wholy ghost, and keep yourselves in the love of God,
looking for the mercy of our lord Iesus Christ, unto eternal life.
And have compassion on some, separating them: and other save with
fear, pulling them out of the fire, and hate the filthy vesture of
the flesh.
    Unto him that is able to keep you, that ye faule not, and to
present you faultless before the presence of his glory with joy, that
is to say, to God our saviour which only is wise, be glory, majesty,
dominion, and power, now and for ever Amen.


The revelation of sanct Ihon the devine.

The first Chapter.

    The revelation of Iesus Christe, which God gave unto him, for to
shew unto his servants things which must shortly come to pass. And he
sent and shewed by his angel unto his servant Ihon, which bare record
of the word of God, and of the testimony of Iesus Christ, and of all
things that he saw. Happy is he that readeth, and they that hear the
words of the prophecy, and keep those things which are written
therein. For the time is at hand.
    Ihon to the vij. congregations in Asia. Grace be with you and
peace, from him which is and which was, and which is to come: and
from the vij. spirits which are present before his throne, and from
Iesus Christ which is a faithful witness, and first begotten of the
dead: and lord over the kings of the earth. Unto him that loved us
and washed us from our sins in his own blood, and made us kings and
priests unto God his father, be glory, and dominion for evermore
amen. Behold he cometh with clouds, and all eyes shall see him: and
they also which pierced him. And all kindreds of the earth shall
wail. Even so amen. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the
ending, saith the lord almighty, which is and which was and which is
to come.
    Ihon your brother and companion in tribulation, and in the
kingdom and patience which is in Iesu Christ, was in the isle of
Pathmos for the word of God, and for the witnessing of Iesu Christ. I
was in the spirit on a son day, and heard behind me, a great voice,
as it had been of a trompe saying: I am Alpha and Omega, the first
and the last. That thou seest write in a book, and send it unto the
congregations which are in Asia, unto Ephesus, and unto Smyrna, and
unto Pergamos, and unto Thiatira, and unto Sardis, and unto
Philadelphia, and unto Laodicia.
    And I turned back to see the voice that spake to me. And when I
was turned: I saw vij. golden candlesticks. and in the midst of the
candlesticks, one like unto the son of man clothed with a linen
garment down to the ground, and gird about the paps with a golden
girdle. His head, and his hairs were white, as white wool, and as
snow: and his eyes were as a flame of fire: and his feet like unto
brass, as though they brent in a furnace: and his voice as the sound
of many waters. And he had in his right hand vij. stars. And out of
his mouth went a two edged sword. And his face shone even as the sun
in his strength. And when I saw him, I fell at his feet, even as
dead. And he laid his right hand upon me, saying unto me: fear not. I
am the first and the last, and am alive, and was dead. And behold I
am alive for evermore, and have the keys of hell and of death. Write
therefore the things which thou hast seen, and the things which are,
and the things which shall be fulfilled hereafter: and the mystery of
the vij. stars which thou sawest in my right hand, and the vij.
golden candlesticks. The vij. stars are the angels of the vij.
congregations: And the vij. candlesticks which thou sawest are the
vij. congregations.

The second Chapter.

    Unto the angel of the congregation of Ephesus write: These things
saith he that holdeth the vij. stars in his right hand, and walketh
in the midst of the vij. golden candlesticks. I know thy works, and
thy labour, and thy patience, and how thou canst not forbear them
which are evil: and examinedst them which say they are apostles, and
are not: and hast found them liars. And hast suffered, and hast
patience: and for my name's sake hast laboured and hast not fainted.
Nevertheless I have somewhat against thee, for thou hast left thy
first love. Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and
repent, and do the first works. Or else I will come unto thee
shortly, and will remove thy candlestick out of his place, except
thou repent. But this thou hast because thou hatest the deeds of the
Nicolaitans, which deeds I also hate. Let him that hath ears hear,
what the spirit saith unto the congregations. To him that overcometh,
will I give to eat of the tree of life, which is in the midst {myddes}
of the paradise of God.
    And unto the Angel of the congregation of Smyrna write: These
things saith he that is first, and the last, which was dead and is
alive. I know thy works and tribulation and poverty, but thou art
rich: And I know the blasphemy of them which call themselves jewes
and are not: but are the congregation of sathan. Fear none of those
things which thou shalt suffer. Behold, the devil shall cast of you
into prison, to tempt you, and ye shall have tribulation x. days. Be
faithful unto the death, and I will give thee a crown of life. Let
him that hath ears hear, what the spirit saith to the congregations:
He that overcometh shall not be hurt of the second death.
    And to the angel of the congregation in Pergamos write: This
saith he which hath the sharp sword with two edges. I know thy works
and where thou dwellest, even where Sathan's seat is, and thou
keepest my name and hast not denied my faith. And in my days Antipas
was a faithful witness of mine, which was slain among you where
sathan dwelleth. But I have a few things against thee: that thou hast
there, they that maintain, the doctrine of Balaam which taught in
Balak, to put occasion of sin before the children of Israhell, that
they should eat of meat dedicated unto idols, and to commit
fornication. Even so hast thou them that maintain the doctrine of the
Nicolaitans, which thing I hate. But repent or else I will come to
thee shortly and will fight against them with the sword of my mought.
Let him that hath ears hear what the spirit sayth unto the
congregations: To him that overcometh will I give to eat Manna that
is hid, and will give him a white stone, and in the stone a new name
written, which no man knoweth, saving he that receiveth it.
    And unto the angel of the congregation of Thiatira write: This
sayth the son of God, which hath his eyes like unto a flame of fire,
whose feet are like brass: I know thy works and thy love, service,
and faith, and thy patience, and thy deeds, which are more at the
last than at the first. Not withstanding I have a few things against
thee, that thou sufferest that woman Iesabell, which called herself a
prophetess to teach and to deceive my servants, to make them commit
fornication, and to eat meats offered up unto idols. And I gave her
space to repent of her fornication and she repented not. Behold I
will cast her into a bed, and them that commit fornication with her
into great adversity, except they repent of their deeds. And I will
kill her children with death. And all the congregations shall know
that I am he which searches the reins and hearts. And I will give
unto everyone of you according to your works.
    Unto you I say, and unto other of them of Thiatira as many as
have not this learning, and which have not known the deepness of
Satan (as they say) I will put upon you none other burden, but that
which you have already. Hold fast till I come, and whosoever
overcometh and keepeth my works unto the end, to him will I give
power over nations, and he shall rule them with a rod of iron: and as
the vessels of a potter, shall he break them to shivers. Even as I
received of my father. And I will give him the morning star. Let him
that hath ears hear what the spirit says to the congregations.

The .iij. Chapter.

    And write unto the angel of the congregation of Sardis: this
sayth he that hath the spirit of God, and the vij. stars. I know thy
works, thou hast a name that you livest, and thou are dead. Be awake
and strengthen the things which remain, that are ready to die. For I
have not found thy works perfect before God. Remember therefore how
thou hast received and heard, and hold fast, and repent. If you shalt
not watch, I will come on you as a thief, and thou shalt not know
what hour I will come upon thee. Thou hast a few names in Sardis,
which have not defiled their garments, and they shall walk with me in
white, for they are worthy. He that overcometh shall be clothed in
white array, and I will not put out his name out of the book of life,
and I will confess his name before my father, and before his angels.
Let him that hath ears hear what the spirit sayth unto the
congregations.
    And write unto the angel of Philadelphia: This sayth he that is
holy and true, which hath the key of David: which openeth and no man
shuteth, and shuteth and no man openeth. I know your works. Behold I
have set before thee an open door, and no man can shut it, for thou
hast a little strength, and hast kept my sayings: and hast not denied
my name. Behold. I make them of the congregation of Sathan, which
call themselves Iewes and are not, but do lie. Behold. I will make
them that they shall come and worship before thy feet: and shall know
that I have loved thee.
    Because thou hast kept the words of my patience, I will keep thee
from the hour of temptation, which will come upon all the world, to
tempt them that dwell upon the earth. Behold I come shortly. Hold
that which thou hast, that no man take away thy crown. Him that
overcometh will I make a pillar in the temple of my God, and he shall
go no more out. And I will write upon him, the name of my God, and
the name of the city of my God, new Ierusalem, which cometh down out
of heaven from my God and I will write upon him my new name. Let him
that hath ears, hear what the spirit saith unto the congregations.
    And unto the angel of the congregation which is in Laodicia
write: This saith (amen) the faithful and true witness, the beginning
of the creatures of God. I know thy works that thou art neither cold
nor hot: I would thou were cold or hot. So then because thou art
between both, and neither cold nor hot, I will spew thee out of my
mought: because thou sayst thou art rich and increased with goods, and
hast need of nothing, and knowest not how thou art wretched and
miserable, poor, blind, and naked. I counsel thee to buy of me gold
tried in the fire, that thou mayst be rich: and white raiment, that
thou mayst be clothed, that thy filthy nakedness do not appear: and
anoint thine eyes with eye salve, that thou mayst see.
    As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten. Be fervent therefore and
repent. Behold I stand at the door and knock. If any man hear my
voice and open the door, I will come in unto him and will sup with
him, and he with me. To him that overcometh will I grant to sit with
me in my seat, even as I overcame and have sitten with my father, in
his seat. Let him that hath ears, hear what the spirit saith unto the
congregations.

The .iiij. Chapter.
After this I looked, and behold a door was open in heaven, and the
first voice which I heard, was as it were of a trumpet talking with
me, which said: come up hither, and I will shew the things which must
be fulfilled hereafter. And immediately I was in the spirit: and
behold, a seat was put in heaven, and one sat on the seat. And he
that sat was to look upon like unto a jasper stone, and a sardyne
stone: And there was a rainbow about the seat, to look upon, like
unto an emerald. And about the seat were xxiiij. seats. And I saw on
the seats .xxiiij. seniors sitting clothed in white raiment, and had
on their heads crowns of gold.
    And out of the seat proceeded lightnings, and thunderings, and
voices: and there were vij. lamps of fire, burning before the seat,
which are the vij. spirits of God. And before the seat there was a
sea of glass, like unto crystal, and in the midst of the seat, and
round about the seat, were iiij. beats full of eyes before and
behind. And the first beast was like a lion, the second beast like a
calf, and the third beast had a face as a man, and the fourth beast
was like a flying eagle. And the iiij. beasts had each one of them
vj. wings about him, and they were full of eyes within. And they had
no rest day neither night saying: holy, holy, holy, lord God
almighty, which was, and is, and is to come.
    And when those beasts gave glory and honour and thanks to him
that sat on the seat, which liveth evermore, the xxiiij. seniours 
{elders} fell down before the throne, before him that sat on the 
throne, and worshipped him that liveth ever, and cast their crowns 
before the throne saying: thou art worthy lord to receive glory, and 
honour, and power, for thou hast created all things, and for thy 
will's sake they are, and were created.

The .v. Chapter.

    And I saw in the right hand of him, that sat in the throne, a
book written within and on the backside, sealed with vij. seals. And
I saw a strong angel which cried with a loud voice: Who is worthy to
open the book, and to loose the seals thereof? And no man in heaven
nor in earth neither under the earth, was able to open the book,
neither to look thereon. And I wept much, because, no man was found
worthy to open, and to read the book, neither to look thereon.
    And one of the seniors said unto me: weep not: Behold a lion
being of the tribe of Iuda, the root of David, hath obtained to open
the book, and to loose the vij. seals thereof. And I beheld, and lo,
in the midst of the seat, and of the iiij. beasts, and in the midst
of the seniors, stood a lamb as though he had been killed, which had
vij. horns and vij. eyes, which are the spirits of God, sent into all
the world. And he came and took the book out of the right hand of him
that sat upon the seat.
    And when he had taken the book, the iiij. beasts and xxiiij.
seniors fell down before the lamb, having harps and golden vials full
of odoures, which are the prayers of saints and they sung a new song
saying: thou art worthy to take the book, and to open the seals
thereof, for thou wast killed, and hast redeemed us by thy blood, out
of all kindreds, and tongues, and people, and nations, and hast made
us unto our God, kings and priests and we shall reign on the earth.
    And I beheld, and I heard the voice of many angels about the
throne, and about the beasts and the seniors, and I heard thousand
thousands, saying with a loud voice: Worthy is the lamb that was
killed to receive power, and riches and wisdom, and strength, and
honour and glory, and blessing. And all creatures, which are in
heaven, and on the earth, and under the earth, and in the sea, and
all that are in them heard I saying: blessing, honour, glory, and
power be unto him, that sitteth upon the seat, and unto the lamb for
evermore. And the iiij. beasts said: amen. And the xxiiij. seniors
fell upon their faces, and worshipped him that liveth for evermore.

The .vj. Chapter.

    And I saw when the lamb opened one of the seals, and I heard one
of the iiij. beasts say, as it were the noise of thunder, come and
see. And I saw, and behold there was a white horse, and he that sat
on him had a bow, and a crown was given unto him, and he went forth
conquering and for to overcome. And when he opened the second seal, I
heard the second beast say: come and see. And there went out another
horse that was red, and power was given to him that sat thereon, to
take peace from the earth, and that they should kill one another. And
there was given unto him a great sword.
    And when he opened the third seal, I heard the third beast say:
come and see. And I beheld, and lo, a black horse: and he that sat on
him, had a pair of balances in his hand. And I heard a voice in the
midst of the iiij. beasts say: a measure of wheat for a penny, and
iij. measures of barley for a penny: and oil and wine see thou hurt
not.
    And when he opened the fourth seal, I heard the voice of the
fourth beast say: come and see. And I looked. And behold a green
horse, and his name that sat on him was death, and hell followed
after him, and power was given unto them over the fourth part of the
earth, to kill with sword, and with hunger, and with death, that
cometh of vermin of the earth.
    And when he opened the fifth seal, I saw under the altar, the
souls of them that were killed for the word of God, and for the
testimony which they had, and they cried with a loud voice saying:
How long tarriest thou lord holy and true, to judge and to avenge our
blood on them that dwell on the earth? And long white garments were
given unto every one of them. And it {hit} was said unto them that 
they should rest for a little season until the number of their 
fellows, and brethren, and of them that should be killed as they were,
 were fulfilled.
    And I beheld when he opened the sixth seal, and lo there was a
great earthquake, and the sun was as black as sack cloth made of
hair. And the moon waxed even as blood: and the stars of heaven fell
unto the earth, even as a fig tree casteth from her her figs, when
she is shaken of a mighty wind. And heaven vanished away, as a scroll
when it is rolled together. And all mountains and isles, were moved
out of their places. And the kings of the earth, and the great men,
and the rich men, and the chief captains, and the mighty men, and
every bondman, and every free man, hid themselves in dens, and in
rocks of the hills, and said to the hills, and rocks: fall on us, and
hide us from the presence of him that sitteth on the seat, and from
the wrath of the lamb, for the great day of his wrath is come, And
who can endure it.

The .vij. Chapter.

    And after that I saw iiij angels stand on the iiij. corners of
the earth, holding the iiij. winds of the earth, that the winds
should not blow on the earth, neither on the sea, neither on any
tree. And I saw another angel ascend from the rising of the sun,
which had the seal of the living God, and he cried with a loud voice
to the iiij. angels (to whom power was given to hurt the earth and
the sea) saying: Hurt not the earth neither the sea, neither the
trees, till I {we} have sealed the servants of our God in their
foreheads.
    And I heard the number of them which were sealed, and there were
sealed an C. and xliiij.M. of all the tribes of the children of
Israhell. Of the tribe of Iuda were sealed xij.M. Of the tribe of
Ruben were sealed xij.M. Of the tribe of Gad were sealed xij M. Of
the tribe of Asser were sealed xij.M. Of the tribe of Neptalym were
sealed xij.M. Of the tribe of Manasses were sealed xij.M. Of the
tribe of Symeon were sealed xij M. Of the tribe of Levy were sealed
xij. M. Of the tribe of Isacar were sealed xij M. Of the tribe of
Zabulon were sealed xij M. Of the tribe of Ioseph were sealed xij M.
Of the tribe of Beniamyn were sealed xij M.
    After this I beheld, and lo a great multitude (which noman could
number) of all nations, and people, and tongues, stood before the
seat, and before the lamb, clothed with long white garments, and
palms in their hands, and cried with a loud voice, saying: Health be
to him that sitteth upon the seat of our God, and unto the lamb. And
all the angels stood in the compass of the seat, and of the seniors,
and of the iiij. beasts, and fell before the seat on their faces, and
worshipped God, saying, amen: Blessing and glory, wisdom and thanks,
and honour, and power and might, be unto our God, for evermore amen.
    And one of the seniors answered, saying unto me: what are these
which are arrayed in long white garments, and whence came they? And I
said unto him: lord thou wottest. And he said unto me: these are they
which came out of great tribulation and made their garments large,
and made them white in the blood of the lamb: therefore are they in
the presence of the seat of God and serve him day and night in his
temple, and he that sitteth in the seat will dwell among them. They
shall hunger no more neither thirst, neither shall the sun light on
them, neither any heat. For the lamb which is in the midst of the
seat, shall feed them, and shall lead them unto fountains of living
water, and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes.

The .viij. Chapter.

    And when he had opened the seventh seal, there was silence in
heaven about the space of half an hour. And I saw angels standing
before God, and to them were given vij. trumpets. And another angel
came and stood before the altar having a golden censer, and much of
odoures was given unto him, that he should offer of the prayers of
all saints upon the golden altar, which was before the seat. And the
smoke of the odoures which came of the prayers of all saints ascended
up before God out of the angel's hand. And the angel took the censer
and filled it with fire of the altar and cast it into the earth, and
voices were made, and thunderings, and lightnings, and earthquake.
    And the vij. angels which had the vij trumpets prepared
themselves to blow. The first angel blew, and there was made hail and
fire, which were mingled with blood, and they were cast into the
earth: and the third part of trees was burnt, and all green grass was
brent. And the second angel blew: and as it were a great mountain:
burning with fire was cast into the sea, and the third part of the
sea turned to blood, and the third part of the creatures which had
life died, and the third part of ships were destroyed.
    And the third Angel blew, and there fell a great star from heaven
burning as it were a lamp, and it fell into the third part of the
rivers, and into fountains of waters, and the name of the star is
called wormwood. And the third part was turned to wormwood. A many
men died of the waters because they were made bitter. And the fourth
Angel blew, and the third part of the sun was smitten, and the third
part of the moon, and the third part of stars: so that the third part
of them was darkened. And the day was smitten that the third part of
it should not shine, and likewise the night. And I beheld and heard
an angel flying thorow the midst of heaven, saying with a loud voice:
Woe, Woe, to the inhabiters of the earth because of the voices to
come of the trompe of the iij. Angels which were yet to blow.

The .ix. Chapter.

    And the fifth Angel blew, and I saw a star fall from heaven unto
the earth. And to him was given the key of the bottomless pit. And he
opened the bottomless pit, and there arose the smoke of a great
furnace. And the sun and the air were darkened by the reason of the
smoke of the pit. And there came out of the smoke locusts upon the
earth: And unto them was given power as the scorpions of the earth
have power. And it was said unto them that they should not hurt the
grass of the earth: neither any green thing: neither any tree: but
only those men which have not the seal in their foreheads, and to
them was commanded that they should not kill them, but that they
should be vexed v months, and their pain was as the pain that cometh
of a scorpion, when he hath stung a man. And in those days shall men
seek death, and shall not find it, and shall desire to die, and
death shall fly from them.
    And the similitude of the locusts was like unto horses prepared
unto battle, and on their heads were as it were crowns, like unto
gold: and their faces were as it had been the faces of men. And they
had hairs as the hairs of women. And their teeth were as the teeth of
lions. And they had habergeons, as it were habergeons of iron. And
the sound of their wings, was as the sound of chariots when many
horses run together to battle. And they had tails like unto
scorpions, and there were stings in their tails. And their power was
to hurt men v months. And they had a king over them, which is the
angel of the bottomless pit, whose name in the hebrew tongue, is
Abadon: but in the greek tongue, Apollion, that is to say a
destroyer. One woe is past, and behold two woes come after this.
    And the sixth. angel blew, and I heard a voice from the iiij.
corners of the golden altar, which is before God, saying to the sixth
angel which had the trompe: Loose the iiij. angels, which are bound
in the great river Euphrates. And the iiij. Angels were loosed which
were prepared for an hour, for a day, for a month, and for a year,
for to slay the third part of men. And the number of horsemen of war,
were twenty times xM And I heard the number of them: And thus I saw
the horses in a vision and them that sat on them, having fiery
habergeons of a Iacinth colour, and brimstone, and the heads of the
horses were as the heads of lions. And out of their mouths went forth
fire and smoke and brimstone. And of these iij, was the third part of
men killed, that is to say, of fire, smoke, and brimstone, which
proceeded out of the mouths of them: For their power was in their
mouths and in their tails: for their tails were like unto serpents,
and had heads, and with them they did hurt: And the remnant of the
men which were not killed by these plagues repented not of the deeds
of their hands, that they should not worship devils, and images, of
gold, and silver, and brass, and stone, and of wood, which neither
can see, neither hear, neither go. Also they repented not of their
murder, and of their sorcery neither of their fornication neither of
their theft.

The .x. Chapter.

    And I saw another mighty angel come down from heaven, clothed
with a cloud, and the rainbow upon his head. And his face as it were
the sun, and his feet as it were pillars of fire, And he had in his
hand a little book open: and he put his right foot upon the sea, and
his left foot on the earth. And cried with a loud voice, as when a
lion roareth. And when he had cried, seven thunders spake their
voices. And when the vij. thunders had spoken their voices, I was
about to write. And I heard a voice from heaven saying unto me mark
those things which the vij. thunders spake, and write them not.
    And the Angel which I saw stand upon the sea, and upon the earth,
lifted up his hand to heaven, and swore by him that liveth for
evermore, which created heaven, and the things that therein are, and
the sea, and the things which therein are: that there should be no
longer time: but in the days of the voice of the seventh angel, when
he shall begin to blow: even the mystery of God shall be fulfilled,
as he preached by his servants the prophets.
    And the voice which I heard from heaven spake unto me again, and
said: go and take the little book which is open in the hand of the
angel, which standeth upon the sea, and upon the earth. And I went
unto the angel, and said to him: give me the little book, and he said
unto me: take it, and eat it up, and it shall make thy belly bitter,
but it shall be in thy mouth as sweet as honey. And I took the little
book out of his hand, and ate it up, and it was in my mouth as sweet
as honey, and as soon as I had eaten it, my belly was bitter. And he
said unto me: thou must prophesy again among the people, and nations,
and tongues, and to many kings.

The .xj. Chapter.

    And then was given me a reed, like unto a rod, and it was said
unto me: Rise and meet the temple of God, and the altar, and them
that worship therein, and the choir which is with in the temple cast
out, and meet it not: for it is given unto the gentiles, and the holy
city shall they tread under foot xlij. months. And I will give power
unto my two witnesses, and they shall prophesy M.ijc. and lx. days,
clothed in sackcloth. These are two olive trees, and two
candlesticks, standing before the God of the earth.
    And if any man will hurt them, fire shall proceed out of their
mouths, and consume their enemies. And if any man will hurt them,
this wise must he be killed. These have power to shut heaven, that it
rain not in the days of their prophesying: and have power over waters
to turn them to blood, and to smite the earth with all manner
plagues, as often as they will.
    And when they have finished their testimony, the beast that came
out of the bottomless pit shall make war against them: and shall over
come, and kill them. And their bodies shall lie in the streets of the
great city, which spiritually is called Zodom and Eygpt, where our
lord was crucified. And they of the people and kindreds, and tongues,
and they of the nations, shall see their bodies iij. days and an
half, and shall not suffer their bodies to be put in graves. And they
that dwell upon the earth, shall rejoice over them and be glad, and
shall send gifts one to another: for these two prophets vexed them
that dwelt on the earth.
    And after iij. days and an half the spirit of life from God
entered into them. And they stood up upon their feet: and great fear
came upon them which saw them. And they heard a great voice from
heaven, saying unto them. Come up hither. And they ascended up into
heaven in a cloud, and their enemies saw them. And the same hour was
there a great earthquake, and the tenth part of the city fell, and in
the earthquake were slain names of men seven M. and the remnant were
feared, and gave glory to God of heaven. The second woe is past, and
behold the third woe will come anon.
    And the seventh angel blew, and there were made great voices in
heaven, saying: the kingdoms of this world are our lord's and his
christe's, and he shall reign for evermore. And the xxiiij. seniors,
which sit before God on their seats, fell upon their faces, and
worshipped God saying: we give thee thanks lord God omnipotent: which
art and wast, and art to come, for thou hast received thy great
might, and hast reigned. And the nations were angry, and thy wrath is
come, and the time of the dead, that thou shouldest judge them: and
shouldest give reward unto thy servants prophets and saints, and to
them that fear thy name small and great and shouldest destroy them,
which destroy the earth.
    And the temple of God was opened in heaven, and there was seen in
his temple, the ark of his testament: and there followed lightnings,
and voices, and thunderings and earthquake, and much hail.

The .xij. Chapter.

    And there appeared a great wonder in heaven. A woman clothed with
the sun, and the moon under her feet, and upon her head a crown of
xij. stars. And she was with child and cried travailing in birth, and
pained ready to be delivered. And there appeared another wonder in
heaven, and behold a great red dragon, having vij. heads, and ten
horns, and seven crowns upon his heads: and his tail drew the third
part of the stars, and cast them to the earth.
    And the dragon stood before the woman, which was ready to be
delivered: for to devour her child as soon as it {hit} were born. 
And she brought forth a man child, which should rule all nations with
a rod of iron. And her son was taken up unto God, and to his seat.
And the woman fled into wilderness, where she had a place, prepared
of God, that they should feed her there, M. and xxvj. days.
{or M.ij.C and lx. days.}
    And there was great battle in heaven, Michael and his Angels
fought with the dragon and the dragon fought and his angels, and
prevailed not: neither was their place found any more in heaven. And
the great dragon, that old serpent called the devil and Sathanas, Was
cast out. Which deceiveth all the world. And he was cast into the
earth, and his angels were cast out also.
    And I heard a loud voice saying: in heaven is now made health and
strength, and the kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ:
For he is cast down which accused them before God day and night: And
they overcame him by the blood of the lamb, and by the word of their
testimony, and they loved not their lives unto the death. Therefore
rejoice heavens, and ye that dwell in them. Woe to the inhabiters of
the earth, and of the sea: for the devil is come down unto you which
hath great wrath, because he knoweth that he hath but a short time.
    And when the dragon saw that he was cast unto the earth, he
persecuted the woman which brought forth the man child. And to the
woman were given two wings of a great eagle, that she might fly into
the wilderness, into her place, where she is nourished for a time,
times, and half a time, from the presence of the dragon. And the
serpent cast out of his mought water after the woman as it had been a
river because she should have been caught of the flood. And the earth
helped the woman, and the earth opened her mought, and swallowed up
the river which the dragon cast out of his mowth. And the dragon was
wroth with the woman: and went and made war with the remnant of her
seed, which keep the commandments of God, and have the testimony of
Iesus Christe.

The .xiij. Chapter.
And I stood on the sea sand.
    And I saw a beast rise out of the sea, having vij heads, and x
horns, and upon his horns x. crowns, and upon his head, the name of
blasphemy. And the beast which I saw, was like a cat of the mountain,
and his feet were as the feet of a bear, and his mowth as the mowth
of a lion. And the dragon gave him his power and his seat, and great
authority: and I saw one of his heads as it were wounded to death,
and his deadly wound was healed. And all the world wondered at the
beast, and they worshipped the dragon, which gave power unto the
beast, and they worshipped the beast saying: who is like unto the
beast? who is able to war with him?
    And there was a mowth given unto him that spake great things, and
blasphemies, and power was given unto him, to continue xlij months.
And he opened his mowth unto blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his
name, and his tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven. And it was
given unto him to make war with the saints, and to over come them.
And power was given him over all kindred, tongue, and nation: and all
that dwell upon the earth worshipped him: whose names are not written
in the book of life of the lamb, which was killed from the beginning
of the world. If any man have an ear, let him hear. He that leadeth
into captivity, shall go into captivity: he that killeth with a
sword, must be killed with a sword. Here is the patience, and the
faight of the saints.
    And I beheld another beast coming up out of the earth, and he had
two horns like a lamb, and he spake as did the dragon. And he did all
that the first beast could do in his presence, and he caused the
earth, and them which dwell therein, to worship the first beast,
whose deadly wound was healed. And he did great wonders, so that he
made fire come down from heaven in the sight of men. And deceived
them that dwelt on the earth, by the means of those signs which he
had power to do in the sight of the beast, saying to them that dwelt
on the earth: that they should make an image unto the beast, which
had the wound of a sword, and did live.
    And he had power to give a spirit unto the image of the beast,
and that the image of the beast should speak, and should cause that
as many as would not worship the image of the beast, should be
killed. And he made all men, small and great, rich and poor, free and
bond, to receive a mark in their right hands, {hondes} or in their 
foreheads.
And that no man might buy or sell, save he that had the mark, or the
name of the beast, other the number of his name. Here is wisdom. Let
him that hath wit count the number of the beast. For it is the number
of a man, and his number is six hundred, threescore and six.

The .xiiij. Chapter.
And I looked, and lo a lamb stood on the mount Sion, and with him C.
and xliiij. thousand having his father's name written in their
foreheads. And I heard a voice from heaven, as the sound of many
waters, and as the voice of a great thunder. And I heard the voice of
harpers harping with their harps. And they sang as it were a new
song, before the seat, and before the four beasts, and the seniors,
and no man could learn that song, but the hundred and xliiij M. which
were redeemed from the earth. These are they, which were not defiled
with women, for they are virgins. These follow the lamb whithersoever
he goeth. These were redeemed from men being the first fruits unto
God and to the lamb, and in their mouths was found no guile. For they
are without spot before the throne of God.
    And I saw an angel fly in the midst of heaven having an
everlasting gospel, to preach unto them that sit and dwell on the
earth, and to all nations, kindreds, and tongues, and people, saying
with a loud voice: Fear God and give honour to him, for the hour of
his judgement is come: and worship him, that made heaven and earth,
and the sea, and fountains of water. And there followed another
angel, saying: Babylon is fallen is fallen that great city, for she
made all nations drink of the wine of her fornication.
    And the third angel followed them saying with a loud voice: If
any man worship the beast and his image, and receive his mark in his
forehead, or on his hand, the same shall drink of the wine of the
wrath of God, which is poured in the cup of his wrath. And he shall
be punished in fire and brimstone, before the holy Angels, and before
the lamb. And the smoke of their torment ascendeth up evermore. And
they have no rest day nor night, which worship the beast, and his
image, and whosoever receiveth the print of his name. Here is the
patience of saints. Here are they that keep the commandments and the
faight of Iesu.
    And I heard a voice from heaven saying unto me: write: Blessed
are the dead, which hereafter die in the lord, even so saith the
spirit: that they may rest from their labors, but their works shall
follow them. And I looked and behold a white cloud, and upon the
cloud one sitting like unto the son of man, having on his head a
golden crown, and in his hand a sharp sickle. And another Angel came
out of the temple, crying with a loud voice to him that sat on the
cloud. Thrust in thy sickle and reap: for the time is come to reap,
for the corn of the earth is ripe. And he that sat on the cloud
thrust in his sickle on the earth, and the earth was reaped.
    And another Angel came out of the temple, which is in heaven,
having also a sharp sickle. And another Angel came out from the
altar, which had power over fire, and cried with a loud cry to him
that had the sharp sickle, and said: thrust in thy sharp sickle, and
gather the clusters of the earth: for her grapes are ripe. And the
Angel thrust in his sickle on the earth: and cut down the grapes of
the vineyard of the earth: and cast them into the great winefat of
the wrath of God, and the winefat was trodden with out the city, and
blood came out of the fat, even unto the horse bridles by the space
of a thousand and iiij score furlongs. {or a thowsande and .vj.C
furlongs.}

The .xv. Chapter.

    And I saw another sign in heaven great and marvellous, vij angels
having the seven last plagues, for in them is fulfilled the wrath of
God. And I saw as it were a glassy sea, mingled with fire, and them
that had gotten victory of the beast, and of his image, and of his
mark, and of the number of his name, stand on the glassy sea, having
the harps of God and they sang the song of Moses the servant of God,
and the song of the lamb, saying: Great and marvellous are thy works
lord God almighty, just and true are thy ways, king of the saints.
Who shall not fear o lord, and glorify thy name? For thou only art
holy, and all gentiles shall come and worship before thee, for thy
judgements are made manifest.
    And after that I looked, and behold the temple of the tabernacle
of testimony was open in heaven, and the seven angels came out of the
temple, which had the seven plagues, clothed in pure and bright
linen, and having their breasts girded with golden girdles. And one
of the four beasts gave unto the seven angels vij golden vials, full
of the wrath of God which liveth for evermore. And the temple was
full of the smoke of the glory of God and of his power, and no man
was able to enter into the temple, till the seven plagues of the
seven angels were fulfilled.

The .xvj. Chapter.

    And I heard a great voice out of the temple, saying to the seven
angels: go your ways, pour out your vials of wrath upon the earth.
And the first went, and poured out his vial upon the earth, and there
fell a noisome and a sore botch upon the men, which had the mark of
the beast, and upon them which worshipped his image. And the second
Angel shed out his vial upon the sea, and it turned as it were into
the blood of a dead man, and every living thing died in the sea. And
the third angel shed out his vial upon the rivers and fountains of
waters, and they turned to blood. And I heard an angel say: lord
which art and wast, thou art righteous and holy, because thou hast
given such judgements, for they shed out the blood of saints, and
prophets, and therefore hast thou given them blood to drink: for they
are worthy. And I heard another out of the altar say: even so lord
God almighty, true and righteous are thy judgements.
    And the fourth angel poured out his vial on the sun, and power
was given unto him to vex men with heat of fire. And the men raged in
great heat, and spake evil of the name of God which had power over
those plagues, and they repented not, to give him glory. And the
fifth angel poured out his vial upon the seat of the beast, and his
kingdom waxed dark, and they gnawed their tongues for sorrow, and
blasphemed the God of heaven for sorrow, and pain of their sores, and
repented not of their deeds.
    And the sixth angel poured out his vial upon the great river
Euphrates, and the water dried up, that the ways of the kings of the
east should be prepared. And I saw three unclean spirits like frogs
come out of the mouth of the dragon, and out of the mouth of the
beast, and out of the mouth of the false prophet. For they are the
spirits of devils working miracles, to go out unto the kings of the
earth and of the whole world, to gather them to the battle of that
great day of God almighty. Behold I come as a thief. Happy is he that
watcheth and keepeth his garments, Lest he be found naked, and men
see his filthiness. And he gathered them together into a place called
in the hebrew tongue Armagedon.
    And the seventh Angel poured out his vial into the air. And there
came a voice out of heaven from the seat, saying: It is done. And
there followed voices, thunderings, and lightnings, and there was a
great earthquake, such as was not since men were upon the earth, so
mighty an earthquake and so great. And the great city was divided
into the three parts, And the cities of nations fell. And great
Babylon came in remembrance before God, to give unto her the cup of
wine of the fierceness of wrath. Every isle fled away, and the
mountains were not found. And there fell a great hail, as it had been
talents, out of heaven upon the men, and the men blasphemed God,
because of the plague of the hail, for it was great and the plague of
it sore.

The .xvij. Chapter.

    And there came one of the seven angels, which had the seven
vials, and talked with me, saying unto me: I will shew thee the
judgement of the great whore, that sitteth upon many waters, with
whom have committed fornication the kings of the earth, so that the
inhabiters of the earth, are drunken with the wine of her
fornication. And he carried me away into the wilderness in the
spirit. And I saw a woman sit upon a rose colored beast full of names
of blasphemy, which had ten horns. And the woman was arrayed in
purple and rose colour, and decked with gold, precious stone, and
pearls, and had a cup of gold in her hand, full of abomination, and
filthiness of her fornication. And in her forehead was a name
written, a mystery, great Babylon the mother of whoredom and
abominations of the earth. And I saw the wife drunken with the blood
of saints, and with the blood of the witnesses of Iesu. And when I
saw her: I wondered with great marvel.
    And the Angel said unto me: wherefore marvellest thou? I will
shew thee the mystery of the woman, and of the beast that beareth
her, which hath seven heads, and ten horns. The beast that thou
seest, was, and is not, and shall ascend out of the bottomless pit,
and shall go into perdition, and they that dwell on the earth shall
wonder (whose names are not written in the book of life from he
beginning of the world) when they behold the beast that was, and is
not. And here is a mind that hath wisdom.
    The seven heads are seven mountains, on which the woman sitteth:
they are also seven kings. Five are fallen, and one is, and another
is not yet come. When he cometh he must continue a space. And the
beast that was, and is not, is even the eighth, and is one of the
seven, and shall go into destruction. And the ten horns which thou
seest, are ten kings, which have received no kingdom, but shall
receive power as kings at one hour with the beast. These have one
mind, and shall give their power and strength unto the beast. These
shall fight with the lamb, and the lamb shall overcome them: For he
is lord of lords, and king of kings: and they that are on his side,
are called, and chosen, and faithful.
    And he said unto me: the waters which thou sawest, where the
whore sitteth, are people, and folk, and nations, and tongues. And
the ten horns, which thou sawest upon the beast, are they that shall
hate the whore, and shall make her desolate, and naked, and shall eat
her flesh, and burn her with fire. For God hath put in their hearts,
to fulfil his will, and to do with one consent, for to give her
kingdom unto the beast, until the words of God be fulfilled. And the
woman thou sawest, is that great city, which reigneth over the kings
of the earth.

The .xviij. Chapter.

    And after that I saw another angel come from heaven, having great
power, and the earth was lightened with his brightness. And he cried
mightily with a strong voice saying: Great Babylon is fallen is
fallen, and is become the habitation of devils, and the hold of all
foul spirits, and a cage of all unclean and hateful birds, for all
nations have drunken of the wine of the wrath of her fornication. And
the kings of the earth have committed fornication with her, and her
merchants are waxed rich of the abundance of her pleasures.
    And I heard another voice from heaven say: come away from her my
people, that ye be not part takers in her sins, that ye receive not
of her plagues. For her sins are gone up to heaven, and God hath
remembered her wickedness. Reward her even as she rewarded you, and
give her double according to her works. And pour in double to her in
the same cup which she filled unto you. And as much as she glorified
herself and lived wantonly, so much pour ye in for her of punishment,
and sorrow, for she said in her heart: I sit being a queen and am no
widow and shall see no sorrow. Therefore shall her plagues come at
one day, death, and sorrow, and hunger, and she shall be brent with
fire: for strong is the lord God which judgeth her.
    And the kings of the earth shall beweep her and wail over her,
which have committed fornication with her, and have lived wantonly
with her, when they shall see the smoke of her burning, and shall
stand afar off, for fear of her punishment, saying: Alas, Alas, that
great city Babylon, that mighty city: For at one hour is her judgment
come. And the merchants of the earth shall weep and wail in
themselves, for no man will buy their ware any more, the ware of gold
and silver, and precious stones, neither of pearl, and raynes, and
purple, and scarlet, and all thyine wood, and all manner vessels of
ivory, and all manner vessels of most precious wood, and of brass,
and of iron, and cinnamon, and odors, and ointments, and
frankincense, and wine, and oil, and fine flour, and wheat, beasts,
and sheep, and horses, and chariots, and bodies and souls of men.
    And the apples that thy soul lusted after, are departed from
thee. And all things which were dainty, and had in price are departed
from thee, and thou shalt find them no more. The merchants of these
things which were waxed rich shall stand afar off from her, for fear
of the punishment of her, weeping and wailing, and saying: alas alas,
that great city, that was clothed in raynes, and purple, and scarlet,
and decked with gold, and precious stone, and pearls: for at one hour
so great riches is come to nought.
    And every ship governor, and all they that occupied ships, and
shipmen which work in the sea, stood afar off, and cried, when they
saw the smoke of her burning, saying: what city is like unto this
great city? And they cast dust on their heads, and cried weeping, and
wailing, and said: Alas Alas that great city wherein were made rich
all that had ships in the sea, by the reason of her ware, for at one
hour is she made desolate.
    Rejoice over her thou heaven, and ye holy Apostles, and prophets:
for God hath given your judgement on her. And a mighty angel took up
a stone like a great millstone, and cast it into the sea, saying:
with such violence shall that great city Babylon be cast, and shall
be found no more. And the voice of harpers, and musicians, and of
pipers, and trumpeters, shall be heard no more in thee: and no crafts
man, of whatsoever craft he be, shall be found any more in thee, and
the sound of a mill shall be heard no more in thee, and the voice of
the bridegroom and of the bride, shall be heard no more in thee: for
thy merchants were the great men of the earth. And with thine
enchantment were deceived all nations: and in her was found the blood
of the prophets, and of the saints, and of all that were slain upon
the earth.

The .xix. Chapter.

    And after that, I heard the voice of much people in heaven
saying: Alleluia. Health and glory and honour, and power be unto our
lord God, for true and righteous are his judgements, for he hath
judged the great whore which did corrupt the earth with her
fornication, and hath avenged the blood of his servants of her hand.
And again they said: Alleluya. And smoke rose up for evermore. And
the xxiiij. seniors, and the iiij. beasts fell down, and worshipped
God that sat on the seat saying: Amen Alleluya. And a voice came out
of the seat, saying: praise our lord God all ye that are his
servants, and ye that fear him both small and great.
    And I heard the voice of much people, even as the voice of many
waters, and as the voice of strong thunderings, saying: Alleluya, for
God omnipotent hath reigned. Let us be glad and rejoice and give
honour to him: for the marriage of the lamb is come, and his wife
made herself ready. And to her was granted, that she should be
arrayed with pure and goodly raynes. For the raynes is the
righteousness of saints. And he said unto me: happy are they which
are called unto the Lamb's supper. And he said unto me: these are the
true sayings of God. And I fell at his feet, to worship him. And he
said unto me: see thou do it not. For I am thy fellow servant, and
one of thy brethren, and of them that have the testimony of Iesus.
Worship God. For the testimony of Iesus is the spirit of prophecy.
And I saw heaven open, and behold a white horse: and he that sat upon
him was faithful and true, and in righteousness did judge and make
battle. His eyes were as a flame of fire: and on his head were many
crowns: and he had a name written, that no man knew but himself. And
he was clothed with a vesture dipped in blood, and his name is called
the word of God. And the warriors which were in heaven, followed him
upon white horses, clothed with white and pure raynes: and out of his
mouth went out a sharp sword, that with it he should smite the
heathen. And he shall rule them with a rod of iron, and he trod the
winefat of fierceness and wrath of almighty God. And hath on his
vesture and on his thigh: king of kings, and lord of lords.
    And I saw an angel stond in the sun, and he cried with a loud
voice, saying to all the fowls that fly by the midst of heaven: come
and gather yourselves together unto the supper of the great God, that
ye may eat the flesh of kings, and of high captains, and the flesh of
mighty men, and the flesh of horses, and of them that sit on them,
and the flesh of all free men and bond men, and of small and great.
And I saw the beast and the kings of the earth, and their warriors
gathered together to make battle against him that sat on the horse
and against his soldiers.
    And the beast was taken, and with him that false prophet that
wrought miracles before him, with which he deceived them that
received the beasts mark, and them that worshipped his image. These
both were cast into a pond of fire burning with brimstone: and the
remnant were slain with the sword of him that sat upon the horse,
which sword proceeded out of his mouth, and all the fowls were
fulfilled with their flesh.

The .xx. Chapter.

    And I saw an Angel come down from heaven, having the key of the
bottomless pit, and a great chain in his hand. And he took the dragon
that old serpent, which is the devil and satanas, and he bound him a
thousand years: and cast him into the bottomless pit, and he bound
him, and set a seal on him, that he should deceive the people no
more, till the M. years were fulfilled. And after that he must be
lowsed for a little season.
    And I saw seats, and they sat upon them, and judgement was given
unto them: and I saw the souls of them that were beheaded for the 
witness of Iesu, and for the word of God: which had not worshipped 
the beast, neither his image, neither had taken his mark upon their 
foreheads, or on their hands: and they lived, and reigned with Christ 
a M. years: but the other of the dead men lived not again, until the 
M. years were finished. This is that first resurrection. Blessed and
holy is he that hath part in the first resurrection. For on such
shall the second death have no power, for they shall be the priests
of God and of Christ, and shall reign with him a M. years.
    And when the M. years are expired, Satan shall be lowsed out of
his prison, and shall go out to deceive the people which are in the
four quarters of the earth Gog and Magog, to gather them together to
battle whose number is as the sand of the sea: and they went up on
the plain of the earth, and compassed the tents of the saints about,
and the beloved city. And fire came down from God, out of heaven, and
devoured them: and the devil that deceived them, was cast into a lake
of fire and brimstone, where the beast and the false prophet were and
shall be tormented day and night for ever more.
    And I saw a great white seat and him that sat on it, from whose
face fled away both the earth and heaven, and their place was no more
found. And I saw the dead, both great and small stond before God: And
the books were opened, and another book was opened, which is the book
of life, and the dead were judged of those things which were written
in the books according to their deeds: and the sea gave up her dead,
which were in her, and death and hell delivered up the dead, which
were in them: and they were judged every man according to his deeds.
And death and hell were cast into the lake of fire. This is that
second death. And whosoever was not found written in the book of
life, was cast into the lake of fire.

The .xxj. Chapter.

    And I saw a new heaven, and a new earth. For the first heaven,
and the first earth, were vanished away, and there was no more sea.
And I Ihon saw that holy city new Ierusalem come down from God out of
heaven prepared as a bride garnished for her husband. And I heard a
great voice from the throne, saying: behold, the tabernacle of God is
with men, and he will dwell with them. And they shall be his people,
and God himself shall be with them and be their God. And God shall
wipe away all tears from their eyes. And there shall be no more
death, neither sorrow, neither crying, neither shall there be any
more pain, for the old things are gone. And he that sat upon the
seat, said: Behold I make all things new. And he said unto me: write,
for these words are faithful and true.
    And he said unto me: it is done I am Alpha and Omega, the
beginning, and the end. I will give to him that is a thirst of the
well of the water of life free. He that overcometh shall inherit all
things, and I will be his God, and he shall be my son. But the
fearful and unbelieving, and the abominable, and murderers, and
whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars shall have
their part in the lake which burneth with fire and brimstone, which
is the second death.
    And there came unto me one of the vij. angels which had the vij.
vials full of the vij. last plagues: and talked with me saying: come
hither I will shew thee the bride, the lamb's wife. And he carried me
away in the spirit to a great and an high mountain, and he shewed me
the great city, holy Ierusalem descending out of heaven from God,
having the brightness of God. And her shining was like unto a stone
most precious, even a Jasper clear as Crystal: and had walls great
and high, and had xij gates, and at the gates xij angels: and names
written, which are the xij tribes of Israell: on the east part iij
gates, and on the north side iij gates, and towards the south iij
gates, and from the west iij gates: and the wall of the city had xij
foundations, and in them the names of the lamb's .xij. Apostles.
    And he that talked with me, had a golden reed to measure the city
withall and the gates thereof and the wall thereof. And the city was
built iiij. square, and the length was as large as the breadth of it,
and he measured the city with the reed xijM. furlongs: and the
length, and the breadth, and the height of it, were equal. And he
measured the wall thereof an cxliiij. cubits: the measure that the
angel had was after the measure that man useth. And the building of
the wall of it was of jasper. And the city was pure gold like unto
clear glass and the foundations of the wall of the city was garnished
with all manner of precious stones. The first foundation was jasper,
the second sapphire, the third a chalcedony, the fourth an emerald:
the fifth sardonyx: the sixth sardeos: the seventh chrysolite: the
eighth berall: the ninth a topas: the tenth a chrysoprasus: the
eleventh a hyacinth: the twelfth an amethyst.
    The xij gates were xij pearls, every gate was of one pearl, and
the street of the city was pure gold, as thorow shining glass. And
there was no temple therein. For the lord God almighty and the lamb
are the temple of it. and the city hath no need of the sun neither of
the moon to lighten it. For the brightness of God did light it: and
the lamb was the light of it. And the people which are saved shall
walk in the light of it: and the kings of the earth shall bring their
glory unto it. And the gates of it are not shut by day. For there
shall be no night there. And there shall enter into it none unclean
thing: neither whatsoever worketh abomination: or maketh lies: but
they only which are written in the lamb's book of life.

The .xxij. Chapter.

    And he shewed me a pure river of water of life pure as crystal:
proceeding out of the seat of God and of the lamb. In the midst of
the street of it, and on either side of the river was there wood of
life: which bare xij manner of fruits: and gave fruit every month:
and the leaves of the wood served to heal the people with all. And
there shall be no more curse, but the fear of God and the lamb shall
be in it: and his servants shall serve him. And they shall see his
face, and his name shall be in their foreheads. And there shall be no
more night there and they need no candle, neither light of the sun:
for the lord God giveth them light, and they shall reign for
evermore.
    And he said unto me: these sayings are faithful, and true. And
the lord God of saints and prophets sent his angel to shew unto his
servants, the things which must shortly be fulfilled. Behold I come
shortly. Happy is he that keepeth the saying of the prophecy of this
book. I am Ihon, which saw these things and heard them. And when I
had heard and seen, I fell down, to worship before the feet of the
angel which shewed me these things. And he said unto me: see thou do
it not, for I am thy fellow servant and the fellow servant of thy
brethren the prophets and of them which keep the sayings of this
book. But worship God.
    And he said unto me: seal not the sayings of prophesy of this
book. For the time is at hand. He that doth evil, let him do evil
still: and he which is filthy, let him be filthy still: and he that
is righteous, let him be more righteous: and he that is holy, let him
be more holy. And behold I come shortly, and my reward with me, to
give every man according as his deeds shall be. I am Alpha and Omega,
the beginning and the end, the first and the last. Blessed are they
that do his commandments, that their power may be in the tree of
life, and may enter in thorow the gates into the city. For with out
shall be dogs and enchanters, and whoremongers, and murderers, and
idolaters, and whosoever loveth or maketh lesynges.
    I Iesus sent mine angel, to testify unto you these things in the
congregations. I am the root and the generation of David, and the
bright morning star. And the spirit and the bride said come. And let
him that heareth, say also come. And let him that is a thirst come.
And let whosoever will, take of the water of life free.
    I testify unto every man that heareth the words of prophecy of
this book: if any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto
him the plagues that are written in this book. And if any man shall
minish of the words of the book of this prophecy, God shall take away
his part out of the book of life, and out of the holy city, and from
those things which are written in this book. He which testifieth
these things saith: be it, I come quickly, Amen. Even so: come lord
Iesu. The grace of our lord Iesu Christ be with you all Amen.

The end of the newe testament.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

{-{-{-{-{-{-{-{  EDITOR NOTES  .}-}-}-}-}-}-}-}

Messiah Iesu the son of God commanded in John Chap. ij. :
.."make not my father's house, an house of merchandise."

If you are shopping for a new Bible, your choices are mind-boggling.
At first I said like Paul wrote:

"What thing is this? Notwithstanding by all manner ways, whether it
be by occasion or of truth, yet Christ is preached: and therefore I
joy. Yee and will joy." (Philippians j.)

Even so, thorow much research and thanks to the guidance of the
spirit of God who leads to truth, that is, His son Christ Iesu our
health; firstly asking God through prayer and fasting, for wisdom in
Iesus name; it must be said, in desire of the pure Word, that one
will come to the realization that over the years there have been many
divers revisions of the Scriptures, some of which under the guise of
wordily scholarship and "the modernizing the languages" have watered
down the message and introduced errors proceeding from deviant
manuscripts, from doctrines of men, and from over simplification of
the English or given language. May the spirit of God deliver us from
any strong delusion, and keep us in the alleviating reality of the
truth, specially at this Laodicean hour.

'So then faith cometh by hearing, and hearing cometh by the word of
God.' (Romans x.)

Instead of revising "forward" towards modernism and employing modern
scholarship, textual criticism, and the like; it has been my
intention to go "back" and restore the pure message from a proven
root. Yea, a root that was tried in the fire like gold and grew to
immense proportions in likeness of a great tree yielding it's fruit
in due season. For it's history of good fruit speaks for itself.
Therefore, I believe that only when we allow the witness of the
spirit of truth in our hearts to have the last word regarding
translation, can we then come to the truth or reality of the matter.

'Study to shew thyself laudable unto God, a workman that needeth not
to be ashamed, dividing the word of truth justly.' Second Timothy ij.

Diligence and great reverence to God must be taken when studying the
Scriptures; like those noble of Berea in Acts xvij. 'which received
the word with all diligence of mind, and searched the scriptures
daily whether those things were even so.' And it must 'BEREAD' in
mind that even if we were to all learn the original tongue to
perfection and could obtain a flawless manuscript of the original
text, there would still be a humanly insurmountable language barrier
between us and the truth that can only be bridged by the spirit of
God.

'For with thee is the fountain of life: and in thy light shall we see
light.' (Psalm xxxvj.)

I. About the translation and the translator

It is thanks to God for devout man of the word like William Tyndale,
that the Scriptures were translated from the original tongue and
printed for the first time in English.

A.) About the translation significance

Fluent in at least 7 languages, by the grace of God, William Tyndale
translated much of the Bible into English from the Hebrew and Greek
original tongue sources. In doing so he gave the English language
many of its best known phrases.

'    In the beginning God created heaven and earth. The earth was
void and empty, and darkness was upon the deep, and the spirit of God
moved upon the water.
     Then God said: Let there be light, and there was light. And God
saw the light that it was good: and divided the light from the
darkness, and called the light day, and the darkness night: and so of
the evening and morning was made the first day.' (Genesis j.)

Through the years many English speaking believers in the Word adopted
and loved the 'Authorised' version of the New Testament, and surely
it includes Phrases of lapidary beauty that have been admired :

'heat of the day' (Matthew xvj.)
'They made light of it, and went their ways: one to his firm place,
another about his merchandise,' (Matthew xxij.)
'And he put forth a similitude unto them saying: The lands of a
certain man brought forth fruits plenteously,  and he thought in
himself saying: what shall I do? because I have no room where to
bestow my fruits? And he said: This will I do. I will destroy my
barns, and build greater, and therein will I gather all my fruits,
and my goods: and I will say to my soul: Soul thou hast much goods
laid up in store for many years, take thine ease: eat, drink and be
merry. But God said unto him: Thou fool, this night will they fetch
away thy soul again from thee. Then whose shall those things be which
thou hast provided?  So is it with him that gathered riches, and is
not rich in God.' (Luke xij.)
'filthy lucre' (First Timothy iij.)

'in the morning: ye say, today shall be foul weather, and that
because the sky is tremulous and red. O ye hypocrites, ye can discern
the fashion of the sky: and can ye not discern the signs of the
times?' (Matthew xvj.)
'scales fell from his eyes' (Acts ix.)
'The powers that be' (Romans xiij.)

'For where ij or iij are gathered together in my name, there am I in
the midst of them.'
(Matthew v.)
'the salt of the earth' (Matthew v.)
'Ask and it shall be given you: Seek and ye shall find, knock and it
shall be opened unto you.' (Matthew vij.)
'clothed and in his right mind' (Luke xviij.)
'Iesus beheld them, and said unto them: with men this is unpossible,
but with God all things are possible.' (Matthew ixx.)
'For in him we live, move, and have our being' (Acts xvij.)
'Full of good works' (Acts ix.)
'A law unto themselves' (Romans ij.)
'Fight the good fight of faith; lay hold on eternal life.' (First
Timothy vj.)
'Be not weary in well doing' (First Thessalonians iij.)
'Let brotherly love continue' (Hebrews xiij.)
'Looking unto Iesus, the author and finisher of our faith' (Hebrews
xij.)
'The patience of Job' (James v.)
'Behold I stand at the door, and knock' (Revelation vij.)
'And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes' (Revelation vij.)

All these phrases, and many, (specially when it is direct, simply
plain and strong,) and many other, were taken by the King James
version translators directly from Tyndale.

B.) About the brave translator (William Tyndale 1494-1536 A.D.)

Pursuing a vision

Master Tyndale happened to be in the company of a learned man and, in
disputing with him ... the man said, "We are better to be without
God's laws than the pope's." Master Tyndale, hearing this, replied,
"I defy the pope and all his laws;" and added, "If God spare my life,
ere many years I will cause a boy that driveth the plough to know
more of the Scripture than thou dost." (Foxe, Book of Martyrs)

At that time, printing had just been invented, although translating
the Bible was considered heretical. These were dangerous times for
Scripture translations. Even still, Tyndale said, "It is impossible
to establish the lay people in any truth, except the Scriptures be
laid before their eyes, in their mother tongue."  He fled to Germany
in 1524, later to Belgium. He continued his work, translating the New
Testament from the original tongue; and first began to print his
first edition with marginal notes in a quarto edition at Cologne, but
he was compelled to halt the printing and flee the city to avoid
arrest. {Only a single copy of it (as far as Matthew chapter 22)
survives, now in the British Museum.} Tyndale was forced to leave
England and finish his work in Worms, Germany, and in the year of our
Lord 1526, he printed the version (anonymously) in smaller octavo
format. The shrewd religious authorities knowing that they could not
stop this version from reaching England's shores, planned to buy up
all the copies and burn them. It backfired, as they bought these
copies from merchants, the money was given to Tyndale to print up
even more copies. And because his enemies did so much carp at it,
pretending it to be full of heresies, he wrote to John Frith, as
followeth, "I call God to record against the day we shall appear
before our Lord Iesus, that I never altered one syllable of God's
Word against my conscience, nor would do this day, if all that is in
earth, whether it be honor, pleasure, or riches, might be given me."

In 1535, Tyndale had planned to complete the translation of the Old
Testament, but was betrayed by a fellow Englishman feigning to be his
friend who was really being paid to betray him. This man enticed
Tyndale to venture into the streets of Antwerp, where he was ambushed
and taken to the prison in the castle at Vilvorde, Brussels. Trials
for heresy in the Netherlands were in the hands of special
commissioners of the self proclaimed "holy roman empire". It took 16
months for the law to take its course. A letter from him during this
time, in Latin, has survived and is translated here:

'    I believe, most excellent Sir, that you are not unacquainted
with the decision reached concerning me. On which account, I beseech
your lordship, even by the Lord Iesus, that if I am to pass the
winter here, to urge upon the lord commissary, if he will deign, to
send me from my goods in his keeping a warmer cap, for I suffer
greatly from cold in the head, and am afflicted with a continual
catarrh, which is much increased in this cell. A warmer coat also,
for that which I have is very thin: also cloth for repairing my
leggings; my overcoat is worn out: the shirts also are worn out. He
has a woolen shirt of mine, if he will please send it. I have also
with him leggings of heavier cloth for overwear. He likewise has
warmer nightcaps: I also ask to be allowed to use a lamp in the
evening: it is indeed weariesome sitting alone in the dark.
But most of all I beg and beseech your clemency to be urgent with the
commissary, that he will kindly permit me to have my Hebrew Bible,
Hebrew Grammar, and Hebrew Dictionary, and that I might employ my
time with that study. Thus likewise may you obtain what you most
desire, saving that it further the salvation of your soul. But if,
before the end of winter, a different decision be reached concerning
me, I shall be patient, and submit to the will of God to the glory of
the grace of Iesus Christ my Lord, whose spirit may ever direct your
heart. Amen.'

W. Tyndale


Tyndale was condemned as a heretic, degraded from the priesthood, and
delivered to the secular authorities for punishment under the laws of
the Inquisition.
T h e   "C r i m e s"   o f   W i l l i a m   T y n d a l e :
First:.... He maintains that faith alone justifies.
Second:... He maintains that to believe in the forgiveness of sins
and to embrace the mercy offered in the Gospel, is enough for
salvation.
Third:.... He avers that human traditions cannot bind the conscience,
except where their neglect might occasion scandal.
Fourth:... He denies the freedom of the will.
Fifth:.... He denies that there is any purgatory.
Sixth:.... He affirms that neither the virgin nor the saints pray for
us in their own person.
Seventh:. He asserts that neither the virgin nor the saints should be
invoked by us.
.{note: According to the Scriptures Mary was only a virgin till she
conceived.
'The birth of Christ was on this wise, when his mother Mary was
married unto Ioseph, before they came to dwell together, she was
found with child by the holy ghost.' Matthew j.
Common sense would say that every generation from hence forth should
call her 'blessed' as she so said in Luke chapter j.
Mary was also blessed with many children:
"Is not this the carpenters son? is not his mother called Mary? and
his brethren be called, Iames and Ioses and Simon and Iudas? and are
not his sisters all here with us?"
Matthew xiij. & Mark vj., also see Matthew xij., Mark iij., & Luke
viij.
Howbeit people still fanatically believed and some even hold today
that Mary remains a virgin; or worst that she and the saints could
even be invoked. What they are assuming and accusing Tyndale of, is
the heresy that they themselves hold; and will be justly judged so
according to the word of God. The Lord himself so loved us that he
warned way in advance:

'It is enough for the disciple to be as his master is, and that the
servant be as his lord is. If they have called the lord of the house
beelzebub: how much more shall they call them of his household so?
Fear them not therefore. There is nothing so close, that shall not be
opened, and nothing so hid, that shall not be known. What I tell you
in darkness, that speak ye in light. And what ye hear in the ear that
preach ye on the house tops. And fear ye not them which kill the
body, and be not able to kill the soul. But rather fear him, which is
able to destroy both soul and body in hell.' Matthew x.

Thus far there is only a son of man that God rose from the dead, and
according to the Scriptures only HE must be invoked:
'Iesus said unto him I am the way, the verity, and life. No man
cometh unto the father, but by me.' John xiv.

Diligence in reasoning, and utmost obedidience to the word of God
must be taken very seriously, unless one finds himself zealously
striving against the faith first given to the Saints, yea, against
THE MAKER, and learn the hard lesson like king Saul according to the
Old Testament (see I Samuel chapter 28
"Woe be unto him that chideth with his maker, the potsherd
with the potter: Sayeth the clay to the potter: What makest thou? or
thy work serveth for nothing?" Isaiah 45:9 (Coverdale's Bible)

..Therefore I say hereto that he was martyred also because he held
the word of God over all traditions and doctrine of men. And Lo, the
LORD asks those that accuse and persecute his children still today
the same question:
'Why do ye also transgress the commandment of God, thorow your
traditions?' Matthew XV.
also see Mark vij.}.

At last, after much reasoning, when no reason would serve, although
he deserved no death, he was condemned by virtue of the emperor's
decree, made in the assembly at Augsburg. Brought forth to the place
of execution, he was tied to the stake, strangled by the hangman, and
afterwards consumed with fire, at the town of Vilvorde, (morning of 6
October) A.D. 1536; crying at the stake with a fervent zeal, and a
loud voice, "Lord! open the king of England's eyes." -- Foxe's Book
of Martyrs

A couple of years after Tyndale's death, Miles Coverdale's Bible was
to be used in every parish in the land. This was largely based on
Tyndale's Bible. In 1539 Tyndale's own edition of the Bible became
officially approved for printing. The Great Bible was the first Bible
ever authorized for public use.

William Tyndale's translation is the foundation of all reformed
English versions published for three centuries afterwards:
Coverdale's Bible New Testament is a revision of Tyndale 1534;
Matthew's Bible is a revision of Tyndale 1535; Taverner's Bible and
the Great Bible are revisions of Matthew's Bible; The Bishops' Bible
is a revision of the Great Bible, and also the N.T. of the "Geneva
Bible" is mainly a revision of Tyndale 1535.
(Although also unacknowledged, much of his work appears in the so
called 'Authorized' (or 'King James') version of the Bible whose
translator's were to abide by rule 1 which demanded merely a revision
of the Bishops' Bible; The version is not said to be "authorized";
yet "appointed to be read in Churches" (not on the title page of the
New Testament) could be interpreted to mean that as successor to the
Bishops' Bible, which was thus appointed, it (the N.T.) might be
regarded as "authorized"; moreover the Bishops' Bible was the
legitimate successor of the expressly "authorized" Great Bible.)


IJ. Notes on the Restoration

A.) Divers spellings kept to best reason the integrity of the original

1.) Tyndale had a writting freestyle that used divers spelling of the
same name like: Isay, Esay (that we call Isaiah,) Hierusalem &
Ierusalem (Jerusalem;) Iury, Iewry, Iewery: (Jewry which is
interpreted as Judaea) etc.. although the reader is able to easily
recognize; the same like when we call somebody a shorten or derived
form of their name; Hence most names are also kept that way in this
online edition.
2.) Most words were updated to current 'go spelling'; For ensample
the word hys=his or wyfe=wife is updated as such.
3.) The words "off" & "of" were sometimes interchanged in the
original, the same with "then" & "than".
4.) The original translation used both lower and upper case
sporadically, as an example for lower-case jewe I rendered it as jewe
and left Iewe when in upper-case; also most descriptors were kept in
the same letter case like in the original; Nonetheless the
significance of the whole original text still remains intact in this
restored edition.

B.) Further word notes on interesting T.N.T renderings you may come
across:

a.) COMO : original spelling like 1526 edition "como" and according
to the Greek word Erhomenon (participle present) it is best
translated: as coming, even returning (that is, Iesus Christ is
coming in the glorious body of resurrection.)
Found in the second letter of John :
"For many deceivers are entered into the world, which confess not
that Iesus Christ is como in the flesh. This is a deceiver and an
antichrist."
b.) ESTER : exact spelling, (other: passover, the feast of sweet
bread)
ester lamb: this is the Hebrew feast of sweet bread, and this lamb
was offered at the first passover in egypt. (also pascha : or paschal
lamb; that Christ the Lord fulfilled by shedding his precious blood
for us at calvary)
c.) IESUS, IESU : "J" was not used in the original W.T. English for
words (although is used as a 1 roman  numeral .j.) William Tyndale
like most early translators were very accurate in rendering the name
of the Lord from the original tongue. The name of our Lord for
ensample was kept the exact spelling shewing that the English root
word came from the latin word
Iesu (pronounced Yesu) that is derived from the Greek word Iesous and
most important of all that the Greek got it from the Hebrew word
Y'shu of Yahshuah meaning G_D "Yah" will save and be our health
"shuah" (like the name Ioshua in the O.T.) that has a similar meaning
of the Name; An Angel will be able to verify the significance in the
first chapter of Matthew.
So only names starting with "I" instead of our modern "J" were kept
as the original. Like other names: Iewry, Iury : which by
interpretation is Judea.
note: Jury is an interesting rendering taking into account the gospel
and Romans chap. ix.
d.) GOSPELL : (v.) exact original spelling; (--as in "go" & "spell";-)
As to spell forth a good saying, glad speech; to tell the joy-full
letters thereof.
Gospel, n. [other: Godspell; God + spell : his letters, promises, &
true story.  The glad tidings; that is, the good news of Christ the
Lord who came in the flesh and died for our sins, whom God his father
rose from the dead, and will rise all the dead at the last trompe;
the soon coming Kingdom of God, and eternal health.
e.) LOWSE, lowsed, lowsest, loosed, loose (v.) : to turn loose, let go
lowse, lose (adj.) loose
(note: from the Greek : loose, untie; release, set free; break away,
set aside; destroy, pull down; break up; or allow. "Low" from the
Hebrew is to humble.)
"And I will give unto thee, the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and
whatsoever thou bindest upon earth, it shall be bound in heaven: and
whatsoever thou lowsest on earth, it shall be lowsed in heaven."
Matthew chapter xvi.
f.) THOROW
    1.) thorow (prep.) : by, through, be cause of, on account of
"and to give light to all men, that they might know what is the
fellowship of the mystery, which from the beginning of the world hath
been hid in God which made all things thorow Iesus Christ" Ephesians
chapter iij.
    2.) Thorowout, Thoroughout (prep.) Quite through; from one
extremity to the other of; also, every part of; as, to search
throughout the house.
    3.) Thorow (adv.) thoroughly, completely
    4.) Thorowout, Throughout (adv.) In every part; as, the cloth was
of a piece throughout.
g.) W.T.'s translation also uses an unique method of roman numerals
for
chapters and numbers within the text, and it has been kept the same :
1 : j., 2 : ij., 3. iij., 4. iiij., 5. v., 6. vi., 7. vij., 8. viij.
9. ix., 10. x. 11.xi.. 20. xx., 30.xxx., 40.il., 44. xliiij. 50. l.
60. lx., 70. lxx., 80.lxxx., 90. xc., 100. C. 200. ij.C. 400. iiij.
C. 500. D., 1000. M. 12000. xij M.


IIJ. Importance of the Archaic word

Archaic words bring back the sharpness to detail and of significance.

A.) Why is "Ye" and "Thee" needed; and How are used :

1.) Thee, Thou, Thy, Thine. Alway Singular (refers to only one.)
2.) Ye, You : Always Plural (refers to more than one.)
Note: Modern English has lost this important distinction. Serious
doctrinal error can result from the consequences of changing the
plural "Ye", "You" and the singular "Thee, Thy, Thine" to: "you and
your"; as there would be no way to distinguish if the scriptural
promises or directives are addressed to a given individual or to the
people of God.

B.) How important is the poetic beauty and depth of archaic verb
endings :

1.) -est or -st : Used to form the archaic second person singular
(thee, thou.. etc) of English verbs: comest thou to me?
"And he said unto Iesus: Lord remember me when thou comest into thy
kingdom." Luke Chap. 23
2.) -eth or  -th : Used to form the archaic third person singular
(he, she, they, it.. etc) present indicative of verbs: leadeth.
 "He that goeth in by the door, is the shepherd of the sheep. To this
man the porter openeth the door, and the sheep hear his voice, And he
calleth his own sheep by name, and leadeth them out,  and when he
hath sent forth his own sheep, he goeth before them, and the sheep
follow him: For they know his voice."  John x.
"He that leadeth into captivity, shall go into captivity: he that
killeth with a sword, must be killed with a sword. Here is the
patience, and the faith of the saints." Revelation chapter xiij.


IIIJ. A list of other interesting notes and definitions :

    abject : low, pitiful;
"Nevertheless he that comforteth the abject, comforted us at the
coming of Titus." 2 Cor. vij.
    acomptes : accounts, accomplishments;
"which shall give acomptes to him that is ready to judge quick and
dead." I Peter iv.
    advoutry, advoutrous, advouterers : adultery, or a-devouter; the
prefix "a" meaning "not" devout or "without" devotion; unfaithfulness
to the marriage, or to the truth; Christ the lord and God our father.
    allayed : settled down, ceased;
"And he rose up and rebuked the wind, and said unto the sea: peace
and be still. And the wind allayed, and there followed a great calm:"
Mark iv.
    amen : so be it
    anathema maranatha: from the marginal notes: {The same be
accursed at the coming of the lorde.}
"If any man love not the lord Iesus Christ, the same be anathema
maranatha." 1 Cor xvj.
    anon - shortly, early, after a while, a little while, soon, right
away, immediately,
    areed, aread : prophecy, declare, guess
    assoil : solve; clear up. Matthew xxj.
    astonied, astunned : (adj.) bewildered; dazed, (p.) stunned;
astonished, astounded
    benevolence : compassion, kindness, good will
    careful : full of cares; or cluttered with detail to the point of
anxiety
    charger : a large shallow dish; a platter.
    Christe: exact spelling in seven letters with the suffix -e
perhaps meaning from or belonging to Christ.
    close: to come or gather around; to inclose; or enclose on all
sides; to encompass; to confine. Mat xiij. : to bring in the sides,
as when covering seed.
    como : I Ihon : Iesus is coming, returning in the flesh, (that
is, in the new glorious body of resurrection.)
concord - agreement
    concupiscence: strong desire as in the lust of the eyes, lust of
the flesh, and the pride of self and/or goods.
    cumbrance, encumbrance : be crushed (with difficulties), syn.
burden; clog; impediment; check; hindrance
    cruses : earthen vessels : jugs, pots, pitchers
    dampned : dampened, damned;
"Grudge not one against another brethren, lest ye be dampned. Behold
the judge standeth before the door." James v.
    debite : deputy: from the Latin meaning to keep accounts of
debts. Official listener to quarrels.
    delectation : enjoyment, delight, pleasure
    derely : dearly, (adv.) 1.) Loved and cherished; Highly esteemed
or regarded. 2.) in a sincere and heartfelt manner; with affection
3.) at a great cost
    devotion : plain hearted to God, being devoted to someone or
something else.
    discreet : prudent; sagacious, judicious; not rash or heedless,
but thoughtful.
    discreetly : wisely, sensibly, caution in speech and proper
behaviour, modestly
    discretion : ability to use common sense and discernment.
    dissimulation : disguised motives or intentions
    draught : natural movement. Or that which is drawn; as: That
which is taken by sweeping with a net. Luke v.
    durst : a past tense and a past participle of dare.
    egal : equal, impartial
    egalness : impartiality
    eschew : to escape from, to avoid, shun
    ere : before, sooner than, ever
    err, erre : error, stray from the true course; to miss the thing
aimed at.
    ester: exact spelling; interpreted as passover, easter, the feast
of sweet or unleavened bread
    ester lamb: this is the Hebrew feast of sweet bread, and this
lamb was offered at the first passover in Egypt.
    even (n) :  in divers passages means : evening
    faithful : (faithfull) full of faith
    farthing : a Great Britain coin worth 1/4 penny, or something of
very little value.
    faveour : also grace.
    fealing , feal : faithful; loyal. [Obs.]
    feign, feigned, feigning : to dissemble; to represent by a false
appearance; to give a mental existence to, as to something not real
or actual; to imagine; to invent; hence, to pretend; to form and
relate as if true.
"There are no such things done as thou sayest, but thou feignest them
out of thine own heart." --Neh. vi. 8.
    firkins : small barrel
    fuller: one who works with cloth. Mark ix.
    fremed : strange, foreign
    froward, frowardly: stubbornly headstrong, contrary to love and
truth. Not willing to yield or compIy with what is required or is
reasonable; perverse; disobedient; peevish; as, a froward child.
"A froward man soweth strife." --Prov. xvi. 28.
    grece : flight of steps. Acts xxj.
    Helias : Elijah, the prophet, EliYah = My God is YHWH.
    Hiericho : Jericho = place of fragrance
    Hierusalem, Ierusalem : Jerusalem
    Iesu, Iesus : today translated as Iesu, Iesus; in Hebrew: Y'shu
(from Yahshuah)
    Ihon : John
    Isay, Esay : the prophet Isaiah
    Iury, Jewry: Judea
    jot : gr. iota; heb. , yod : the smallest letter (10th) in the
Hebrew alphabet
"For truly I say unto you, till heaven and earth perish, one jot, or
one tittle of the law shall not scape, till all be fulfilled." Matt.
Chap.v.
    loth : unwilling
    lucre : gain in money or goods; profit; riches; -- often in an
ill sense.
"See that ye feed Christe's flock, which is among you, taking the
oversight of them, not as though ye were compelled thereto: but
willingly: Not for the desire of filthy lucre: but of a good mind."
I. Peter chap. v.
    mammon : greed-full riches; to serve for gain and filthy lucre
    meet (a.) : worthy; suitable; fit; proper; appropriate;
qualified; convenient.
    merciful : (mercifull) having or exercising mercy
    Messias, Christ : anointed ,
"The same found his brother Simon first, and said unto him: we have
found Messias, which is by interpretation anointed:" Ihon j.
    mete : what ever is used to measure or for a measure
    mote : a very small particle; a speck
    nard, spikenard : an aromatic ointment used in antiquity
    nay : no.
    nere : were not (be not)
    nought : nothing, (not ever a whit)
    ought : (n.) anything whatever, any part; whit (a.) in any
respect; at all. (imp. p.) owe; to be bound in duty or by moral
obligation. (v.) to be indebted or obliged for.
    pillers: those that charge others excessively, as to pillage the
people.  pill: extort
    pyght: plight : to promise or bind by a solemn pledge, especially
to betroth.
To give or solemn pledge (as of faith, one's word or oath to the
truth, for example) Heb. viij. (other: pitched, trothed)
    posing : asking questions
    phylacteries: either of two leather pouches containing
scriptures, one worn on the left arm, the other on the forehead, by
these Scribes or Pharisees
    predestinate: to destine or determine in advance; foreordain. to
appoint or ordain beforehand by an unchangeable purpose or decree; to
pre["e]lect. Romans Chap. viij.
    privy, privily : in private, hidden (also a privy place to rest
and think)
    publicans - ones who worked for the Romans; collector of taxes or
tribute from the public.
    quaternions : four soldiers, heavy security
    raca : from the heb. means worthless
    rue : aromatic plant
    sophistry : a imaginable but misleading discussion, fallacious
reasoning.
    staunched : To stop the flow of blood from (a wound) Luke chap. 8
    succor, succour : help, to relieve in time of distress, to assist
and deliver from suffering
" For in that he himself suffered, and was tempted, he is able to
succour them that are tempted. --Heb. ii."
    suffer(ed) : allow(ed), permit(ed) (even suffer)
    superfluity : excess, overabundance, indulgence
    superfluous : unnecessary; being beyond what is required or
sufficient.
    surfeiting : to overindulge, caused by excessive eating or
drinking.
    tittle : the "tittle" is a tiny curve at the end of some Hebrew
characters to distinguish them from others which otherwise would be
similar. The very least point. Luke xvj. :
"Sooner shall heaven and earth perish, than one tittle of the law
shall perish."
    twain : two
    trow : think
    trough : troth, or truth; in reality of the narrow way
"I rejoiced greatly, that I found of thy children walking in trough,
as we have received a commandment of the father." II. Ihon j.
    thorow(e) : (prep.)  by., through, be cause of, on account of
    thorowout (prep.) throughout
    thorow(e) adv. thoroughly, completely
    unfeigned: not made up, true, sincere, genuine
    unneth : uneasily, with much difficulty, scarcely
    unspotted : not spotted; free from spot or stain; especially,
free from moral stain; unblemished; as, an unspotted reputation.
"Pure devotion and undefiled before God the father, is this: To visit
the fatherless, and widows in their adversity, and to keep himself
unspotted of the world." James j.
    untoward: unfavorable, ungraceful, contrary, froward; perverse;
"Save yourselves from this untoward generation." Acts chap. ij.
    wene : to ween; suppose, imagine, think
    wenest : supposes, to assume
    whit : smallest part, least bit
    winefat : the upper vat of the winepress; emblematic of divine
judgement
    whitsontide: whitsuntide; also interpreted pentecost (Jewish
festival celebrated on the fiftieth day after the Passover Feast)
    wiliness : trickery, deceit, craftiness, cunning;
"That we henceforth be no more children wavering and carried with
every wind of doctrine, by the wiliness of men and craftiness,
whereby they lay a wait for us to deceive us." Ephesians chap. iv.
    wist - knew, or known well, understand
    wit, (n.) Mind; intellect; understanding; sense.
"Who knew the wit of the Lord? or who was his counselor?" --Wyclif
(Rom. xi. 34).
    wit, wettest, wot, wotteth (v.) : knew, know well
    wottest, wettest : to know sharply.
    woe (n.) (interj.) Used to express sorrow or dismay. Grief;
sorrow; misery; disaster, heavy calamity. A curse; a malediction.
Note: Woe is used in denunciation, and in exclamations of sorrow.
"Woe is me! for I am undone." --Isa. vi. 5.
"Woe unto him that striveth with his Maker!" --Isa. xlv. 9.
    wont: used to, as usual
    yee, yea : yes .
    yer: before


V. Some revised definitions from Webster's revised unabridged
dictionary (1913)

AMEN (interj., adv., & n.) [heb. n. certainly, truly.] An expression
used at the end of prayers, and meaning, So be it. At the end of a
creed, it is a solemn asseveration of belief.
To approve warmly; to concur in heartily or emphatically of a
certainty and it's verity.
((Revelation chapter vij.))
When it introduces a declaration, it is equivalent to truly, verily.
Note: It is used as a noun, to denote: (a) concurrence in belief, or
in a statement; assent; (b) the final word or act; (c) Christ as
being one who is true and faithful.
And let all the people say, Amen. --Ps. cvi. 48.

CONGREGATION :
1. The act of congregating, or bringing together, or of collecting
into one aggregate or mass.
2. An assembly of persons; a gathering; esp. an assembly of persons
met for the worship of God, and for instruction in His Word; a body
of people who habitually so meet.
4. In Ancient Jewish History it meant the whole body of the Jewish
people; (called also Congregation of the Lord;-) today the body is
composed of both Jew and Gentile believers in Christ.

ERR : error
1. To wander; to roam; to stray. [Archaic]
"What seemeth to you, if there were to a man an hundred sheep and one
of them hath erred." --Wyclif (Matt. xviii. 12).
2. To deviate from the true course; to miss the thing aimed at.
3. To miss intellectual truth; to fall into error; to mistake in
judgment or opinion; to be mistaken.
4. To deviate morally from the right way; to go astray, in a
figurative sense; to do wrong; to sin.
"Do they not err that devise evil?" --Prov. xiv. 22.
5. To offend, as by erring.

DEVOTION : plain hearted to God; Being devoted to someone or
something.
1. The state of being dedicated, or solemnly set apart for a
particular purpose.
2. A solemn attention to the Supreme Being in worship; a yielding of
the heart and affections to God, with reverence, faith and piety,
particularly in prayer and meditation; devoutness.
3. The state of being devoted; eager inclination; strong attachment
love or affection; zeal; especially, feelings toward God
appropriately expressed by acts of worship and obedience to His
commandments; devoutness.

FAITHFUL \Faith"ful\,
a. 1. Full of faith, or having faith; disposed to believe, especially
in the declarations and promises of God.
2. Firm in adherence to promises, oaths, contracts, treaties, or
other engagements.
The faithful God, which keepeth covenant and mercy with them that
love him. --Deut. vii. 9.
3. True and constant in affection or allegiance to a person to whom
one is bound by a vow, be ties of love, gratitude, or honor, as to a
husband, a prince, a friend; firm in the observance of duty; loyal;
of true fidelity; as, a faithful husband or servant.
4. Worthy of confidence and belief; conformable to truth ot fact;
exact; accurate; as, a faithful narrative or representation.
Syn: Trusty; honest; upright; sincere; veracious; trustworthy.

LAUD  n.
1. High commendation; praise; honor; exaltation; glory.
"Laud be to God." --Shak.
"So do well and thou shalt have laud of the same." --Tyndals.
2. A part of divine worship, consisting chiefly of praise; -- usually
in the pl.
laud v. (celebrate, glorify, honor, exalt)
\Laud\, v. i. [imp. & p. p. Lauded; p. pr. & vb. n. Lauding.]
To praise in words alone, or with words and singing; to celebrate; to
extol.
With all the company of heaven, we laud and magnify thy glorious
name. --Book of Common Prayer.
laudable - honorable, praised
\Laud"a*ble\, a. 1. Worthy of being lauded; praiseworthy;
commendable; as, laudable motives; laudable actions; laudable
ambition.
2. (Med.) Healthy; salubrious; normal; having a disposition to
promote healing.

MERCIFUL
\Mer"ci*ful\, a. [Mercy + -ful.] 1. Full of mercy; having or
exercising mercy; disposed to pity and spare offenders; unwilling to
punish.
The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious. --Ex. xxxiv. 6.
2. Unwilling to give pain; compassionate.
A merciful man will be merciful to his beast. --Old Proverb.
Syn: Compassionate; tender; humane; gracious; kind; mild; clement;
benignant. -- Mer\"ci*ful*ly, adv. -- Mer\"ci*ful*ness, n.

SHEW, v. t. [It is sometimes written shew, shewed, shewn, shewing.]
gr. to mark, perceive, hear
1. To exhibit or present to vjew; to place in sight; to display; --
the thing exhibited being the object, and often with an indirect
object denoting the person or thing seeing or beholding;
2. To exhibit to the mental vjew; to tell; to disclose; to reveal; to
make known; as, to show one's designs.
Shew them the way wherein they must walk. --Ex. xviii. 20.
3. Specifically, to make known the way to (a person); hence, to
direct; to guide; to asher; to conduct; as, to show a person into a
parlor; to show one to the door.
4. To make apparent or clear, as by evidence, testimony, or
reasoning; to prove; to explain; also, to manifest; to evince; as, to
show the truth of a statement; to show the causes of an event.
5. To bestow; to confer; to afford; as, to show favor.
Shewing mercy unto thousands of them that love me. --Ex. xx. 6.
To show forth, to manifest; to publish; to proclaim.

PITH : heart, core, center - Hebrews viij.
"Of the things which we have spoken, this is the pith: that we have
such an high priest that is sitten on the right hand of the seat of
majesty in heaven,"
1. (Bot.) The soft spongy substance in the center of the stems of
many plants and trees, especially those of the dicotyledonous or
exogenous classes. It consists of cellular tissue.
2. (a) The spongy interior substance of a feather. (b) (Anat.) The
spinal cord; the marrow.
3. Hence: The which contains the strength of life; the vital or
essential part; concentrated force; vigor; strength; importance; as,
the speech lacked pith.

nay, (a.) [a contracted word, to deny]
1. No; a word that expresses negation.
I tell you, nay: but except ye amend your lives, ye shall all
likewise perish. Luke xiij.
2. It expresses also refusal.
He that will not when he may, When he would he shall have nay.
[In these senses it is now rarely used; 'no' being substituted.]
3. Not only so; not this alone; intimating that something is to be
added by way of amplification. He requested an answer; nay, he urged
it.
4. Nay, (n.) Denial, refusal.

YEE, (also yea) adv. Ya.
1. YES; a word that expresses affirmation or assent. Will you go?
Yea. It sometimes introduces a subject, with the sense of indeed,
verily, truly, it is so.
"But your communication shall be yea, yea; nay, nay." Matthew 5.
"Yee and why judge ye not of yourselves, that which is rightwise?"
Luke 12.
2. It sometimes enforces the sense of something preceding; not only
so, but more.
"Notwithstanding by all manner ways, whether it be by occasion or of
truth, yet Christ is preached: and therefore I joy. Yee and will
joy."  Philippians 1.
3. Yee (n) An affirmative; In Scripture, it is used to denote
certainty, consistency, harmony, and stability.
"For all the promises of God, in him are Yee: and are in him Amen,
unto the laud of God thorow us."  2 Corinthians 1.

THOU (pron.) [SINGULAR: nom. Thou; poss. Thy or Thine; obj. Thee.]
The second personal pronoun, in the singular number, denoting the
person addressed; thyself; the pronoun which is used in addressing
persons in the solemn or poetical style.
Art thou he that shall come? --Matt. xi.
Thee (pron.) [Singular : the objective case of Thou]
Thine (pron.) Used to indicate the one or ones belonging to thee.
Thine (adj.) A possessive form of Thou Used instead of thy before an
initial vowel

YE : [PLURAL: nom. You; poss. Your or Yours; obj. You.]
The plural of the pronoun of the second person in the nominative case.
"But ye are washed: ye are sanctified: ye are justified by the name
of the lord Iesus: And by the spirit of our God." --1 Cor. vi.
{Note: In Old English "ye" was used only as a nominative, and "you"
only as a dative or objective. In the 16th century, however, ye and
you became confused and were often used interchangeably, both as
nominatives and objectives, and you has now superseded ye except in
solemn or poetic use.}

What more can be said of such (eloquently translated) New Testament
blessing?
Glory be to God the almighty,
and for his son Iesu Christ,
being faithfully and freely given
with such gracious might!

Hope Will Be a blessing to ye all.
Glory be to God for his son Iesu Christ the Lord.
Faithfully your net servant in Him,
Mario Valente
valente@faithofgod.net
http://faithofgod.net



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK W.T. PENTATEUCH 1530-37 AND N.T. 1525-26***


******* This file should be named 10553-8.txt or 10553-8.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/5/5/10553


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.
This particular work is one of the few copyrighted individual works
included with the permission of the copyright holder.  Information on
the copyright owner for this particular work and the terms of use
imposed by the copyright holder on this work are set forth at the
beginning of this work.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS," WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
http://www.gutenberg.net/GUTINDEX.ALL

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***
