The Project Gutenberg EBook of Notes & Queries 1850.01.19, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Notes & Queries 1850.01.19

Author: Various

Release Date: March 14, 2004 [EBook #11575]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES & QUERIES 1850.01.19 ***




Credits: Jon Ingram, Susan Lucy and PG Distributed Proofreaders.
Produced from page scans provided by Internet Library of Early
Journals.





{177} NOTES AND QUERIES:

A MEDIUM OF INTER-COMMUNICATION FOR LITERARY MEN, ARTISTS,
ANTIQUARIES, GENEALOGISTS, ETC.

       *       *       *       *       *

"When found, make a note of."--CAPTAIN CUTTLE.

       *       *       *       *       *

NO. 12.]
SATURDAY, JANUARY 19. 1850.
[Price Threepence. Stamped Edition, 4d.

       *       *       *       *       *

CONTENTS.

NOTES:--                                                   Page
  Passage in Hudibras, by E.F. Rimbault                     177
  Field of the Brothers' Footsteps                          178
  Notes on Books and Authors, by Bolton Corney              178
  Receipts of the Beggar's Opera                            178
  Notes on Cunningham's London, by E.F. Rimbault            180
  Sewerage in Etruria                                       180
  Andrew Frusius                                            180
  Opinions respecting Burnet                                181

QUERIES:--
  St. Thomas of Lancaster, by R. Monckton Milnes            181
  Shield of the Black Prince, &c. by J.R. Planch�           183
  Fraternitye of Vagabondes, &c.                            183
  The name of Shylock, by M.A. Lower                        184
  Transposition of Letters, by B. Williams                  184
  Pictures in Churches                                      184
  Flaying in Punishment of Sacrilege                        185
  Minor Queries:--Pokership or Parkership--Boduc or
  Boduoc--Origin of Snob--Mertens the Printer--
  Queen's Messengers--Bishop of Ross' Epitaph, &c.--
  Origin of Cannibal--Sir W. Rider--Origin of word
  Poghele, &c.                                              185

MISCELLANIES--including ANSWERS TO MINOR QUERIES:--
  Darkness at the Crucifixion--High Doctrine--Wife of
  King Robert Bruce--The Talisman of Charlemagne
  --Sayers the Caricaturist--May-Day--Dr. Dee's Petition
  --Lines quoted by Goethe--Queen Mary's Expectations
  --Ken's Hymns--Etymology of Daysman, &c.                  186

MISCELLANEOUS:--
  Notes on Books, Sales, Catalogues, &c.                    189
  Books and Odd Volumes wanted                              190
  Notices to Correspondents                                 190
  Advertisements                                            191

       *       *       *       *       *


ORIGIN OF A WELL-KNOWN PASSAGE IN HUDIBRAS.

The often-quoted lines--

   "For he that fights and runs away
    May live to fight another day,"

generally supposed to form a part of _Hudibras_, are to be found (as
Mr. Cunningham points out, at p. 602. of his _Handbook for London_),
in the _Musarum Delici�_, 12mo. 1656; a clever collection of "witty
trifles," by Sir John Mennis and Dr. James Smith.

The passage, as it really stands in _Hudibras_ (book iii. canto iii.
verse 243.), is as follows:--

   "For those that fly may fight again,
    Which he can never do that's slain."

But there is a much earlier authority for these lines than the
_Musarum Delici�_; a fact which I learn from a volume now open
before me, the great rarity of which will excuse my transcribing the
title-page in full:--

"Apophthegmes, that is to saie, prompte, quicke, wittie, and
sentencious saiynges, of certain Emperours, Kynges, Capitaines,
Philosophiers, and Oratours, as well Grekes as Romaines, bothe
veraye pleasaunt and profitable to reade, partely for all maner of
persones, and especially Gentlemen. First gathered and compiled in
Latine by the right famous clerke, Maister Erasmus, of Roteradame.
And now translated into Englyshe by Nicolas Udall. _Excusam typis
Ricardi Grafton_, 1542. 8vo."

A second edition was printed by John Kingston, in 1564, with no
other variation, I believe, than in the orthography. Haslewood, in a
note on the fly-leaf of my copy, says:--

"Notwithstanding the fame of Erasmus, and the reputation of his
translator, this volume has not obtained that notice which, either
from its date or value, might be justly expected. Were its claim
only founded on the colloquial notes of Udall, it is entitled to
consideration, as therein may be traced several of the familiar
phrases and common-place idioms, which have occasioned many
conjectural speculations among the annotators upon our early drama."

The work consists of only two books of the original, comprising the
apophthegms of Socrates, Aristippus, Diogenes, Philippus, Alexander,
Antigonus, Augustus C�sar, Julius C�sar, Pompey, Phocion, Cicero,
and Demosthenes.

On folio 239. occurs the following apophthegm, which is the one
relating to the subject before us:--

   "That same man, that renneth awaie,
    May again fight, on other daie.

   "� Judgeyng that it is more for the benefite of
    one's countree to renne awaie in battaile, then to lese
    his life. For a ded man can fight no more; but who
    hath saved hymself alive, by rennyng awaie, may, in
    many battailles mo, doe good service to his countree.

   "� At lest wise, if it be a poinet of good service, to
    renne awaie at all times, when the countree hath most
    neede of his helpe to sticke to it."

Thus we are enabled to throw back more than a century these famous
Hudibrastic lines, which have occasioned so many inquiries for their
origin.

I take this opportunity of noticing a mistake which has frequently
been made concerning the _French_ translation of Butler's
_Hudibras_. Tytler, in his _Essay on Translation_; Nichols, in his
_Biographical Anecdotes of Hogarth_; and Ray, in his {178} _History
of the Rebellion_, attributes it to Colonel Francis Towneley;
whereas it was the work of _John_ Towneley, uncle to the celebrated
Charles Towneley, the collector of the Marbles.

EDWARD F. RIMBAULT.

       *       *       *       *       *


FIELD OF THE BROTHERS' FOOTSTEPS.

I do not think that Mr. Cunningham, in his valuable work, has given
any account of a piece of ground of which a strange story is
recorded by Southey, in his _Common-Place Book_ (Second Series, p.
21.). After quoting a letter received from a friend, recommending
him to "take a view of those wonderful marks of the Lord's hatred to
_duelling_, called _The Brothers' Steps_," and giving him the
description of the locality, Mr. Southey gives an account of his own
visit to the spot (a field supposed to bear ineffaceable marks of
the footsteps of two brothers, who fought a fatal duel about a love
affair) in these words:--"We sought for near half an hour in vain.
We could find no steps at all, within a quarter of a mile, no nor
half a mile, of Montague House. We were almost out of hope, when an
honest man who was at work directed us to the next ground adjoining
to a pond. There we found what we sought, about three quarters of a
mile north of Montague House, and about 500 yards east of Tottenham
Court Road. The steps answer Mr. Walsh's description. They are of
the size of a large human foot, about three inches deep, and lie
nearly from north-east to south-west. We counted only seventy-six,
but we were not exact in counting. The place where one or both the
brothers are supposed to have fallen, is still bare of grass. The
labourer also showed us the bank where (the tradition is) the
wretched woman sat to see the combat."

Mr. Southey then goes on the speak of his full confidence in the
tradition of their indestructibility, even after ploughing up, and
of the conclusions to be drawn from the circumstance.

To this long note, I beg to append a query, as to the latest account
of these footsteps, previous to the ground being built over, as it
evidently now must be.

G.H.B.

       *       *       *       *       *


ON AUTHORS AND BOOKS, NO. 4.

Verse may picture the feelings of the author, or it may only picture
his fancy. To assume the former position, is not always safe; and in
two memorable instances a series of sonnets has been used to
construct a _baseless fabric_ of biography.

In the accompanying sonnet, there is no such uncertainty. It was
communicated to me by John Adamson, Esq., M.R.S.L., &c., honourably
known by a translation of the tragedy of _Dona Ignez de Castro_,
from the Portuguese of Nicola Luiz, and by a _Memoir of the life and
writings of Camoens_, &c. It was not intended for publication, but
now appears, at my request.

Mr. Adamson, it should be stated, is a corresponding member of the
Royal Academy of Sciences of Lisbon, and has received diplomas of
the orders of Christ and the Tower-and-Sword. The _coming storm_
alludes to the menace of invasion by France.


"SONNET.

 "O Portugal! whene'er I see thy name
    What proud emotions rise within my breast!
  To _thee_ I owe--from _thee_ derive that fame
    Which here may linger when I lie at rest.
  When as a youth I landed on thy shore,
    How little did I think I e'er could be
    Worthy the honours thou has giv'n to me;
  And when the coming storm I did deplore,
  Drove me far from thee by its hostile threat--
  With feelings which can never be effaced,
    I learn'd to commune with those writers old
    Who had the deeds of they great chieftains told;
  Departed bards in converse sweet I met,
  I'd seen where they had liv'd--the land Camoens grac'd."

I venture to add the titles of two interesting volumes which have
been printed subsequently to the publications of Lowndes and Martin.
It may be a useful hint to students and collectors:--

"BIBLIOTHECA LUSITANA, or catalogue of books and tracts, relating to
the history, literature, and poetry, of Portugal: forming part of
the library of John Adamson, M.R.S.L. etc. _Newcastle on Tyne_, 1836.
8vo.

"LUSITANIA ILLUSTRATA; notices on the history, antiquities,
literature, etc. of Portugal. Literary department. Part I. Selection
of sonnets, with biographical Sketches of the author, by John
Adamson, M.R.S.L. etc. _Newcastle upon Tyne_, 1842. 8vo."

BOLTON CORNEY.

       *       *       *       *       *


RECEIPTS TO THE BEGGAR'S OPERA ON ITS PRODUCTION.

Every body is aware of the prodigious and unexpected success of
Gay's _Beggar's Opera_ on its first production; it was offered to
Colley Cibber at Drury Lane, and refused, and the author took it to
Rich, at the Lincoln's-Inn-Fields theatre, by whom it was accepted,
but not without hesitation. It ran for 62 nights (not 63 nights, as
has been stated in some authorities) in the season of 1727-1728; of
these, 32 nights were in succession; and, from the original
Account-book of the manager, C.M. Rich, I am enabled to give an
exact statement of the money taken at the doors on each night,
distinguishing such performances as were for the benefit of the
author, viz. the 3rd, 6th, 9th, and 15th nights, which put exactly
693l. 13s. 6d. into Gay's pocket. This is a new circumstance in the
biography of one of our most fascinating English writers, whether in
prose or verse. Rich records that the king, queen, and {179}
princesses were present on the 21st repetition, but that was by no
means one of the fullest houses. The very bill sold at the doors on
the occasion has been preserved, and hereafter may be furnished for
the amusement of your readers. It appears, that when the run of the
_Beggar's Opera_ was somewhat abruptly terminated by the advance of
the season and the benefits of the actors, the "takings," as they
were and still are called, were larger than ever. The performances
commenced on 29th January, 1728, and that some striking novelty was
required at the Lincoln's-Inn-Fields theatre, to improve the
prospects of the manager, may be judged from the fact that the new
tragedy of _Sesostris_, brought out on the 17th January, was played
for the benefit of its author (John Sturm) on its 6th night to only
58l. 19s., while the house was capable of holding at least 200l.

In the following statement of the receipts to the _Beggar's Opera_,
I have not thought it necessary to insert the days of the months:--

                                �    s.   d.
    Night  1   -     -     -   169   12   0
           2   -     -     -   160   14   0
 (Author)  3   -     -     -   162   12   6
           4   -     -     -   163    5   6
           5   -     -     -   175   19   6
 (Author)  6   -     -     -   189   11   0
           7   -     -     -   161   19   0
           8   -     -     -   157   19   6
 (Author)  9   -     -     -   165   12   0
          10   -     -     -   156    8   0
          11   -     -     -   171   10   0
          12   -     -     -   170    5   6
          13   -     -     -   164    8   0
          14   -     -     -   171    5   0
 (Author) 15   -     -     -   175   18   0
          16   -     -     -   160   11   0
          17   -     -     -   171    8   6
          18   -     -     -   163   16   6
          19   -     -     -   158   19   0
          20   -     -     -   170    9   6
          21   -     -     -   163   14   6
          22   -     -     -   163   17   6
          23   -     -     -   179    8   6
          24   -     -     -   161    7   0
          25   -     -     -   169    3   6
          26   -     -     -   163   18   6
          27   -     -     -   168    4   6
          28   -     -     -   153    3   6
          29   -     -     -   165    2   6
          30   -     -     -   152    8   6
          31   -     -     -   183    4   0
          32   -     -     -   185    8   6

Therefore, when the run was interrupted, the attraction of the opera
was greater than it had been on any previous night, excepting the
6th, which was one of those set apart for the remuneration of the
author, when the receipt was 189l. 11s. The total sum realised by
the 32 successive performances was 5351l. 15s., of which, as we have
already shown, Gay obtained 693l. 13s 6d. To him it was all clear
profit; but from the sum obtained by Rich are, of course, to be
deducted the expenses of the company, lights, house-rent, &c.

The successful career of the piece was checked, as I have said, by
the intervention of benefits, and the manager would not allow it to
be repeated even for Walker's and Miss Fenton's nights, the Macheath
and Polly of the opera; but, in order to connect the latter with it,
when Miss Fenton issued her bill for _The Beaux's Stratagem_, on
29th April, it was headed that it was "for the benefit of Polly." An
exception was, however, made in favour of John Rich, the brother of
the manager, for whose benefit the _Beggar's Opera_ was played on
26th February, when the receipt was 184l. 15s. Miss Fenton was
allowed a second benefit, on the 4th May, in consequence, we may
suppose, of her great claims in connection with the _Beggar's
Opera_, and then it was performed to a house containing 155l. 4s.
The greatest recorded receipt, in its first season, was on the 13th
April, when, for some unexplained cause the audience was so numerous
that 198l. 17s. were taken at the doors.

After this date there appears to have been considerable fluctuation
in the profits derived from repetitions of the _Beggar's Opera_. On
the 5th May, the day after Polly Fenton's (her real name was
Lavinia) second benefit, the proceeds fell to 78l. 14s., the 50th
night produced 69l. 12s., and the 51st only 26l. 1s. 6d. The next
night the receipt suddenly rose again to 134l. 13s. 6d., and it
continued to range between 53l. and 105l. until the 62nd and last
night (19th June), when the sum taken was 98l. 17s. 6d.

Miss Fenton left the stage at the end of the season, to be made
Duchess of Bolton, and in the next season her place, as regards the
_Beggar's Opera_, was taken by Miss Warren, and on 20th September it
attracted 75l. 7s.; at the end of November it drew only 23l., yet,
on the 11th December, for some reason not stated by the manager, the
takings amounted to 112l. 9s. 6d. On January 1st a new experiment
was tried with the opera, for it was represented by children, and
the Prince of Wales commanded it on one or more of the eight
successive performances it thus underwent. On 5th May we find Miss
Cantrell taking Miss Warren's character, and in the whole, the
_Beggar's Opera_ was acted more than forty times in its second year,
1728-9, including the performances by "Lilliputians" as well as
comedians. This is, perhaps, as much of its early history as your
readers will care about.

DRAMATICUS.

       *       *       *       *       *


{180} NOTES UPON CUNNINGHAM'S HANDBOOK FOR LONDON.

_Lady Dacre's Alms-Houses, or Emanuel Hospital._--"Jan. 8. 1772,
died, in Emanual Hospital, Mrs. Wyndymore, cousin of Mary, queen of
William III., as well as of Queen Anne. Strange revolution of
fortune, that the cousin of two queens should, for fifty years, by
supported by charity."--_MS. Diary_, quoted in Collett's _Relics of
Literature_, p. 310.

_Essex Buildings._--"On Thursday next, the 22nd of this instant,
November, at the _Musick-school in Essex Buildings_, over against
St. Clement's Church in the Strand, will be continued a concert of
vocal and instrumental musick, beginning at five of the clock, every
evening. Composed by Mr. Banister."--_Lond. Gazette_, Nov. 18.
1678. "This famous 'musick-room' was afterwards Paterson's
auction-room."--Pennant's _Common-place Book_.

_St. Antholin's._--In Thorpe's Catalogue of MSS. for 1836 appears
for sale, Art. 792., "The Churchwarden's Accounts, from 1615 to
1752, of the Parish of _St. Antholin's_, London." Again, in the same
Catalogue, Art. 793., "The Churchwardens and Overseers of the Parish
of _St. Antholin's_, in London, Accounts from 1638 to 1700
inclusive." Verily these books have been in the hands of "unjust
stewards!"

_Clerkenwell._--Names of eminent persons residing in this parish in
1666:--Earl of Carlisle, Earl of Essex, Earl of Aylesbury, Lord
Barkely, Lord Townsend, Lord Dellawar, Lady Crofts, Lady Wordham,
Sir John Keeling, Sir John Cropley, Sir Edward Bannister, Sir
Nicholas Stroude, Sir Gower Barrington, Dr. King, Dr. Sloane. In
1667-8:--Duke of Newcastle, Lord Baltimore, Lady Wright, Lady Mary
Dormer, Lady Wyndham, Sir Erasmus Smith, Sir Richard Cliverton, Sir
John Burdish, Sir Goddard Nelthorpe, Sir John King, Sir William
Bowles, Sir William Boulton.--_Extracted from a MS. in the late Mr.
Upcott's Collection._

_Tyburn Gallows._--No. 49. Connaught Square, is built on the spot
where this celebrated gallows stood; and, in the lease granted by
the Bishop of London, this is particularly mentioned.

EDWARD F. RIMBAULT.

       *        *        *        *        *


SEWERAGE IN ETRURIA.

I have been particularly struck, in reading _The Cities and
Cemeteries of Etruria_, of George Dennis, by the great disparity
there appears between the ancient population of this country and the
present.

The ancient population appears, moreover, to have been located in
circumstances not by any means favourable to the health of the
people. Those cities surrounded by high walls, and entered by
singularly small gateways, must have been very badly ventilated, and
very unfavourable to health; and yet it is not reasonable to suppose
they could have been so unhealthy then as the author describes the
country at present to be. It is hardly possible to imagine so great
a people as the Etruscans, the wretched fever-stricken objects the
present inhabitants of the Maremna are described to be.

To what, then, can this great difference be ascribed? The Etruscans
appear to have taken very great pains with the drainage of their
cities; on many sites the cloaca are the only remains of their
former industry and greatness which remain. They were also careful
to bury their dead outside their city walls; and it is, no doubt, to
these two circumstances, principally, that their increase and
greatness, as a people, are to be ascribed. But why do not the
present inhabitants avail themselves of the same means to health? Is
it that they are idle, or are they too broken spirited and
poverty-stricken to unite in any public work? Or has the climate
changed?

Perhaps it was owing to some defect in their civil polity that the
ancients were comparatively so easily put down by the Roman power,
which might have been the superior civilisation. Possibly the great
majority of the people may have been dissatisfied with their rulers,
and gladly removed to another place and another form of government.
It is even possible, and indeed likely, that these great public
works may have been carried on by the forced labour of the poorest
and, consequently, the most numerous class of the population, and
that, consequently, they had no particular tie to their native city,
as being only a hardship to them; and they may even have had a
dislike to sewers in themselves, as reminding them of their bondage,
and which dislike their descendants have inherited, and for which
they are now suffering. At any rate, it is an instructive example to
our present citizens of the value of drainage and sanitary
arrangements, and shows that the importance of these things was
recognised and appreciated in the earliest times.

C.P.F.

       *        *        *        *        *


ANDREW FRUSIUS--ANDR� DES FREUX.

Many of your readers, as well as "ROTERODAMUS," will be ready to
acknowledge their obligation to Mr. Bruce for his prompt
identification of the author of the epigram against Erasmus (pp. 27,
28.). I have just referred to the catalogue of the library of this
university, and I regret to say that we have no copy of any of the
works of Frusius. Mr. Bruce says he knows nothing of Frusius as an
author. I believe there is no mention of him in any English
bibliographical or biographical work. There is, however, a notice
{181} of him in the _Biographie Universelle_, vol. xvi. (Paris), and
in the _Biografia Universale_, vol. xxi. (Venezia). As these works
have, perhaps, found their way into very few private English
libraries, I send you the following sketch, which will probably be
acceptable to your readers. It is much to be lamented that
sufficient encouragement cannot be given in this country for the
production of a _Universal Biography_. Roses's work, which promised
to be a giant, dwindled down to a miserable pigmy; and that under
"The Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge" was strangled in
its birth.

Andr� des Freux, better known by his Latin name, Frusius, was born
at Chartres, in the beginning of the sixteenth century. He embraced
the life of an ecclesiastic, and obtained the cure of Thiverval,
which he held many years with great credit to himself. The high
reputation of Ignatius Loyola, who was then at Rome, with authority
from the Holy See to found the Society of the Jesuits, led Frusius
to that city, where he was admitted a member of the new order in
1541, and shortly after became secretary to Loyola. He contributed
to the establishment of the Society at Parma, Venice, and many towns
of Italy and Sicily. He was the first Jesuit who taught the Greek
language at Messina; he also gave public lectures on the Holy
Scriptures in Rome. He was appointed Rector of the German College at
Rome, shortly before his death, which occurred on the 25th of
October, 1556, three months and six days after the death of Loyola.
Frusius had studied, with equal success, theology, medicine, and
law: he was a good mathematician, an excellent musician, and made
Latin verses with such facility, that he composed them, on the
instant, on all sorts of subjects. But these verses were neither so
elegant nor so harmonious, as Alegambe asserts[1], since he adds,
that it requires close attention to distinguish them from prose.
Frusius translated, from Spanish into Latin, the _Spiritual
Exercises_ of Loyola. He was the author of the following works:--Two
small pieces, in verse, _De Verborum et Rerum Copia_, and _Summa
Latin� Syntaxeos_: these were published in several different places;
_Theses Collect� ex Interpretatione Geneseos; Assertiones
Theologic�_, Rome, 1554; _Poemata_, Cologne, 1558--this collection
often reprinted at Lyons, Antwerp and Tournon, contains 255[2]
epigrams against the heretics, amongst whom he places Erasmus;--a
poem _De Agno Dei_; and, lastly, another poem, entitled _Echo de
Presenti Christian� Religionis Calamitate_, which has been sometimes
cited as an example of a great _difficult� vaincue_. The edition of
Tournon contains also a poem, _De Simplicitate_, of which Alegambe
speaks with praise. To Frusius was also owing an edition of
Martial's _Epigrams_, divested of their obscenities.

EDW. VENTRIS.
Cambridge, Jan. 10. 1850.

[Our valued correspondent, MR. MACCABE, has also informed us that
the "_Epigrams_ of Frusius were published at Antwerp, 1582, in 8vo.,
and at Cologne, 1641, in 12mo. See Feller's _Biographie_."]

    [1] I presume in his _Bibliotheca Scriptorum Societatis
    Jesu_.

    [2] Duthilloeul, according to Mr. Bruce, says 251.

       *       *       *       *       *


OPINIONS RESPECTING BURNET

A small _catena patrum_ has been given respecting Burnet, as a
historian, in No. 3. pp. 40, 41., to which two more _scriptorum
judicia_ have been appended in No. 8. p. 120., by "I.H.M.". As a
sadly disparaging opinion had been quoted, at p. 40., from Lord
Dartmouth, I hope you will allow the following remarks on the
testimony of that nobleman to appear in your columns:--

   "No person has contradicted Burnet more frequently,
    or with more asperity, than Dartmouth. Yet
    Dartmouth wrote, 'I do not think he designedly published
    anything he believed to be false.' At a later
    period, Dartmouth, provoked by some remarks on
    himself in the second volume of the Bishop's history,
    retracted this praise; but to such a retraction little
    importance can be attached. Even Swift has the
    justice to say, 'After all he was a man of generosity and
    good nature.'"--_Short Remarks on Bishop Burnet's History_.

   "It is usual to censure Burnet as a singularly inaccurate
    historian; but I believe the charge to be
    altogether unjust. He appears to be singularly inaccurate
    only because his narrative has been subjected to
    a scrutiny singularly severe and unfriendly. If any
    Whig thought it worth while to subject Reresby's
    _Memoirs_, North's _Examen_, Mulgrave's _Account of the
    Revolution_, or the _Life of James the Second_, edited by
    Clarke, to a similar scrutiny, it would soon appear that
    Burnet was far indeed from being the most inexact
    writer of his time."--Macaulay, _Hist. England_, vol. ii.
    p.177, 3rd. Ed.

T.
Bath.

       *       *       *       *       *


QUERIES

SAINT THOMAS OF LANCASTER.

Sir,--I am desirous of information respecting the religious
veneration paid to the memory of Thomas, Earl of Lancaster,
cousin-german to King Edward the Second. He was taken in open
rebellion against the King on the 16th of March, 1322, condemned by
a court-martial, and executed, with circumstances of great
indignity, on the rising ground above the castle of Pomfret, which
at the time was in his possession. His body was probably given to
the monks of the adjacent priory; and soon after his death miracles
were said to be performed at his tomb, and at the place of {182}
execution; a curious record of which is preserved in the library of
Corpus Christi College, at Cambridge, and introduced by Brady into
his history of the period. About the same time, a picture or image
of him seems to have been exhibited in St. Paul's Church, in London,
and to have been the object of many offerings. A special
proclamation was issued, denouncing this veneration of the memory of
a traitor, and threatening punishment on those who encouraged it;
and a statement is given by Brady of the opinions of an
ecclesiastic, who thought it very doubtful how far this devotion
should be encouraged by the Church, the Earl of Lancaster, besides
his political offences, having been a notorious evil-liver.

As soon, however, as the King's party was subdued, and the unhappy
sovereign, whose acts and habits had excited so much animosity,
cruelly put to death, we find not only the political character of
the Earl of Lancaster vindicated, his attainder reversed, his
estates restored to his family, and his adherents re-established in
all their rights and liberties, but within five weeks of the
accession of Edward the Third, a special mission was sent to the
Pope from the King, imploring the appointment of a commission to
institute the proper canonical investigation for his admission into
the family of saints. His character and his cause are described, in
florid language, as having been those of a Christian hero; and the
numberless miracles wrought in his name, and the confluence of
pilgrims to his tomb, are presumed to justify his invocation.

In June of the same year (1327), a "king's letter" is given to
Robert de Weryngton, authorising him and his agents to collect alms
throughout the kingdom for the purpose of building a chapel on the
hill where the Earl was beheaded, and praying all prelates and
authorities to give him aid and heed. This sanction gave rise to
imposture; and in December a proclamation appeared, ordering the
arrest and punishment of unauthorised persons collecting money under
this pretence, and taking it for their own use.

In 1330, the same clerical personages were sent again to the Pope,
to advance the affair of the canonization of the Earl, and were
bearers of letters on the same subject from the King to five of the
cardinals, all urging the attention of the Papal court to a subject
that so much interested the Church and people of England.

It would seem, however, that some powerful opposition to this
request was at work at the Roman see. For in the April of the
following year another commission, composed of a professor of
theology, a military personage, and a magistrate of the name of John
de Newton, was sent with letters to the Pope, to nine cardinals, to
the referendary of the Papal court, and to three nephews of his
Holiness, entreating them not to give ear to the invectives of
malignant men ("commenta fictitia maliloquorum"), who here asserted
that the Earl of Lancaster consented to, or connived at, some injury
or insult offered to certain cardinals at Durham in the late king's
reign. So far from this being true, the letters assert that the earl
defended these prelates to the utmost of his power, protected them
from enemies who had designs on their lives, and placed them in
security at his own great peril. The main point of the canonization
is again urged, and allusion made to former repeated supplications,
and the sacred promise, "Knock, and it shall be opened unto you,"
appealed to. The vindication of the Earl from the malicious charge
against him is omitted in the letters to two of the cardinals and
the lay personages. Were these the two cardinals who fancied
themselves injured?

This, then, is all I can discover in the ordinary historical
channels respecting this object of ancient public reverence in
England. The chapel was constructed and officiated in till the
dissolution of the monasteries; the image in St. Paul's was always
regarded with special affection; and the cognomen of _Saint_ Thomas
of Lancaster was generally accepted and understood.

Five hundred years after the execution of the Earl of Lancaster, a
large stone coffin, massive and roughly hewn, was found in a field
that belonged of old to the Priory of Pomfret, but at least a
quarter of a mile distant from the hill where the chapel stood.
Within was the skeleton of a full-grown man, partially preserved;
the skull lay between the thighs. There is no record of the
decapitation of any person at Pomfret of sufficient dignity to have
been interred in a manner showing so much care for the preservation
of the body, except the Earl of Lancaster. The coffin may have been
removed here at the time the opposite party forbade its veneration,
from motives of precaution for its safety.

Now, I shall be much obliged for information on the following
points:--

Is any thing known, beyond what I have stated, as to the
communications with Rome on the subject of his canonization, or as
to the means by which he was permitted by the English church to
become a fit object for invocation and veneration?

What are the chief historical grounds that endeared his memory to
the Church or the people? The compassion for his signal fall can
hardly account for this, although a similar motive was sufficient to
bring to the tomb of Edward II., in Gloucester Cathedral, an amount
of offerings that added considerably to the splendour of the
edifice.

Are any anecdotes or circumstances recorded, respecting the worship
of this saint in later times, than I have referred to?

{183} What is the historic probability that the stone coffin,
discovered in 1822, contained the remains of this remarkable man?

I have no doubt that much curious and valuable matter might be
discovered, by pursuing into the remote receptacles of historical
knowledge the lives and characters of persons who have become, in
Catholic times, the unauthorised objects of popular religious
reverence after death.

RICH. MONCKTON MILNES.
26. Pall Mall, Jan. 12th.

[To this interesting communication we may add that "_The Office of
St. Thomas of Lancaster_," which begins,

    "Gaude Thoma, ducum decus, lucerna Lancastri�,"

is printed in the volume of "_Political Songs_" edited by Mr. Wright
for the Camden Society, from a Royal MS. in the British Museum.--MS.
Reg. 12.]

       *       *       *       *       *


SHIELD OF THE BLACK PRINCE--SWORD OF CHARLES I.

In Bolton's _Elements of Armories_, 1610, p. 67., is an engraving of
a very interesting shield, of the kind called "Pavoise," which at
that period hung over the tomb of Edward the Black Prince, at
Canterbury, in addition to the shield still remaining there. Bolton
says, "The sayd victorious Princes tombe is in the goodly Cathedral
Church erected to the honour of Christ, in Canterburie; there
(beside his quilted coat-armour, with half-sleeves, Taberd fashion,
and his triangular shield, both of them painted with the royall
armories of our kings, and differenced with silver labels) hangs
this kind of Pavis or Target, curiously (for those times) embost and
painted, and the Scutcheon in the bosse being worne out, and the
Armes (which, it seemes, were the same with his coate armour, and
not any particular devise) defaced, and is altogether of the same
kinde with that upon which (Froissard reports) the dead body of the
Lord Robert of Dvras, and nephew to the Cardinall of Pierregoort,
was laid, and sent unto that Cardinale, from the Battell of
Poictiers, where the Blacke Prince obtained a Victorie, the renowne
whereof is immortale."

Can any of your correspondents inform me when this most interesting
relic disappeared? Sandford, whose _Genealogical History_ was
published some sixty or seventy years later, says, "On an iron barr
over the Tombe are placed the Healme and Crest, Coat of Maile, and
Gantlets, and, on a pillar near thereunto, his shield of Armes,
richly diapred with gold, all which he is said to have used in
Battel;" but he neither mentions the missing "Pavoise," engraved in
Bolton, or the scabbard of the sword which yet remains, the sword
itself having been taken away, according to report, by Oliver
Cromwell. Did that unscrupulous Protector(?) take away the "Pavoise"
at the same time, or order his Ironsides to "remove that
bauble?"--and how came he to spare the helmet, jupon, gauntlets,
shield, and _scabbard_? I have strong doubts of his being the
purloiner of the sword. The late Mr. Stothard, who mentions the
report, does not quote his authority. I will add another query, on a
similar subject:--When did the _real_ sword of Charles the First's
time, which, but a few years back, hung at the side of that
monarch's equestrian figure at Charing Cross, disappear?--and what
has become of it? The question was put, at my suggestion, to the
official authorities, by the secretary of the British Arch�ological
Association; but no information could be obtained on the subject.
That the sword _was_ a real one of that period, I state upon the
authority of my lamented friend, the late Sir Samuel Meyrick, who
had ascertained the fact, and pointed out to me its loss.

J.R. PLANCH�.

       *       *       *       *       *


FRATENRNITYE OF VAGABONDES--REV. MR. GENESSE--RED MAIDS.

[We have for some time past been obliged, by want of space, to omit
all the kind expressions towards ourselves, in which friendly
correspondents are apt to indulge; but there is something so unusual
in the way in which the following letter begins, that we have done
violence to our modesty, in order to admit the comments of our
kind-hearted correspondent. We have no doubt that all his questions
will be answered in due course.]

Never, during my life (more than half a century), do I remember
hailing the appearance of any new publication with such unfeigned
delight. I had hugged myself on having the friendship of a certain
"BOOKWORM," possessing a curious library, of some three or four
thousand volumes; how much must I have rejoiced, therefore, at
finding that, through the medium of your invaluable journal, my
literary friends were likely to be increased one hundred-fold; and
that, for the small sum of three pence weekly, I could command the
cordial co-operation, when at a loss, of all the first scholars,
antiquaries, and literary men of the country; that without the
trouble of attending meetings, &c., I could freely become a member
of the "Society of Societies;" that the four thousand volumes, to
which I had, previously, access, were increased more than ten
thousand-fold. It is one of the peculiar advantages of literary
accumulation, that it is only by diffusing the knowledge of the
materials amassed, and the information gained, that their value is
felt. Unlike the miser, the scholar and antiquary, by expending, add
to the value of their riches.

Permit me to avail myself of the "good the bounteous gods have sent
me," and make one or two inquiries through the medium of your
columns. {184} In the first place, can any of your readers inform me
by whom a pamphlet, of the Elizabethan period, noticed in the
_Censura Literaria_, and entitled _The Fraternitye of Vagabondes_,
was reprinted, some years since?--Was it by Machelle Stace, of
Scotland Yard, who died a brother of the Charter-House?

In the second place, can any of your clerical readers tell me where
I can find any account of the late Rev. Mr. Genesse, of Bath, author
of a _History of the Stage_, in ten volumes, one of the most
elaborate and entertaining works ever published, which must have
been a labour of love, and the labour of a life?

And, in the third and last place, I find, in the _Bristol Gazette_
of the early part of last month, the following paragraph:--"THE RED
MAIDS, 120 in number, enjoyed their annual dinner in honour of the
birthday of their great benefactor, Alderman Whitson. The dinner
consisted of joints of _veal_ (which they only have on this
occasion), and some dozens of plum puddings. The mayor and Mayoress
attended, and were much pleased to witness the happy faces of the
girls, to whom the Mayoress distributed one shilling each."

Can any of your curious contributors give me any account of these
_Red Maids_?--why they are so called, &c., &c.?--and, in fact, of
the charity in general?

It will not be one of the least of many benefits of your
publication, that, in noticing from time to time the real intention
of many ancient charitable bequests, the purposes of the original
benevolent founder may be restored to their integrity, and the
charity devoted to the use of those for whom it was intended, and
who will receive it as a charity, and not, as is too often the case,
be swallowed up as a mere place,--or worse, a sinecure.

ARTHUR GRIFFINHOOF, JUN.

       *        *        *        *        *


THE NAME OF SHYLOCK.

Dr. Farmer has stated that Shakspere took the name which he has
given to one of the leading characters in the _Merchant of Venice_
from a pamphlet entitled _Caleb Shilloche, or the Jew's Prediction_.
The date of the pamphlet, however, being some years posterior to
that of the play, renders this origin impossible. Mr. C. Knight, who
points out this error, adds--"_Scialac_ was the name of a Marionite
of Mount Libanus."

But "query," Was not _Shylock_ a proper name among the Jews, derived
from the designation employed by the patriarch Jacob in predicting
the advent of the Messiah--"until _Shiloh_ come"? (Gen. xlix. 10.)
The objection, which might be urged, that so sacred a name would not
have been applied by an ancient Jew to his child, has not much
weight, when we recollect that some Christians have not shrunk from
the blasphemous imposition of the name _Emanuel_ ("God with us")
upon their offspring. St. Jerome manifestly reads SHILOACH, for he
translates it by _Qui mittendus est. (Lond. Encyc_. in voc.
"Shiloh.") Now the difference between _Shiloach_ and _Shylock_ is
very trivial indeed. I shall be very glad to have the opinion of
some of your numerous and able contributors on this point.

But, after all, Shylock may have been a _family name_ familiar to
the great dramatist. In all my researches on the subject of _English
surnames,_ however, I have but once met with it as a generic
distinction. In the _Battel Abbey Deeds_ (penes Sir T. Phillipps,
Bart.) occurs a power of attorney from John Pesemershe, Esq., to
_Richard Shylok_, of Hoo, co. Sussex, and others, to deliver seizin
of all his lands in Sussex to certain persons therein named. The
date of this document is July 4, 1435.

MARK ANTONY LOWER.

       *        *        *        *        *


TRANSPOSITION OF LETTERS.

I should be obliged if any of your readers would give me the reason
for the transposition of certain letters, chiefly, but not
exclusively, in proper names, which has been effected in the course
of time.

The name of our Queen Bertha was, in the seventh century, written
Beorhte.

The Duke Brythnoth's name was frequently written Byrthnoth, in the
tenth century.

In Eardweard, we have dropped the _a_; in Ealdredesgate, the _e_. In
Aedwini, we have dropped the first letter (or have sometimes
transposed it), although, I think, we are wrong; for the given name
Adwin has existed in my own family for several centuries.

John was always written Jhon till about the end of the sixteenth
century; and in Chaucer's time, the word _third_, as every body
knows, was written _thridde_, or _thrydde_. I believe that the _h_
in Jhon was introduced, as it was in other words in German, to give
force to the following vowel. Certain letters were formerly used in
old French in like manner, which were dropped upon the introduction
of the accents.

B. WILLIAMS.
Hillingdon, Jan. 5.

       *        *        *        *        *


PICTURES OF QUEEN ELIZABETH AND CHARLES I. IN CHURCHES.

Your correspondent "R.O." will find two pictures of Charles I. of
the same allegorical character as that described by him in his note
(_ant�_, p. 137.), one on the wall of the stairs leading to the
north gallery of the church of St. Botolph, Bishopsgate, and the
other in the hall of the law courts in Guildhall Yard. I know
nothing of the history of the first-mentioned picture; the latter,
until within a few years, hung on the wall, above the {185} gallery,
in the church of St. Olave, Jewry, when, upon the church undergoing
repair, it was taken down, and, by the parishioners, presented to
the corporation of London, who placed it in its present position. In
the church of St. Olave there were two other pictures hung in the
gallery, one representing the tomb of Queen Elizabeth, copied from
the original at Westminster, the other of Time on the Wing,
inscribed with various texts from Scripture. Both these pictures
were presented at the same time with the picture of Charles I. to
the corporation, and are now in the hall in Guildhall Yard. The
representation of Queen Elizabeth's tomb is to be met with, I
believe, in some other of the London churches. The picture in
Bishopsgate Church is fully described in the 1st vol. of Malcolm's
_Londinium Redivivum_, p. 243., and the St. Olave's pictures are
mentioned in the 4th vol. of the same work, p. 563. Malcolm states
he was not able to find any account of the Bishopsgate painting in
the parish books. Hitherto I have not been able to discover anything
connected with the history of the St. Olave's pictures, which, as
the old church was destroyed in the great fire of 1666, were
doubtless placed there subsequently to that year. I shall be glad if
any of your readers can throw any light as to the time when, and the
circumstances under which, such pictures as I have mentioned,
referring to Queen Elizabeth and Charles I., were placed in our
churches.

JAMES CROSBY.

       *       *       *       *       *


FLAYING IN PUNISHMENT OF SACRILEGE.

In the _Journal of the Arch�ological Institute_, for September,
1848, there are some most interesting notes on the subject of
"Flaying in Punishment of Sacrilege," by Mr. Way. Since then I have
felt peculiar interest in the facts and traditions recorded by Mr.
Way. Can any of your correspondents, or Mr. Way himself, give any
further references to authors by whom the subject is mentioned,
besides those named in the paper to which I allude? A few weeks ago
I received a piece of skin, stated to be human, and taken from the
door of the parish church of Hadstock, in Essex. Together with this
I received a short written paper, apparently written some fifty
years ago, which ascribes the fact of human skin being found on the
door of that church, to the punishment, _not_ of _sacrilege_, but of
a somewhat different crime. The piece of skin has been pronounced to
be human by the highest authority. As the above query might lead to
some lengthy "notes," I desire only to be informed of the titles of
any works, ancient or modern, in which distinct mention, or
allusion, is made of the punishment of flaying.

R.V.
Winchester.

       *       *       *       *       *


MINOR QUERIES.

_Pokership or Parkership_.--In Collins' _Peerage_, vol. iv. p. 242.,
5th edition, 1779, we are told that Sir Robert Harley, of Wigmore
Castle, in 1604, was made Forester of Boringwood, alias Bringwood
Forest, in com. Hereford, _with the office of the 'Pokership_,' and
custody of the forest or chase of Prestwood for life. The same word
occurs in the edition (the 3rd) of 1741, and in that edited by Sir
Egerton Brydges in 1812 (vol. iv. p. 57.).

If _Pokership_ be not a misprint or misreading of the original
authority, viz. _Pat. 2. Jac. I._ p. 21., for _Parkership_, can any
of your readers tell me the meaning of "the _Pokership_," which is
not to be found in any book of reference within my reach? I like the
"NOTES AND QUERIES" very much.

Audley End, Jan. 9. 1850.
BRAYBROOKE.


_Boduc or Boduoc on British Coins._--I observe there is a prevailing
opinion that the inscription on the British coin, "Boduc or Boduoc,"
must be intended for the name of our magnanimous Queen Boadicea. I
am sorry to cast a cloud over so pleasant a vision, but your little
book of QUERIES tempts me to throw in a doubt.

Although the name Budic is not met with in the pedigrees of England,
commonly given by Welsh heralds, yet it is often found among the
families of the Welsh in Brittany, and as they are reported to be
early descendants of the Welsh of England, there can be little doubt
that the name was once common in England. I beg leave, therefore, to
_query_, Whether the inscription is not intended for a Regulus of
Britain of that name?

P.


_The Origin of the word Snob._--Can any of your valuable
correspondents give me the origin or derivation of the word Snob?

When, and under what peculiar circumstances, was it first introduced
into our language?

In the town in which I reside, in the north of England, the word
Snob was formerly applied to a _cobbler_, and the phrase was in use,
"_Snip_ the _tailor_, and _Snob_ the _cobbler_."

I cannot discover how and why the word Snob was enlarged into its
present comprehensive meaning.

Explanations of many of the slang phrases met with in the dramatic
works of the last century, such as, "Thank you, sir, I owe you one,"
"A Rowland for an Oliver," "Keep moving, dad," &c. &c. would perhaps
give much light upon the manners of the times, and an interesting
history might be compiled of the progress of slang phrases to the
present day.

ALPHA.


_Mertens, Martins, or Martini, the Printer._--Can any of your
correspondents inform me what was really the surname of Theodoric
Mertens, Martins, or Martini, the printer of Louvain, and who {186}
was a friend of Erasmus? In a small volume of his, now before me,
printed in 1517, the colophon gives: "Lovanii apud Theodoricum
Martinum anno MDXVII mense April;" while, on the reverse of _the
same leaf_, is a wooden block, of his device, occupying the whole
page, and beneath it are inscribed the words "Theodoricus Martini."
This appears to put _Mertens_ out of the question.

W.


_Queen's Messengers_.--I should esteem it a favour conferred if any
of your readers could give me any memoranda touching the early
origin of the corps now termed Queen's Messengers, the former
"Knightes caligate of Armes." The only mention that I have read of
their origin is a brief notice in Knight's _London_, No. 131. p. 91;
but doubtless there exists, did I know what works to consult, many
more voluminous a history of their origin and proceedings than the
short summary given in the work of Mr. Knight. In whose reign were
they first created? and by whom were they appointed? In fact, any
data relating to their early history would very much oblige,

J.U.G.G.


_Bishop Lesly of Ross' Epitaph.--Machoreus or Macorovius, "De Pr�lio
Aveniniano."_--Would any of your readers be so kind as to favour me
with a copy of the Latin epitaph of Bishop Lesly, of Ross, inscribed
on his tomb in the abbey church of Gurtenburg, near Brussels?

Can any one furnish the _entire_ title and imprint of a Latin poem,
_De Pr�lio Aveniniano_, said to have been written in 1594, by a
Scottish Jesuit named Alexander Macorovius, or Machoreus? Any
particulars concerning this author would gratify

LLEWELYN ST. GEORGE.


_The Word "Cannibal."_--When was the word _Cannibal_ first used in
English books?--To what language does it belong?--and what is its
exact meaning?

W.


_Sir William Rider_.--"H.F." would feel obliged by a reference to
any work containing an account of Sir William Rider and his family.
He was Lord Mayor of London in 1600; and his daughter Mary was
married to Sir Thomas Lake, of Cannons, Secretary of State temp.
James I. He wishes more particularly to ascertain the date of Sir
William Rider's death.


_The Word "Poghele."_--What is the etymology and precise meaning of
the word "Poghele" (pronounced Poughley), or rather the first part
of it, which occurs occasionally as the name of a place in the
county of Berks, and perhaps elsewhere?

W.


_Duncan Campbell._--Was the Duncan Campbell, of whom memoirs were
written by Defoe, a real or an imaginary person? If the former,
where can one find any authentic account of him?

L.B.


_Boston de Bury de Bib. Monasteriorum._--Can any of your
correspondents give me a reference to the original MS. of _Boston de
Bury de Bibliothecis Monasteriorum_?

P.


_Cazena on the Inquisition_.--Can any one tell me what is the public
opinion of Cazena's work on the Inquisition? I see Limborch and many
others quoted concerning that tribunal, but never Cazena. Is the
book scarce?--or is it not esteemed? I never saw but one copy.

P.


_The Reconciliation_, 1554.--In 1554, Cardinal Pole directed a
register to be kept in every parish of all the parishioners who, on
a certain day, were to be reconciled to the Church of Rome and
absolved. (Burnet's _Ref_. vol. iii. p. 245.)

The Bishop of London's Declaration thereon (Feb. 19. 1554) runs
thus:--

   "And they not so reconciled, every one of them
    shall have process made agaynst him accordyng to
    the canons, as the case shall requyre; for which purpose
    the pastours and curates of every paryshe shall be
    commanded by their archedeacon to certyfye me in
    writinge of every man and woman's name that is not
    so reconciled."

Have any of your readers at any time seen and made a _note_ of such
a register?

The most probable place of deposit would be the Bishop's Registry,
but I have never yet been fortunate enough to meet with one of these
curious returns.

J.S.B.

       *       *       *       *       *


MISCELLANIES.

_Darkness at the Crucifixion_.--The following passage, in a volume
of Lectures by the Rev. H. Blunt, has fallen under my notice:--

   "It was this Dionysius (the Areopagite) of whom
    the earliest Christian historians relate that, being at
    Heliopolis, in Egypt, at the time of our Lord's crucifixion,
    when he beheld the mid-day darkness which
    attended that awful event, he exclaimed, 'Either the
    God of Nature suffers, or the frame of the world will
    be dissolved.'"

Having very limited opportunity of studying the ancient historians,
I should be greatly obliged if you would inform me from what work
this account is derived; or refer me to any authors, _not_ having
embraced Christianity, who give a description of the crucifixion of
our Saviour; and especially with reference to the "darkness over all
the earth" at the time of that event, mentioned by St. Luke, who
also adds, that "the sun was darkened." Your kindly consenting, as
you did in your second number, to receive queries respecting
references, has induced me to trouble you so far.

S.A.M.

[Our correspondent will find much that is to his purpose, both in
the way of statements and of reference {187} to original
authorities, in Lardner's _Jewish and Heathen Testimonies_, chap.
xiii. of the Heathen Authors; vol. ii. p. 125. of the original 4to.
edition; or vol. vii. p. 370. of the 8vo. edition of his works by
Kippis, 1788.]


_High-Doctrine_.--In the Cambridgeshire fens there are a great
number of Dissenters, and I believe Cromwell's Ironsides were
chiefly recruited from those districts. On the higher lands
adjoining are the old parish churches; and in conversation it is not
uncommon to hear the tenets of the Church of England described as
_High land Doctrine_, in contra-distinction to the _Low land_, or
Dissenters' doctrine.

The thing is amusing, if nothing else, and I heard it while staying
some few years ago with my brother, who lives on the edges of the
Cambridgeshire fens.

E.H.


_Wife of Robert de Bruce_.--In the Surrenden Collection is an
interesting roll, entitled "Liberatio facta Ingelardo de Warlee
Custodi Garderobe, 7 E. 2."

It is, as its title imports, the release to the keeper of the
wardrobe, for one year's accounts, a�. 7 E. 2.

I shall probably be able to send you therefrom a few "notes"
illustrative of the history of that time.

As a commencement, I think that the subjoined "note" will interest
your historical readers.

It appears that the unfortunate wife of Robert Bruce was then
consigned to the care of the Abbess of Barking, with an allowance of
20s. per week for the same. She was, I believe, the daughter of
Henry de Burgh, Earl of Ulster, and died in 1328. In the above roll
there is the following entry:--

   "Cs liberati Anne de Veer Abbatisse de Berkyng,
    per manus domini Roberti de Wakfeld clerici, super
    expensis domine Elizabethe uxoris Roberti de Brus,
    percipientis per ebdomadum xxs., et ibidem perhendinantis."

   "Cs liberati Johanni de Stystede valletto Abbatisse
    de Berkyng, per manus proprias, super expensis
    Domine de Brus in Abbathia de Berkyng perhendinantis."


It does not appear, in the above roll, how long the hapless queen
remained in the abbey.

LAMBERT B. LARKING.
Ryarsh Vicarage. Dec. 14. 1849.


_The Talisman of Charlemagne_.--I beg to refer your correspondent,
on the subject of Charlemagne's Talisman, to what professes to be a
correct representation of this antique relic, in _The Illustrated
London News_, of March 8th, 1845; but it is not there described as
"a small nut, in a gold filigree envelopment," and gives the idea of
an ornament much too large for the finger or even wrist of any lady:
that paper says,--

   "This curious object of virtu is described in the
    Parisian journals as, 'la plus belle relique de
    l'Europe;' and it has, certainly, excited considerable
    interest in the arch�ological and religious circles of
    the continent. The talisman is of fine gold, of round
    form, as our illustration shows, set with gems, and in
    the centre are two rough sapphires, and a portion of
    the Holy Cross; besides other relics brought from the Holy Land."

The rest of the description much resembles your correspondent's, and
asserts the talisman to be at that time the property of Prince Louis
Napoleon, then a prisoner in the ch�teau of Ham.

S.A.M.


_Sayers the Caricaturist._--In Wright's _England under the House of
Hanover_, vol. ii. p. 83 _n_., it is stated that James Sayer, the
caricaturist, "died in the earlier part of the present century, no
long time after his patron, Pitt." In _Sepulchral Reminiscences of a
Market Town_, by Mr. Dawson Turner (Yarmouth, 8vo. 1848), p. 73
_n_., the caricaturist is called Sayers, and is said to have died on
the 20th of April, 1823.

C.H. COOPER.
Cambridge, Dec. 29. 1849.


_May-Day_.--To what old custom does the following passage allude?

   "It is likewise on the first day of this month [May]
    that we see the ruddy milk-maid exerting herself in a
    most sprightly manner under a pyramid of silver
    tankards, and, like the virgin Tarpeia, oppressed by the
    costly ornaments which her benefactors lay upon her."
    --_Spectator_, No. 365.

MELANION.

[Our correspondent will find much curious illustration of this now
obsolete custom in Strutt's _Sports and Pastimes_ p. 357. (ed.
Hone), where the preceding passage from the _Spectator_ is quoted;
and we are told "these decorations of silver cups, tankards, &c.
were borrowed for the purpose, and hung round the milk pails (with
the addition of flowers and ribands), which the maidens _carried
upon their heads_ when they went to the houses of their customers,
and danced in order to obtain a small gratuity from each of them."
In Tempest's _Cryes of London_ there is a print of a well-known
merry milk-maid, Kate Smith, dancing with the milk pail decorations
upon her head. See also Hone's _Every Day Book_, i. p. 576.]


_Dr. Dee's Petition_.--There is no mention of Dr. Dee's petition to
King James in the list of his works in Tanner's _Bibliotheca
Britannica_; but in Beloe's _Anecdotes_, vol. ii. p. 263., is an
account of the preface to a scarce work of his, in which he defends
himself from the charge of being a conjurer, or caller of divels,
&c.

Tanner mentions his _Supplication to Queen Mary for the Recovery of
Ancient Writings and Monuments_.

I fear, however, that your correspondent is {188} acquainted with
these more easily obtained accounts of Dr. Dee's works.

the _Dictionary_ of M. l'Abb� Ladoocat states that he died in
England, A.D. 1607, at the age of 81; so that his petition to James
must have been made at the close of his life.

HERMES.


_Lines quoted by Goethe_.--I beg to inform your correspondent
"TREBOR," that he will find the lines quoted by Goethe in his
_Autobiography_, in Rochester's _Satire against Mankind_.

J.S.


_Queen Mary's Expectations_.--Most persons have heard of the anxiety
of Queen Mary I., for the birth of a child, and of her various
disappointments; but many may not be aware that among the Royal
Letters in the State Paper Office, are letters in French, prepared
in expectation of the event, addressed by Queen Mary, without date,
except "Hampton Court, 1555" (probably about May), to her
father-in-law, the Emperor Charles V., to Henry II., King of France,
to Eleonora, Queen Dowager of France, to Ferdinand I., King of
Bohemia, to Mary, the Queen Dowager of Bohemia, to the Doge of
Venice, to the King of Hungary, and to the Queen Dowager of Hungary,
announcing to each the birth of her child, the word being so written
_fil_, as to admit of being made _filz_, or of an easy alteration to
the feminine _fille_, if necessary.

J.E.


_Ken's Morning and Evening Hymns_.--I saw it mentioned in a review
in the _Guardian_ some few weeks ago, as one merit of the last
edition of the Book of Common Prayer, published by Eyre and
Spottiswoode, that it had restored Bishop Ken's Morning and Evening
Hymns to their original purity.

I have no means of accurately testing this assertion by reference to
any undoubted version of the date of the original publication, but I
have no doubt that this might easily be done through the medium of
your paper; and I think you will agree with me that, if it should be
substantiated, not only is credit due to the Queen's printers, but
also that it is an example which ought to be followed, without
exception, in all future editions of the Prayer Book.

The variations, which I have noted in the ordinary version of the
Hymns, as given in other Prayer Books, are too numberous to be
inserted here, not to mention the omission of several stanzas, three
in the Morning Hymn, together with the Doxology, and one in the
Evening Hymn.

If they be false readings, no doubt they have been allowed to creep
in inadvertently, and need only pointing out to be corrected. It
occurred to me that this might be done more effectually in your
columns, and I venture to hope that you will not consider it a task
unworthy the high aim which you have in view in your admirable
publication.

OXONIENSIS.

[Bishop Ken's Morning and Evening Hymns have been restored in
Messrs. Eyre and Spottiswoode's last rubricated edition of the
Common Prayer, as far as was practicable; they were carefully
collated with the original, and all variations corrected, except
those which would materially affect immemorial use. The entire hymns
are of great length, but all those verses which have been at all
generally sung in churches are to be found in the edition to which
we refer.

We may take this opportunity of noticing that the Queen's printers
have lately restored the lesser Saints' Days to the kalendar in
their smaller editions of the Common Prayer. We are not aware of any
other similar editions in which the kalendar appears thus complete.]


_Etymology of "Daysman_."--What is the etymology of _Daysman_,
which, in the Book of Job, and in some of our provincial dialects,
means a mediator or arbitrator?

MARK ANTONY LOWER.

[NARES defines _Daysman_, an umpire or arbitrator, from his fixing a
day for decision; and adds, "Mr. Todd shows that _day_ sometimes
meant Judgment." Jacob, in his _Law Dictionary_, tells us, "Days-man
signifies, in the North of England, an arbitrator or person chosen
to determine an affair in dispute, who is called a _Dies-man_ or
_Days-man_." Jacob's definition may be again illustrated from
NARES:--"In Switzerland (as we are informed by Simlerus) they had
some common arbitrators, or _dayesmen_, in every towne, that made a
friendly composition betwixt man and man."--Burton, _Anat_.]


_Roland Monoux_.--In answer to your correspondent "M", p. 137., the
monumental brass in his possession is, no doubt, from the church at
_Edmonton_, Middlesex. Lysons (_Environs of London_, vol. ii. p.
263.), in his description of Edmonton Church, says, "Near the door
is a brass plate, with some English verses to the memory of ROLAND
MONOUX (no date)." He subjoins, in a _note_, "arms--on a chevron
betw. 3 oak-leaves as many bezants, on a chief 2 anchors, a market
for difference. On the brass plate are some English verses, nowise
remarkable."

These arms (omitting the _chief_) are those borne by the Baronet
Monnoux of Sandy in Bedfordshire (extinct in 1814), who was
descended from Sir George Monox, of Walthamstow, Lord Mayor of
London, who died in 1543, to whom and his lady there are brasses in
Walthamstow Church. ROLAND of Edmonton was doubtless of the same
family. I am not able to give an opinion of the _date_ of the brass
in question; but it might be readily conjected from the style of its
execution.

Your readers will, I am sure, all unite with me in commendation of
your correspondent "M's" correct feeling in offering to restore this
monument to its original site. I hope "M's" example will find many
followers. There are hundreds of {189} these pillaged brasses in the
hands of "collectors," and your admirable publication will have
effected a great public good, if it shall have been instrumental in
promoting their restoration.

Cambridge, Jan. 1. 1850.
E. VENTRIS.

       *       *       *       *       *


_Ancient Motto_.--In reference to a query (No. 6. p. 93.), and a
reply (No. 7. p. 104.), permit me to remark, that St. Augustine, the
celebrated Bishop of Hippo, was the person who caused to be engraved
on his table the distich against detractors. Possidius, in his Life
of that Father (S. Augustini, _Opera Omnia_, Paris, 1690, vol. x.
part ii. p. 272.), gives the verses--no doubt an adaptation of
Horace--thus:--

   "Quisquis amat dictis absentum rodere vitam
      Hanc mensam indignam noverit esse sibi."

The Benedictine editors subjoin two readings of the pentameter:--

    "Hac mensa indignam noverit esse suam."
    "Hanc mensam vetitam noverit esse sibi."

LLEWELYN ST. GEORGE.

       *       *       *       *       *


_Mr. Cresswell and Miss Warneford_.--At p. 157. of the "NOTES AND
QUERIES," your correspondent "B." inquires about a pamphlet relating
to the marriage, many years ago, of Mr. Cresswell and Miss
Warneford. "P.C.S.S." cannot give the precise title of that pamphlet
in question; but he is enabled to state, on the authority of Watts
(_Biblioth. Brit._), and on that of his old friend Sylvanus Urban
(_Gent. Mag._ vol. xvii. p. 543.), that it was published in London,
towards the end of the year 1747, and that the very remarkable and
very disgraceful transactions to which it refers were afterwards (in
1749) made the subject of a novel, called _Dalinda_, or _The Double
Marriage_. Lond. 12mo. Price threepence.

The gentleman who was the hero of this scandalous affair was Mr.
Thomas Estcourt Cresswell, of Pinkney Park, Wilts, M.P. for Wootton
Bassett. He married Anne, the sole and very wealthy heiress of
Edward Warneford, Esq. As it cannot be the object of the "NOTES AND
QUERIES" to revive a tale of antiquated scandal, "P.C.S.S." will not
place upon its pages the details of this painful affair--the cruel
injury inflicted upon Miss Scrope (the lady to whom Mr. Cresswell
was said to have been secretly married before his union with Miss
Warneford)--and the base and unmanly contrivance by which, it was
stated, that he endeavoured to keep possession of both wives at the
same time. Miss Scrope appears to have retained, for a considerable
time, a deep sense of her injuries; for in 1749 she published a
pamphlet, in her own name, called _Miss Scrope's Answer to Mr.
Cresswell's Narrative_. (Lond. Baldwin. Price 2s. 6d.)

If "B." should be desirous of further information, he is referred,
by "P.C.S.S.," to the _General Evening Post_ of Oct. 3. and 31.
1747, to the _Gentleman's Magazine_ for that month and year, and to
the same work, vol. xix. pp. 192. 288.

P.C.S.S.

       *       *       *       *       *


NOTES ON BOOKS, SALES, CATALOGUES, ETC.

Little as public attention has of late years been devoted to
commentating upon Pope, his writings and literary history, there are
no doubt many able and zealous illustrators of them among lovers of
literature for its own sake: and many a curious note upon the Bard
of Twickenham and his works will probably be evoked by the
announcement, that now is the moment when they may be produced with
most advantage, when Mr. Murray is about to bring forth a new
edition of Pope, under the able and experienced editorship of Mr.
Croker. Besides numerous original inedited letters, Mr. Croker's
edition will have the advantage of some curious books bought at the
Brockley Hall sale, including four volumes of Libels upon Pope, and
a copy of Ruffhead's Life of him, with Warburton's manuscript notes.

No one has rendered better service to the study of Gothic
architecture in this country than Mr. J.H. Parker, of Oxford. The
value of his admirable _Glossary of Terms used in Architecture_, is
attested by the fact, that it has already reached a fourth edition,
and that another will soon be called for. But we doubt whether he
has done any thing better calculated to promote this interesting
branch of Arch�ology than by the production of his _Introduction to
the Study of Gothic Architecture_, which--originally written as part
of a series of elementary lectures recommended by the Committee of
the Oxford Architectural Society to be delivered to the junior
members, and considered useful and interesting by those who heard
them--is now published at the request of the Society. A more
interesting volume on the subject, or one better calculated to give
such a knowledge of it, as is essential to any thing like a just
appreciation of the peculiar characteristics of our church
architecture, could scarcely have been produced, while its compact
size and numerous illustrations fit it to become a tourist's
travelling companion.

We have great pleasure in directing attention to the advertisement
inserted in another column respecting some improvements about to be
introduced into the GENTLEMAN'S MAGAZINE. This venerable periodical
has maintained its station uninterruptedly in our literature from
the year 1731. From the times of Johnson and Cowper it has been the
medium by which many men of the greatest eminence have communicated
with the public. At all times it has been the sole depository of
much valuable information of a great variety of kinds. We are
confident that under the new management {190} it will put forth
fresh claims to the favour of the public. Many writers of high
reputation in historical and antiquarian literature are henceforth
to be enlisted in its service. We shall look for the forthcoming
number with great interest.

Scheible, of Stuttgart, who is doubtless known to our readers as the
publisher of some very curious works illustrative of the popular
literature of Germany of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries,
has just commenced a new Library of Magic, &c., or _Bibliothek der
Zanber-Geheimnisse-und Offenbarungs-Bucher_. The first volume of it
is devoted to a work ascribed to that prince of magicians, our old
familiar, Dr. Faustus, and bears the imposing title _Doktor Johannes
Faust's Magia Naturalis et Innaturalis, oder Dreifacher H�llenzwang,
leiztes Testament und Siegelkunst_. It is taken from a MS. of the
last century, filled with magical drawings and devices enough to
summon back again from the Red Sea all the spirits that ever were
laid in it. It is certainly a curious book to publish in the middle
of the nineteenth century.

Messrs. Sotheby and Co. will sell the extensive and valuable
Collection of MSS. in all languages formed by the late Mr. Rodd, on
Monday the 4th of February, and five following days. The catalogue
deserves the attention of all collectors of manuscripts, as it is,
as far as circumstances will admit, a classified one. There are
upwards of one thousand lots in the sale--many of a very curious and
interesting character. There are Greek and Latin versions of the
Scriptures, manuscripts of the 13th century, Ruding's original
collections for his _History of the Coinage of Great Britain_; which
work, it is stated, contains only a very small portion of the
materials he had brought together. One lot consists of a mass of
documents and papers contained in eight large packing cases, and
weighing from ten to fifteen hundred weight, of the families of
Eyre, of Derbyshire and Berkshire, and their intermarriages from the
reign of Henry II. to the present time. Well may Mr. Sotheby talk of
their proving a source of amusement to any person having room to
sort them, and time to devote to their arrangement.

Messrs. Puttick and Simpson, of Piccadilly, commence their sales on
Monday next, with a four days' miscellaneous sale of works on
theology, history, classics, voyages and travels, and standard works
in foreign and English general literature. They have some important
sales coming on, of which our readers shall have due notice.

We have received the following new Catalogues:--

"Catalogue of valuable second-hand Books in Divinity, the Classics,
Law, and Miscellaneous, on sale by William Heath, 29 1/2. Lincoln's
Inn Fields."

"Catalogue of curious and rare Books, all recently purchased, now on
sale by George Bumstead, No. 205. High Holborn."

"Catalogue of Choice, Useful and Interesting Books, in fine
condition, on sale at the low Prices affixed, by W. Waller and Son,
188. Fleet Street."

Messrs. Waller have also forwarded to us a Catalogue recently
published by them, which contains some curious "Manuscripts,
Historical Documents, and Autograph Letters."

       *       *       *       *       *


BOOKS AND ODD VOLUMES

WANTED TO PURCHASE.

(_In continuation of Lists in former Nos._)


PROPOSITIONES GEOMETRIC�, MORE VETERUM DEMONSTRAT�, AUCTORE MATTH�O
STEWART, S.T.D. Edinburgi. 1763.

HUDDESFORD'S WYCCAMICAL CHAPLET. 8vo. London, 1801.

_Odd Volumes_.

NARES' LIFE OF LORD BURLEIGH. 4to. Vol. III. (In boards.) DODD'S
CHURCH HISTORY. Small folio, 1739. Vol. II. (Or Vol. III. would be
given for it.)

KNIGHT'S ILLUSTRATED EDITION OF ARABIAN NIGHTS. (Last part.)

LEYBOURN'S MATHEMATICAL REPOSITORY. New Series. Vols. IV. V. VI.
London. 1819, 1830, 1835.

THE LIVERPOOL APOLLONIUS. No. I. by J.H. SWALE. 1823.

Letters stating particulars and lowest price, _carriage free_, to be
sent to Mr. BELL, publisher of "NOTES AND QUERIES," 186. Fleet
Street.

       *       *       *       *       *


NOTICES TO CORRESPONDENTS.

T. _will find every information upon the Bibliography of Proverbs in
M.G. Duplessis_' Bibliographie Par�miologique, 8vo., _Paris_, 1847.

MR. HICKSON'S _interesting Paper upon "Marlowe," in our next number.

The Sale Catalogue of Dr. Graham's Library reached us too late for
notice_.


COMMUNICATIONS RECEIVED.--_K.M.P.--P.H.F.--Gomer.--B.--A.D.M.--
E.L.N.--D.--A Templar.--D. Stevens.--L.R.--J.E.B.M.--S.D.--
Arch�us.--Norris.--F.D.--Melanion.--A Cornishman.--R.J.S.--
J.S.--V.--A.F.H.--Seleucus.--B.--M.--R.G.--Nathan.--J.M.--W.D.B._

_We have again to explain to correspondents who inquire as to the
mode of procuring_ "NOTES AND QUERIES," _that every bookseller and
newsman will supply it,_ if ordered_, and that gentlemen residing in
the country may be supplied regularly with the Stamped Edition, by
giving their orders direct to the publisher_, Mr. GEORGE BELL, 186.
_Fleet Street, accompanied by a Post-Office order for a Quarter (4s.
4d.).

A neat Case for holding the Numbers of_ "NOTES AND QUERIES" _until
the completion of each volume, is now ready, price 1s. 6d., and may
be had_, by Order, _of all Booksellers and Newsmen.

We are again compelled to omit many Notes, Queries, and answers to
Queries, as well as Answers to Correspondents_.

       *       *       *       *       *

{191} Illustrated by the Etching Club. In One Volume, square crown
8vo. 21s. cloth; or, 36s. bound in morocco, by Hayday.

GOLDSMITH'S POETICAL WORKS. edited by BOLTON CORNEY. With engravings
on wood, from Designs by Members of the Etching Club.

"That edition of the Poetical Works which had the benefit of Mr.
Bolton Corney's care and judgment in its preparation; and which,
apart from the grace and beauty of the Illustrations contributed to
it by the Etching Club, is by far the most correct and careful of
the existing editions of Goldsmith's poetry."--Forster's _Life of
Goldsmith_, p. 699.

London: LONGMAN, BROWN, BREEN, AND LONGMANS;

Of whom may be had, uniform with the above in size and price,

THOMSON'S SEASONS. Edited by BOLTON CORNEY. With Wood Engravings, by
Members of the Etching Club.

       *        *        *        *        *

Just published, a New Edition, Three Vols., crown 8vo., 1l. 11s.
9d., of

THE DRAMATIC WORKS OF KIT MARLOWE, with some Account of his Life and
Writings by the Rev. ALEXANDER DYCE.

WILLIAM PICKERING, 177. Piccadilly.

       *        *        *        *        *

Just published, Part I. of THE DECORATIVE ARTS of the MIDDLE AGES.
By HENRY SHAW, F.S.A. The object of the present publication is to
exhibit, by means of a series of carefully executed Engravings
(taken from some of the best authorities now remaining) the peculiar
features, and general characteristics of Decorative Art, as applied
to the various materials on which it was employed, whether for
sacred or domestic purposes, from the Byzantine, or early Christian
period, to the decline of that termed the Renaissance.

A Number will appear on the 1st of each month, containing Four
Plates, one of which will be coloured. Imperial 8vo., price 3s.; and
in imperial 4to., price 6s.; to be completed in Twenty-four Parts.

A more detailed prospectus, and list of Mr. Shaw's other works, may
be had of the Publisher, or through any Bookseller.

WILLIAM PICKERING, 177. Piccadilly.

       *        *        *        *        *

Just published, price 4s. 6d.

PINACOTHEC� HISTORIC� SPECIMEN; sive Illvstrivm qvorvundam ingenia,
mores, fortvn�, ad Inscriptionvm formam express�. Avctore F.
KILVERT, A.M. Pars Secvnda.

"I am struck with the successful endeavour, in each case, to say
much in few words.--those words remarkably select, and expressive,
and appropriate,--exhibiting the noble characteristics of the Latin
language, as compared with every other, ancient or modern. This is a
rare excellence, and, therefore, I mention it first. But it is not
the greatest merit of your performance. There is a truth in the
delineation of character, and a devotion to rectitude and virtue in
your moral estimate, quite as remarkable as the felicity of diction
by which the varieties of each portrait are denoted. You have also
escaped the snare to which brevity (according to Horace's well-known
line), is exposed--obscurity."--_From a letter of the late Bishop of
Llandoff._

London: GEORGE BELL, 186. Fleet Street; of whom Part I., price 3s.,
may be had.

       *        *        *        *        *

Just published, price 1s. 8vo. sewed.

PRACTICAL REMARKS ON BELFRIES AND RINGERS. By the Rev. H.F.
ELLACOMBE, M.A., Oriel College, Oxford, vicar of Bitton,
Gloucestershire.

GEORGE BELL, 186. Fleet Street; RIDLER, Bristol.

       *        *        *        *        *

THE GENTLEMAN'S MAGAZINE AND HISTORICAL REVIEW.

The next number of the "Gentleman's Magazine" (which will be
published on the 1st of February, 1850), will exhibit several
alterations in the character and arrangement of its contents, which
have been determined upon after due consideration of the present
state of our literature.

Time was when the whole field of English Literature was before us,
and we were its only reapers. At that time the harvest was scarcely
rich enough to supply materials for our monthly comment. One hundred
and twenty years have produced a marvelous revolution. Our
literature has grown and expanded, and been divided and subdivided,
and has still gone on growing and increasing, until--such is its
wonderful extent and fertility--every separate branch maintains its
independent organ, and we ourselves, overpowered by a growth which
we were the first to foster, have gradually been compelled, by our
limited space, to allow one subject after another to drop from under
our notice.

Still, amidst many minor alterations, we have kept an unweakened
hold upon certain main subjects. HISTORY, BIOGRAPHY, and ARCH�OLOGY
have never been neglected, and our OBITUARY has grown into a record
which, even we ourselves may say, has become a permanent and
important portion of the literature of our country.

The changes we are now about to introduce have for their design a
more strict adherence to what we look upon as our peculiar path. We
shall henceforth devote ourselves more particularly--we may say
almost exclusively--to the great subjects we have mentioned. Space
that has been given to other matters will be curtailed, variations
in type and arrangement will afford additional room, and all that
can in any way be gained will be devoted to our main and peculiar
purpose.

We have made arrangements to secure for our pages, by a liberal
outlay, contributions from gentlemen most competent to write upon
their respective subjects of study, and shall strive, more than
ever, to be a worthy organ and representative of that most valuable
and peculiarly interesting branch of literature which has for its
object the instruction of mankind by the study and the perpetuation
of whatever is now doing, or whatever has been done in times past,
which is worthy of being kept in remembrance. We shall endeavour to
put forth a miscellany which will be attractive from its variety,
and from the skill with which its several subjects are treated, and
will be permanently valuable from the importance of the matters to
which it relates.

In principles and general tone of management we have nothing to
retract, nothing to alter. History is Truth, or it is a mere
delusion. The discovery and the establishment of Historical Truth,
in all its branches, are our objects, and we shall continue to
pursue them, as we have done in times past, faithfully and honestly,
but, as we purpose and intend, more diligently and more undividedly.

Contributions should be addressed, post paid, To the Editor of the
"Gentleman's Magazine" to the care of Messrs. Nichols and Son, 25.
Parliament Street, Westminster.

The "Gentleman's Magazine" is published by Messrs. J.B. Nichols and
Son, 25. Parliament Street, Westminster, on the first day of every
month, price 2s. 6d. and may be obtained of all booksellers.

       *       *       *       *       *

{192} No. I., for 1850, of
JOHN MILLER'S CATALOGUE OF BOOKS, OLD AND NEW,

On sale at 43. Chandos Street, Trafalgar Square, is ready this day,
to be had gratis, and is sent (if required) postage free to any
Book-buyer. The prices are for ready money only.

The following List has been made with a view to exhibit the
character of the selections for the Catalogue generally, as well as
the moderate prices affixed.

It is published regularly every month, with occasional supplemental
sheets and classed Catalogues, embodying in its contents, throughout
the year, works on Arch�ology, History, Biography, Topography,
Classics, Divinity, Language, &c. together with Poetry and the
Drama, collections relating to Irish History and Antiquities, Books
of Prints, Architecture, Books of Sports, and Treatises on Geology
and Mineralogy, Botany, Gardening, and Domestic Economy.

ANGLING BOOKS:--FISHER'S ANGLING SOUVENIR, beautifully illustrated.
Fcap. 8vo. half morocco binding, 7s. 6d.--HOFLAND'S BRITISH ANGLER'S
MANUAL, by JESSE. Nearly 100 Engravings. Post 8vo. 8s. 6d--CHITTY'S
FLY-FISHER'S TEXT-BOOK. 12 beautiful Steel Plates. 8vo. half calf,
gilt, 7s. 6d.

BALLAD COLLECTIONS:--EVANS' OLD BALLADS. Best Edition. 4 vols. 8vo.
12s. 6d. 1810--GUTCH'S ROBIN HOOD GARLANDS and BALLADS, profusely
illustrated by FAIRHOLT. 2 vols. 8vo. 18s. 6d. 1847.--NICHOL'S
SELECT COLLECTION OF FUGITIVE POETRY. 8 vols. 18mo. half calf.
Portraits. 6s. 6d.--RITSON'S ENGLISH ANTHOLOGY. 3 vols. post 8vo.
half morocco extra. 14s. 6d. 1794.--RITSON'S SELECT COLLECTIONS of
ENGLISH SONGS. 3 vols. post 8vo. calf neat, with Music, 15s.
1783.--ROWTON'S FEMALE POETS OF GREAT BRITAIN, Chronologically
arranged. Square 8vo. 10s. 6d. 1848.

BOOKS OF SPORTS:--BLOME'S GENTLEMAN'S RECREATION IN THE SPORTS OF
HORSEMANSHIP, HAWKING, HUNTING, FOWLING, FISHING, &c. Folio, calf
neat, fine Plates. 1l. 1s. 1710.--GALLERY OF ENGLISH RACE-HORSES AND
PORTRAITS OF SPORTSMEN. 73 Plates. Imp. 8vo. cloth, gilt, 15s.
1844.--MORLEY'S ESSAY ON ARCHERY, 8vo. Plates. Half calf, gilt, 5s.
1792.

BOSWELL'S (J.) LIFE OF DR. S. JOHNSON, including his Tour to the
Hebrides, to which is added Anecdotes by Hawkins, Piozzi, Murphy,
Tyers, Reynolds, Stevens, &c. Edited by J.W. CROKER. Cloth. 50
Plates, 1l. 1s. 1835.

BROWN'S (SIR THOMAS) COMPLETE WORKS, containing his Vulgar Errors,
Religio Medici, and Miscellaneous Writings, complete in 1 vol.
folio, calf, gilt, fine port, by White, 18s.

BUCKLAND'S RELIQUI� DILUVIN�, on OBSERVATIONS ON THE ORGANIC
REMAINS, contained in Caves, Fissures, and Diluvian Gravel, and of
other Geological Phenomena. 4to. Fine Plates, some coloured, scarce,
1l. 1s.

BURTON'S (T.) CROMWELLIAN DIARY, from 1656 to 1659, published from
the Original Autograph Manuscript, with an Introduction, containing
an Account of the Parliament of 1654, edited and illustrated with
Notes, by J.T. RUTT. 4 vols. 8vo. front., neatly bound in half calf,
gilt, 16s.

BYRON'S (LORD) LETTERS AND JOURNALS, with Notices of his Life, by
THOMAS MOORE, 3 vols. 8vo., illustrated with 44 Engravings by the
Findens, from Designs by Turner, Stanfield, &c., elegantly
half-bound morocco, marble edges, by Hayday, 1l. 8s.

COVERDALE'S BIBLE. The Holy Scriptures faithfully and truly
translated by MILES COVERDALE, Bishop of Exeter, 1535, reprinted
from the Duke of Sussex's copy. 4to. very elegantly bound in purple
calf, blind tooled in antique style, gilt edges, fine copy. 2l. 2s.
Bagster, 1838.

DANIELL'S (WM.) SKETCHES, representing the Native Tribes, Animals,
and Scenery of Southern Africa, from Drawings made by S. DANIELL.
Royal 4to. half bd. morocco, uncut, consisting of 48 fine engravings
of animals, scenery, portraits of the various tribes, &c. Proofs on
India paper, 1l. 1s. 1820.

EARLY ENGLISH DRAMA. DODSLEY'S Select Collection of Old Plays. 12
vols. 12mo. old calf, gilt, neat. 1l. 1s.--DRYDEN'S Entire Dramatic
Works. 6 Vols. 12mo. calf, neat print. 8s. 6d. 1717.--SHIRLEY'S
Dramatic Works and Poems. By the Rev. A. DYCE. 6 vols. 8vo.,
portrait. 1l. 4s. 1833.--MIDDLETON'S (THOMAS) Dramatic Works, with
Life and Notes, by the Rev. A. DYCE. 5 vols. 8vo. With autograph of
LEIGH HUNT. 1l. 4s. 1840.

FREEMASONS' (The) QUARTERLY REVIEW, from its commencement in 1834,
to the Year 1847, inclusive. 14 vols. 8vo. newly and elegantly half
bound, purple calf, backs emblematically tooled, only 3l. 10s.
1834-47.

GIBBON'S (E.) HISTORY OF THE DECLINE AND FALL OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 6
vols. 4to. calf, gilt, good copy. 1l. 5s. 1788.

KAY'S SERIES OF ORIGINAL PORTRAITS AND CARICATURE ETCHINGS, with
Biographical Sketches and Illustrative Anecdotes. 2 thick vols. 4to.
half bd., morocco, marbled edges. 329 engraved portraits. 3l. 13s.
6d. 1838.

NICOLAS'S (Sir H.) TESTAMENTA VETUSTA, being Illustrations from
Wills of Manners and Customs as well as of the Descents and
Possessions of many Distinguished Families, from the Reign of Henry
the Second, to the Accession of Queen Elizabeth, with Notes by Sir
Harris Nicolas. 2 vols. royal 8vo. bds. 15s. 1826.

PAYNE'S ROYAL DRESDEN GALLERY, from Pictures of the Great Masters. 2
vols. 4to. Complete in parts: a Subscriber's copy, fine plates. 1l.
16s. 1849.

PLOWDON'S (Dr. F.) HISTORICAL REVIEW OF THE STATE OF IRELAND, from
the Invasion of Henry II. to its Union with Great Britain in 1801;
with Appendices of Original Papers. Portrait. 3 vols. 4to. Half
calf, uncut. 1l. 1s. 1803.

SCRIPTORES REI RESTIC�. Opera Agricolationum Columell�, Varronis,
Catonisque, nec non Paladii. Annot. Beroaldi. Folio, calf, fine
copy, rubricated capitals, gilt edges. 16s. Bononi�, 1504.

STRUTT'S CHRONICLE OF ENGLAND, or a Complete History, Civil and
Ecclesiastical, of the Ancient Britons and Saxons, from C�sar to the
Conquest, with a View of Manners, Customs, Habits, &c. Many Plates,
2 vols. 4to. half bd. russia, neat, 1l. 10s. 1777.

WILBERFORCE (WILLIAM), THE LIFE AND CORRESPONDENCE OF, edited and
arranged by his Sons, the Rev. R.T. WILBERFORCE and the Rev. SAM.
WILBERFORCE. 5 vols. crown 8vo. Portraits, &c. Calf, gilt. 1l. 4s.
1838.

WILKIE. THE GALLERY, with Notices Biographical and Critical, a
Portrait of WILKIE, and a View of his Birth-place. Folio, 44 fine
Engravings. 2l. 2s. A subscriber's copy. 1849.

WILLIAM III.--LETTERS ILLUSTRATIVE OF THE REIGN OF, from 1696 to
1708, addressed to the Duke of SHREWSBURY, by JAMES VERNON, Esq.,
Secretary of State, now first published from the Originals, edited
by G.P.R. JAMES, Esq., 3 vols. 8vo. Fine portrait. Half calf, gilt,
14s. 6d. 1841.

JOHN MILLER, 43. Chandos Street, Trafalgar Square.

       *       *       *       *       *


Printed by THOMAS CLARK SHAW, of No. 8. New Street Square, at No. 5.
New Street Square, in the Parish of St. Bride, in the City of
London; and published by GEORGE BELL, of No. 186. Fleet Street, in
the Parish of St. Dunstan in the West, in the City of London,
Publisher, at No. 186. Fleet Street aforesaid.--Saturday, January
19. 1850.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Notes & Queries 1850.01.19, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES & QUERIES 1850.01.19 ***

***** This file should be named 11575-8.txt or 11575-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/1/5/7/11575/

Credits: Jon Ingram, Susan Lucy and PG Distributed Proofreaders.
Produced from page scans provided by Internet Library of Early
Journals.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year. For example:

     http://www.gutenberg.net/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/GUTINDEX.ALL


