The Project Gutenberg EBook of Notes & Queries 1849.11.17, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Notes & Queries 1849.11.17

Author: Various

Release Date: March 14, 2004 [EBook #11577]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES & QUERIES 1849.11.17 ***




Credits: Jon Ingram, William Flis and PG Distributed Proofreaders.
Produced from page scans provided by Internet Library of Early
Journals,





NOTES AND QUERIES:

A MEDIUM OF INTER-COMMUNICATION FOR LITERARY MEN, ARTISTS,
ANTIQUARIES, GENEALOGISTS, ETC.

       *       *       *       *       *

"When found, make a note of."--CAPTAIN CUTTLE.

       *       *       *       *       *

NO. 3]
SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 17, 1849.
[Price Threepence. Stamped Edition, 4d.

       *       *       *       *       *{33}

CONTENTS.

  NOTES:--                                                    Page
    Travelling in England .................................... 33
    Sanuto's Doges of Venice, by Sir F. Madden ............... 35
    Letters of Lord Nelson's Brother, immediately after the
      Battle of Trafalgar, by the Rev. A. Gatty .............. 36
    Misquotations ............................................ 38
    Herbert's and Dibdin's Ames--Rowland's Choise of
      Change--Greene's Royal Exchange ........................ 38
    Notes from Fly Leaves, No. 3. ............................ 39
    Abdication of James II. .................................. 39
    Writers on English History ............................... 40
    Queen Elizabeth's Domestic Establishment ................. 41
    Register of East Peckham Church, Kent .................... 41
    Pawnbrokers' Golden Balls ................................ 42
    Lions in the Tower ....................................... 42
    Notes on Authors and Books, No. 1, by Belton Corney ...... 42

  QUERIES:--
    Form of Petition ......................................... 43
    Query as to Notes--Greene of Green's Norton .............. 43
    Busts of Charles I. and James I.--Ancient Tapestry ....... 43
    Origin of the term "Factotum" ............................ 43
    Inscriptions on ancient Church Plate ..................... 44

  MISCELLANEOUS:--
    Notes of Book-Sales, Catalogues, &c. ..................... 44
    Queries still on our List ................................ 45
    Books and Odd Volumes wanted ............................. 46
    Notices to Correspondents ................................ 46
    Advertisements ........................................... 46

       *       *       *       *       *


TRAVELLING IN ENGLAND.

I suppose that the history of travelling in this country, from the
Creation to the present time, may be divided into four periods--those
of no coaches, slow coaches, fast coaches, railways. Whether balloons,
or rockets, or some new mode which as yet has no name, because it has
no existence, may come next, I cannot tell, and it is hardly worth
while to think about it; for, no doubt, it will be something quite
inconceivable.

The third, or fast-coach period was brief, though brilliant. I doubt
whether fifty years have elapsed since the newest news in the world of
locomotive fashion was, that--to the utter confusion and defacement of
the "Sick, Lame, and Lazy," a sober vehicle so called from the nature
of its cargo, which was nightly disbanded into comfortable beds at
Newbury--a new post-coach had been set up which performed the journey
to Bath in a single day. Perhaps the day extended from about five
o'clock in the morning to midnight, but still the coach was, as it
called itself, a "_Day_-coach," for it travelled all day; and if it
did somewhat "add the night unto the day, and so make up the measure,"
the passengers had all the more for their money, and were incomparably
better off as to time than they had ever been before. But after this
many years elapsed before "old Quicksilver" made good its ten miles
an hour in one unbroken trot to Exeter, and was rivalled by "young
Quicksilver" on the road to Bristol, and beaten by the light-winged
Hirondelle, that flew from Liverpool to Cheltenham, and troops of
others, each faster than the foregoing, each trumpeting its own fame
on its own improved bugle, and beating time (all to nothing) with
sixteen hoofs of invisible swiftness. How they would have stared if
a parliamentary train had passed them, especially if they could have
heard its inmates grumbling over their slow progress, and declaring
that it would be almost quicker to get out and walk whenever their
jealousy was roused by the sudden flash of an express.

Certainly I was among those who rejoiced in the increased expedition
of the fast-coach period; not because I loved, but because I hated,
travelling, and was glad to have periods of misery abridged. I used to
listen with delight to the stories of my seniors, and to marvel that
in so short a space of time so great an improvement had been made. One
friend told me that in earlier life he had travelled from Gloucester
to Hereford in a coach, which performed the journey of about thirty
miles between the hours of five in the morning and seven in the
evening. I took it for granted that they stopped on the road to dine,
and spent a long afternoon in smoking, {34} napping, or playing at
bowls. But he would not acknowledge anything of the kind, and the
impression on his mind was that they kept going (such going as it
was), except during the time necessarily expended in baiting the
horses, who, I think, were not changed--unless indeed it were from bad
to worse by fatigue. Another friend, a physician at Sheffield, told me
that one of the first times (perhaps he may have said, the first) that
a coach started for London, he was a passenger. Without setting out
unreasonably early in the morning, or travelling late at night they
made such progress, that the first night they lay at Nottingham, and
the second at Market Harborough. The third morning they were up early,
and off at five o'clock; and by a long pull and a strong pull through
a long day, they were in time to hear Bow Church clock strike eleven
or twelve (I forget which) as they passed through Cheapside. In fact
such things have always seemed to me to be worth noting, for you never
can tell to what extent, or even in what direction, they may throw
some little ray of light on an obscure point of history. On this
principle I thought it worth while to copy an original bill which
lately fell into my hands. Many such have been reprinted, but I am
not aware that this one has; and as what is wanted is a series, every
little may help. It is as follows:--

"YORK Four Dayes

"Stage-Coach

"Begins on Monday the 18 of March 1678.

"All that are desirous to pass from London to York, or return from
York to London or any other Place on that Road; Let them Repair to
the Black Swan in Holborn in London and the Black Swan in Cony-Street
in York.

"At both which places they may be received in a Stage-Coach every
Monday, Wednesday and Friday, which performs the whole journey in
Four days (if God permit) and sets forth by Six in the Morning.

"And returns from York to Doncaster in a Forenoon, to Newark in a day
and a half, to Stamford in Two days, and from Stamford to London in
Two days more.

                 / Henry Moulen
  "Performed by <  Margaret Gardner
                 \ Francis Gardner."

But I cannot deny that, while I have listened to, and rejoiced in,
these stories, I have had some doubt whether full justice has been
done to the other side of the question. I have always felt as if I had
a sort of guilty knowledge of one contradictory fact, which I learned
between twenty and thirty years ago, and which no one whom I have yet
met with has been able to explain. For this reason I am desirous to
lay it before you and your readers.

Just one hundred years ago--that is to say, on Sunday, the 10th of
August, 1749--two German travellers landed at Harwich. The principal
one was Stephen Schultz, who travelled for twenty years through
various parts of Europe, Asia, and Africa, in the service of the
Callenberg Institution at Halle, of which he was afterwards Director,
being at the same time Pastor of St. Ulrich's Church in that city,
where his picture is (or was about twenty years ago) to be seen
affixed to the great pillar next the organ. It represents him as an
elderly divine in a black cap, and with a grave and prediger-like
aspect; but there is another likeness of him--an engraved print--in
which he looks more like a Turk than a Christian. He is dressed in a
shawl turban, brickdust-red mantle, and the rest of the costume which
he adopted in his Eastern travels. Our business, however, is with his
English adventures, which must, I think, have astonished him as much
as anything that he met with in Arabia, even if he acted all the
Thousand and One Nights on the spot. As I have already said, he and
his companion (Albrecht Friedrich Woltersdorf, son of the Pastor of
St. George's Church in Berlin), landed at Harwich on Sunday, August
10. They staid there that night, and on Monday they walked over
to Colchester. There (I presume the next morning) they took the
"Land-Kutsche," and were _barely six hours_ on the road to London.

This statement seems to me to be so at variance with notorious facts,
that, but for one or two circumstances, I should have quietly set it
down for a mistake; but as I do not feel that I can do this, I should
be glad to obtain information which may explain it. It is no error of
words or figures, for the writer expresses very naturally the surprise
which he certainly must have felt at the swiftness of the horses, and
the goodness of the roads. He was a man who had seen something of {35}
the world, for he had lived five-and-thirty years, thirteen of which
had elapsed since he began his travels. As a foreigner he was under
no temptation to exaggerate the superiority of English travelling,
especially to an extent incomprehensible by his countrymen; and, in
short, I cannot imagine any ground for suspecting mistake or untruth
of any kind.[1]

I have never been at Colchester, but I believe it is, and always was,
full fifty miles from London. Ipswich, I believe, is only eighteen
miles farther; and yet _fifteen years_ later we find an advertisement
(_Daily Advertiser_, Thursday, Aug. 30, 1764), announcing that London
and Ipswich Post Coaches on _steel springs_ (think of that, and think
of the astonished Germans careering over the country from Colchester
without that mitigation), from London to Ipswich in _ten hours_ with
Postillions, set out every morning at seven o'clock, Sundays excepted,
from the Black Bull Inn, in Bishopsgate Street.

It is right, however, to add that the Herr Preniger Schultz and his
companion appear to have returned to Colchester, on their way back to
Germany, at a much more moderate pace. The particulars do not very
exactly appear; but it seems from his journal that on the 16th of
September they dined with the Herr Prediger Pittius, minister of the
German Church in the Savoy, at twelve o'clock (_nach teutscher art_,
as the writer observes). They then went to their lodging, settled
their accounts, took up their luggage, and proceeded to the inn from
which the "Staets-Kutsche" was to start; and on arriving there found
some of their friends assembled, who had ordered a meal, of which they
partook. How much time was occupied in all this, or when the coach set
out, does not appear; but they travelled the whole night, and until
towards noon the next day, before they got to Colchester. This is
rather more intelligible; but as to their up-journey I really am
puzzled, and shall be glad of any explanation.

Yours, &c.

G.G.

    [1] It is perhaps right to give his words. Speaking of a person
    who acted as their guide, he says:--"Des folgenden Tages gieng er
    mit uns 22 engl. Meilen bis Colchester zu Fuss; wo wir uns auf
    die Land-Kutsche verdungen, mit welcher wir 50 englische Meilen
    d. i. 10 teutsche Meilen bis London, in solcher Geschwindigkeit
    endigten, dass wir auf dem ganzen Wege kaum 6 Stunden gefahren
    sind; so schnell gehen die englischen Pferde; aber auch so schoen
    sind die englischen Wege." _Der Leitungen des Hoechsten_, &c. Zw.
    Theil. Halle, 1772, p.62.

       *       *       *       *       *


SANUTO'S DOGES OF VENICE.

Mr. Editor,--Among the well-wishers to your projected periodical,
as a medium of literary communication, no one would be more ready
to contribute to it than myself, did the leisure I enjoy permit me
often to do so. I have been a maker of _Notes and Queries_ for above
twenty-five years, and perhaps should feel more inclined to trouble
you with the latter than the former, in the hope of clearing up some
of the many obscure points in your history, biography, and poetical
literature, which have occurred to me in the course of my reading. At
present, as a very inadequate specimen of what I once designed to call
_Leisure Moments_, I beg to copy the following Note from one of my
scrap-books:--

In the year 1420, the Florentines sent an embassy to the state of
Venice, to solicit them to unite in a league against the ambitious
progress of Filippo Maria Visconti, Duke of Milan; and the historian
Daru, in his _Histoire de Venise_, 8vo., Paris, 1821, has fallen into
more than one error in his account of the transaction. Marino Sanuto,
who wrote the lives of the Doges of Venice in 1493 (Daru says,
erroneously, some fifty years afterwards), has preserved the Orations
made by the Doge Tomaso Mocenigo, in opposition to the Florentine
proposals; which he copied, according to his statement, from a
manuscript that belonged to the Doge himself. Daru states, that the
MS. was communicated to him by the Doge; but that could not be, since
the Doge died in 1423, and Sanuto was not born till 1466. An abridged
translation of these Orations is given in the _Histoire de Venise_,
tom. ii, pp. 289-311.; and in the first of these, pronounced in
January, 1420 (1421, Daru), he is made to say, in reference to an
ambassador sent by the Florentines to the Duke of Milan, in 1414, as
follows: "L'ambassadeur fut _un Juif_, nomme Valori, banquier de sa
profession,", p. 291. As a commentary on this passage, Daru subjoins
a note from the Abbe Laugier, who, in his _Histoire de Venise_, liv.
21., remarks, 1. That it appears strange the Florentines should
have {36} chose a _Jew_ as an ambassador; 2. That his surname was
Bartolomeo, which could not have been borne by a Jew; 3. That the
Florentine historian Poggio speaks of Valori as having been one of the
principal members of the Council of Florence. The Abbe thence justly
concludes, that the ambassador could not have been a Jew; and it is
extraordinary that Daru, after such a conclusive argument, should have
admitted the term _Jew_ into his text. But the truth is, that this
writer (like many others of great reputation) preferred blindly
following the text of Sanuto, as printed by Muratori[2], to the
trouble of consulting any early manuscripts. It happens, however, that
in a manuscript copy of these Orations of Mocenigo, written certainly
earlier than the period of Sanuto, and preserved in the British
Museum, MS. _Add._ 12, 121., the true reading of the passage may be
found thus:--"Fo mandato Bartolomio Valori, _homo richo_, el qual
viveva de cambij." By later transcribers the epithet _richo_, so
properly here bestowed on the Florentine noble, was changed into
_iudio_ (_giudeo_), and having been transferred in that shape into
Sanuto, has formed the groundwork of a serious error, which has now
existed for more than three centuries and a half.

FREDERICK MADDEN.

British Museum, Nov. 7. 1849

    [2] In the _Rerum Italicarum Scriptores_, tom. xxii. col. 947.,
    the passage stands thus: "Fu mandato Bartolomeo Valori, _hom
    giudeo_, el qual vivea di cambi." Two late copies of Sanuto,
    formerly in the Guildford collection, and now in the British
    Museum, MS. _Add._ 8575, 8576, read, "Bartoli Valori, hom iudio."

       *       *       *       *       *


LETTERS OF LORD NELSON'S BROTHER IMMEDIATELY AFTER THE BATTLE OF
TRAFALGAR.

    [The following letters will be best illustrated by a few words
    derived from the valuable life of our great naval hero lately
    published by Mr. Pettigrew. Besides his last will, properly so
    called, which had been some time executed, Lord Nelson wrote and
    signed another paper of testamentary character immediately before
    he commenced the battle of Trafalgar. It contained an enumeration
    of certain public services performed by Lady Hamilton, and a
    request that she might be provided for by the country. "Could I
    have rewarded those services," Lord Nelson says, "I would not now
    call upon my country; but as that has not been in my power, I
    leave Emma Hamilton, therefore, a legacy to my king and country,
    that will give her ample provision to maintain her rank in life."
    He also recommended to the beneficence of his country his adopted
    daughter. "My relations," he concludes, "it is needless to
    mention; they will of course be amply provided for."

    This paper was delivered over to Lord Nelson's brother, together
    with his will. "Earl Nelson, with his wife and family, were then
    with Lady Hamilton, and had indeed been living with her many
    months. To their son Horatio, afterwards Viscount Trafalgar, she
    was as attentive as a mother, and their daughter had been almost
    exclusively under her care for education for six years. The
    Earl kept the codicil in his pocket until the day 120,000l. was
    voted for him by the House of Commons. On that day he dined with
    Lady Hamilton in Clarges Street, and learning at table what had
    been done, he brought forth the codicil, and throwing it to
    Lady Hamilton, coarsely said, she might now do with it as she
    pleased."--Pettigrew's _Memoirs of Nelson_, ii. 624, 625. Lady
    Hamilton took the paper to Doctors' Commons, where it stands
    registered as a codicil to Nelson's will. A knowledge of these
    circumstances is necessary to the full understanding of our
    correspondents communication.]

Sir,--The following letters may be found interesting as illustrative
of the private history of Lord Nelson, to which public attention has
been strongly drawn of late by the able work of Mr. Pettigrew. The
letters were addressed by Earl Nelson to the Rev. A.J. Scott, the
friend and chaplain of the fallen hero.

    18, Charles Street, Berkeley Square,

    Dec. 2. 1805.

    Dear Sir,--I am this day favoured with your obliging letter of
    October 27.[3] The afflicting intelligence you designed to prepare
    me for had arrived much sooner; but I am duly sensible of the kind
    motive which inducted this mark of your attention and remembrance.

    The King has been pleased to command that his great and gallant
    servant shall be buried with funeral honours suitable to the
    splendid services he rendered to his country, and that the body
    shall be conveyed by water to Greenwich, in order to be laid in
    state. For myself I need not say how anxious I am to pay every
    tribute of affection and of respect to my honoured and lamented
    brother's remains. And it affords me great satisfaction to learn
    your intention of accompanying them till deposited in their last
    earthly mansion. The coffin made of the L'Orient's mast will be
    sent to Greenwich to await the arrival of the body, and I hope
    there to have an opportunity of making my acknowledgments in
    person.

    Believe me, dear Sir,

    Your faithful friend, and obedient humble servant,

    NELSON.
{37}
    I beg the favour of your transmitting to me by the first safe
    opportunity such of my dear brother's papers (not of a public
    nature) as are under your care, and of making for me (with my
    sincere regards and kind compliments) to Captain Hardy the like
    request.

    Please to let me hear from you the moment you arrive at Portsmouth
    and direct to me as above, when I will send you any further
    directions I may have received from ministers.


    18 Charles Street, Berkeley Square,

    Dec. 6. 1805.

    My dear Sir,--I have this moment received your kind letter. I do
    not know I can add any thing to my former letter to you, or to
    what I have written to Captain Hardy. I will speak fully to Mr.
    Chevalier[4] before he leaves me.

    Your faithful and obliged humble servant,

    NELSON.

    It will be of great importance that I am in possession of his
    _last will_ and _codicils_ as soon as possible--no one can say
    that it does not contain among other things, many directions
    relative to his funeral.


    18 Charles Street, Berkeley Square,

    Dec. 13. 1805.

    Dear Sir,--I have been to the Admiralty, and I am assured that
    leave will be sent to you to quit the ship, and follow the remains
    of my dear brother when you please. We have determined to send Mr.
    Tyson with the coffin to the Victory, when we know she is at the
    Nore. He, together with Captain hardy and yourself, will see the
    body safely deposited therein. I trust to the affection of all
    for that. The Admiralty will order the Commissioner's yacht at
    Sheerness to receive it, and bring it to Greenwich. I suppose an
    order from the Admiralty will go to Captain Hardy to deliver the
    body to Mr. Tyson, and you will of course attend. But if this
    should be omitted by any mistake of office, I trust Captain Hardy
    will have no difficulty.

    There is no hurry in it, as the funeral will not be till the 10th
    or 12th of January.

    We do not wish to send Tyson till we have the will and codicil,
    which Captain Hardy informed me was to come by Captain Blackwood
    from Portsmouth on Tuesday last. We are surprised he is not here.
    Compts. to Captain Hardy. Write to me as soon as you get to the
    Nore, or before, if you can.

    Believe me, yours faithfully,

    NELSON

    Excuse this hasty and blotted scrawl, as I have been detained so
    long at the Admiralty that I have scarce time to save the Post.


    Canterbury,

    Dec. 26, 1805

    Dear Sir,--I received your letters of the 23rd and 25th this
    morning. I am glad to hear the remains of my late dear and most
    illustrious brother are at length removed to Mr. Peddieson's
    coffin, and safely deposited in Greenwich Hospital. Your kind and
    affectionate attention throughout the whole of this mournful and
    trying scene cannot fail to meet my sincere and grateful thanks,
    and that of the whole family. I am perfectly satisfied with the
    surgeon's reports which have been sent to me, that every thing
    proper has been done. I could wish to have known what has been
    done with the bowels--whether they were thrown overboard, or
    whether they were preserved to be put into the coffin with the
    body. The features being now lost, the face cannot, as Mr. Beatty
    very properly observes, be exposed; I hope therefore everything is
    closed and soldered down.

    I wrote to Mr. Tyson a few days ago, and should be glad to hear
    from him. I mean to go towards London about the 1st, 2nd or 3rd of
    Jan (the day not yet fixed), and call at Greenwich for a moment,
    just to have a melancholy sight of the coffin, &c. &c., when I
    hope I shall see you.

    I shall be glad to hear from you as often as you have any thing
    new to communicate, and how the preparations go on. Every thing
    now is in the hands of government, but, strange to tell, I have
    not yet heard from the Herald's Office, whether _I_ am to attend
    the procession or _not_.

    Believe me,

    Your much obliged humble servant,

    NELSON.


The _codicil_ referred to in these letters proved to be, or at least
to include, that memorable document which the Earl suppressed, when he
produced the will, lest it should curtail his own share of the amount
of favour which a grateful country would be anxious to heap on the
representative of the departed hero. By this unworthy conduct the
fortunes of Lady Hamilton and her still surviving daughter were at
once blighted.

The Earl as tightly held all he had, as he grasped all he could
get. It was expected that he would resign his stall at Canterbury
in favour of his brother's faithful chaplain and when he "held on"
notwithstanding his peerage and riches, he was attacked in the
newspapers. The following letter is the last communication with which
Dr. Scott was honoured, for his work was done:--

    Canterbury, May 28, 1806.

    Sir,--I am glad to find, by your letter, that you are not
    concerned in the illiberal and {38} unfounded paragraphs which
    have appeared and daily are appearing in the public prints.

    I am, Sir, your very humble servant,

    NELSON.

The Rev. Dr. Scott.

The above have never been printed, and I shall be glad if they are
thought worthy of a place in your very useful and interesting
periodical. I am, Sir, &c.,

ALFRED GATTY.

Ecclesfield, 7th Nov. 1849.

    [3] The Battle of Trafalgar was fought October 21.

    [4] Lord Nelson's steward in the Victory.

       *       *       *       *       *


MISQUOTATIONS.

Mr. Editor,--The offence of misquoting the poets is become so general,
that I would suggest to publishers the advantage of printing more
copious indexes than those which are now offered to the public. For
the want of these, the newspapers sometimes make strange blunders. The
_Times_, for instance, has lately, more than once, given the following
version of a well-known couplet:--

  "Vice is a monster of _so frightful_ mien,
  _As_ to be hated needs but to be seen."

The reader's memory will no doubt instantly substitute _such hideous_
for "so frightful," and _that_ for "as."

The same paper, a short time since, made sad work with Moore, thus:--

  "You may break, you may ruin the vase if you will,
  But the scent of the roses will _hang by_ it still."

Moore says nothing about the scents _hanging by_ the vase. "Hanging"
is an odious term, and destroys the sentiment altogether. What Moore
really does say is this:--

  "You may break, you may ruin the vase if you will,
  But the scent of the roses will _cling round_ it still."

Now the couplet appears in its original beauty.

It is impossible to speak of the poets without thinking of Shakspeare,
who towers above them all. We have yet to discover an editor capable
of doing him full justice. Some of Johnson's notes are very amusing,
and those of recent editors occasionally provoke a smile. If once
a blunder has been made it is persisted in. Take, for instance, a
glaring one in the 2nd part of Henry IV., where, in the apostrophe
to sleep, "clouds" is substituted for "shrouds."

  "Wilt thou, upon the high and giddy mast,
  Seal up the ship-boy's eyes, and rock his brains
  In cradle of the rude imperious surge,
  And in the visitation of the winds,
  Who take the ruffian billows by the top,
  Curling their monstrous heads, and hanging them
  With deafening clamours in the slippery _clouds_,
  That with the hurly death itself awakes?"

That _shrouds_ is the correct word is so obvious, that it is
surprising any man of common understanding should dispute it. Yet
we find the following note in Knight's pictorial edition:--

    "_Clouds_.--Some editors have proposed to read _shrouds_. A line
    in Julius Caesar makes Shakspere's meaning clear:--

          "'I have seen
  Th' ambitious ocean swell, and rage, and foam,
  To be exalted with the threatening _clouds_.'"

_Clouds_ in this instance is perfectly consistent; but here the scene
is altogether different. We have no ship-boy sleeping on the giddy
mast, in the midst of the shrouds, or ropes, rendered slippery by the
perpetual dashing of the waves against them during the storm.

If in Shakspeare's time the printer's rule of "following copy" had
been as rigidly observed as in our day, errors would have been
avoided, for Shakspeare's MS. was sufficiently clear. In the preface
to the folio edition of 1623, it is stated that "his mind and hand
went together; and what he thought he uttered with that easinesse that
wee have scarse received from him a blot in his papers."

D***N**R.

8th Nov. 1849.

       *       *       *       *       *


HERBERT AND DIBDIN'S AMES.

BORDE'S BOKE OF KNOWLEDGE--BOWLAND'S CHOISE OF CHANGE--GREENE'S ROYAL
EXCHANGE.

Mr. Editor,--I am induced to mention the following misstatement in
Herbert's edition of Ames' _Typographical Antiquities_, enlarged by
Dibdin, not by its importance, but by its supplying an appropriate
specimen of the benefits which would be conferred on bibliography by
your correspondents complying with Dr. Maitland's recommendations.

"Mr. Bindley," says Dibdin, "is in possession of the original
impression of Borde's _Boke of the Introduction of Knowledge_, which
was successively in the collection of West and Pearson. This copy,
and another in the Chetham Library at Manchester, are the only ones
known with the following {39} imprint: 'Copland in Fletestrete, at
the signe of the Rose Garland.' In the Selden Collection, in the
Bodleian Library, and in the copy from which Mr. Upcott published his
reprint, we read on the recto of the last leaf, 'Imprented at London
in Lothbury ouer agaynste Sainct Margaryte's Church, by me Wyllyam
Copland.'"

The copy in the Chetham Library, now lying before me, corresponds with
the description of the latter impression. Dibdin's mistake perhaps
originated in the last page of the work preceding Borde, which is
bound up with four other works, having the following: "Imprinted at
London in _Fleetestrete_ by Henry Wykes."

This volume contains--

    "The Choise of Change: Containing the Triplicitie of Diuinitie,
    Philosophie, and Poetrie, Short for memorie, Profitable for
    Knowledge, and necessary for Maners; whereby the learned may
    be confirmed, the ignorant instructed, and all men generally
    recreated. Newly set forth by S.R., Gent and Student in the
    Universitie of Cambridge. Tria sunt omnia. At London, Printed
    by Roger Warde, dwelling neere Holborne Conduite, at the sign
    of the Talbot, An. Dom. 1585."

These letters, S.R., are the well known initials of Samuel Rowlands,
who appears to have been a Welshman, from his love of Triads, and
from the dedications found in this the rarest of his works, and those
described by Mr. Collier in his _Catalogue of the Bridgewater House
Collection_. In the same volume is comprised a tract by Greene, with
a copy of which Mr. Dyce could never meet, entitled _The Royal
Exchange_, printed in 1590.

T. JONES.

       *       *       *       *       *


NOTES FROM FLY LEAVES, NO. 3

The following lines are copied from the fly leaf of a copy of the
_Necessary Doctrine and Erudition_. Are they original?

  Anno Dni md 47.

    _E P_

  Davyd's seat vnto the we comend
  Salomon's wysdome god the send
  Iohnes valiauntnesse in the reste
  Theys iij in oon be in thy brest.

_A Description of a Kyng after Scripture._

  _Prov._ 21  The hart of a kyng is in goddes hande
  _Sap._ 6    The strengthe of a realme ys a ryghteouse kyng
  _Deut._ 17  The kyng ought to kepe hym in the bande
  _Reg._ 20   Of the lawe of God the same readynge
  _Prov._ 20  Kyngs be happye in mercy doyng
  3 _Reg._ 3  Askynge wysdome of god omnipotent
              To discerne good from an evyll thyng
  _Prov._ 25  Take away vngodlines from the Kyng
              And his seat shall be stablyshed with ryght judgmet
           Let vs pray for the Kyng and hym honour
      EDWARD the sext our earthlye socour God save ye Kyng.

       *       *       *       *       *


ABDICATION OF JAMES II.

Mr. Editor,--The recent publication of Macaulay's _History of
England_, and the fresh prominence given thereby to the occurrences
of the Revolution of 1688, have induced me, joined to a wish for the
success of your happily-conceived work, to send you the following
"Note." It was drawn up by the late Sir Harris Nicolas, and printed in
the _Proceedings_ of the late Record Commissioners. As, however, only
fifty copies were printed for the use of the Commissioners, and a copy
is rarely met with, perhaps this Note may have sufficient novelty for
insertion. Sir Harris Nicolas, as editor of the _Proceedings of the
Privy Council_, would doubtless, had that work been continued to 1688,
have used the MSS. if attainable.

"Notice of manuscript in the possession of the Rev. Sir Thomas Miller,
Bart., containing the original Minutes of the Assembly of Peers and
Privy Councillors that met at Guildhall, upon the flight of James II.
from London.

    "Extracts from Memorandum of a MS. in the possession of the Rev.
    Sir Thomas Miller, Bart. shown to Mr. Cooper, Secretary to the
    Record Commissioners, to Sir Harris Nicolas, and to Mr. Hardy, in
    May, 1833, at Sir Thomas Miller's lodgings in the Edgeware Road.

"Immediately after the flight of James the Second from London, on
the 11th of December, 1688, a tumult arose among the citizens which
created considerable alarm; and with the view of preserving the peace,
of imparting public confidence, and of providing for the extraordinary
state of affairs, all the Peers and Privy Councillors then in the
vicinity of the metropolis assembled at Guildhall. Of this important
Assembly Bishop Burnet's notice is very brief, and it would appear
from his statement that it was called by the Lord Mayor.[5] A more
full account of the Convention {40} is, however, given in the Memoir
of James the Second published by Dr. Clarke: 'It seems, upon the
King's withdrawing from London, the lords about town met at Guildhall
to consult what was fit to be done. They looked upon the present state
of affairs as an interregnum, that the government was in a manner
devolved upon them, and were in great haste to make a present of it
to the Prince of Orange.'[6] Other acts of this Assembly are then
mentioned; and its proceedings are among the most interesting and
important events in English history, not only from their forming a
precedent in a conjuncture of affairs for which no express provision
is to be found in the constitution, but from the first regular offer
of the throne to the Prince of Orange having emanated from this
Convention. No Record of its proceedings has, it is presumed, been
hitherto known to exist; and the fact that so valuable a Document is
extant, cannot be too generally stated, for it is obvious that it has
high claims to the attention of historians.

"Sir Thomas Miller possesses the original Minutes of this Assembly of
the Peers in the handwriting of a Mr. Glyn, who acted as secretary.
His appointment to that situation is also preserved; and, as it is
signed by all the Lords who were present, it affords evidence of the
names of the Peers who took part in the business of the Assembly, and
contains a very interesting collection of autographs.

"The MS. itself is a small folio, but not above fifty pages are
filled. It comprises the period between the 11th and the 28th
December, 1688, both days inclusive, and appears to be a perfect
Record of every act of that memorable Assembly. The indorsement on the
cover merits notice: it states with singular minuteness the precise
hour of James's abdication, namely at _one in the morning_ of the 11th
of December, 1688."

Sir Thomas Miller also possessed a manuscript, containing an "Account
of the Earl of Rochester, Captain Kendall, and the Narrator's Journey
to Salisbury with King James, Monday, Nov. 19. to Friday, Nov. 23.
1688, inclusive."

In connection with this subject, it may be noticed that there is no
entry of any payment in the _Issue Books_ of the clerks of the Pells
between Tuesday, 11th December, and Monday, 24th December, 1688. J.E.

    [Perhaps some of our correspondents could inform us where the MSS.
    in question are now deposited.]

    [5] After mentioning the excesses committed by the mob, and the
    arrest of Judge Jefferies, Bishop Burnet says: "The Lord Mayor
    was so struck with the terror of this rude populace, and with the
    disgrace of a man who had made all people tremble before him, that
    he fell into fits upon it, of which he died soon after.

    "To prevent the further growth of such disasters, he called
    a Meeting of the Privy Councillors and Peers, who meet at
    Guildhall," &c. The pronoun _he_ must relate to the Lord Mayor,
    but the sentence is obscurely expressed.

    [6] Vol. ii. pp. 259, 260.

       *       *       *       *       *


OPINIONS OF WRITERS ON ENGLISH HISTORY, NO. 1.

    "Oh, do not read history, for that I _know_ must be false."--SIR
    ROBERT WALPOLE.

Sir,--I have, from time to time, made a few _notes_ on our historical
writers--rather I should say the conflicting opinions of critical
writers on their relative value, and the dependence to be placed on
them as historical guides. They are so opposite, as would in a great
measure confirm the opinion of the celebrated statesman above quoted.
I send, as a specimen, the opinions upon Burnet, and should its
insertion in your "NOTES AND QUERIES" be deemed advisable, I will
from time to time send others which I have in my note-book.

M.

Burnet, "A good historian and an honest man."--_Lord Brougham_.

"The History of his Own Times, which Burnet left behind him, is a work
of great instruction and amusement.... His ignorance of parliamentary
forms has led him into some errors, it would be absurd to deny,
but these faults do not detract from the general usefulness of his
work."--_Lord John Russell_.

"The most partial, malicious heap of scandal and misrepresentation,
that was ever collected for the laudable design of giving a false
impression of persons and things to all future ages."--_Lord
Dartmouth: note in Dr. Routh's edition_.

"A rash and partial writer."[7]--_Macaulay_.

"It is a piece of justice I owe to historical truth to say, that I
have never tried Burnet's facts by the tests of dates and of original
papers, without finding them wrong."--_Sir J. Dalrymple_.

"Burnet had all the merits and all the faults of an ardent, impetuous,
headstrong man, whose mind was honest, and whose objects were noble.
Whatever he reports himself to have heard or seen, the reader may
be assured he really did hear and see. But we must {41} receive his
representations and conclusions with that caution which must ever be
observed when we listen to the relation of a warm and busy partizan,
whatever be his natural integrity and good sense."--_Smyth's Lectures
on Modern History._

"His history is one which the present editor (Dr. Routh) truly says
will never lose its importance, but will continue to furnish materials
for other historians, and to be read by those who wish to derive their
knowledge of facts from the first sources of information. The accuracy
of his narrative has often been attacked with vehemence, and often, it
must be confessed, with success, but not so often as to overthrow the
general credit of his work."--_Quarterly Review._

"Rarely polished, I never read so ill a style."--_Swift._

    [7] Our correspondent should have added exact references to the
    places where these passages are to be found. Mr. Macaulay may
    have written these words quoted by our correspondent, in some
    hasty moment, but his summary of the character of Burnet in his
    _history of England_, ii. 175. 2nd Edition--a very noble and well
    considered passage--gives a very different and far juster estimate
    of Burnet's character.

       *       *       *       *       *


QUEEN ELIZABETH'S DOMESTIC ESTABLISHMENT.

Your readers may be curious to see a list of the persons composing the
domestic establishment (as it may be called) of Queen Elizabeth in the
middle of her reign, and an account of the sums of money severally
allowed to them out of the privy purse of the sovereign. The payments
will seem remarkably small, even allowing for the great difference in
the value of money then and now. What that difference may be, I am
not prepared to say; and I will venture here to put it as a "Query,"
to be answered by some competent person who may read this "Note." I
have seen it stated by more than one writer, that the difference in
the value of money at the end of Elizabeth's reign was at least five
times, i.e. that one pound then would go as far as five pounds now;
but I am not aware of the _data_ upon which the calculation was made.
I apprehend, besides, that the difference was greater in 1582, to
which what follows applies, than afterwards, and I should be glad to
have the matter cleared up. The subsequent account is indorsed in the
hand-writing of Lord Burghley, Lord Treasurer, in these words:--"1582.
The payment of the Ladies of the Privy Chamber;" but it applies also
to the gentlemen.

  _Wages paid to the Privy Chamber by the Year._

  The Bedchamber:                      L  s. d.
      The Lady Cobham, by the year     20  0  0
      The Lady Carewe                  33  6  8
      Mrs. Blanch Apprye[8]            33  6  8

  Gentlewomen of the Privy Chamber:
      Bridget Cave                     33  6  8
      The Lady Howard                  33  6  8
      The Lady Stafford                33  6  8
      The Lady Arundell                33  6  8
      The Lady Leighton                33  6  8
      Frances Howard                   33  6  8
      Dorothy Edmundes                 33  6  8

  Chamberers:
      The Lady Bartlett                20  0  0
      The Lady Drury                   20  0  0
      Mrs. Mary Skydmore               20  0  0
      Mrs. Katherine Newton            20  0  0
      Mrs. Jane Brucella               20  0  0

  Gentlemen of the Privy Chamber:
      Sir Christopher Hatton, Knight   50  0  0
      John Ashley, Esq.                33  6  8

  Gentlemen Usher of the Privy Chamber:
      Sir Drew Drury, Knight           30  0  0

  Grooms of the Privy Chamber:
      Thomas Ashley                    20  0  0
      Henry Sackford                   20  0  0
      John Baptiste                    20  0  0
      Thomas Knevett                   20  0  0
      Edward Carey                     20  0  0
      Thomas George                    20  0  0
      William Killigrew                20  0  0
                                      ---------
                  Summa Totalis       673  6  8
                                      =========

The above 673l. 6s. 8d. was the whole sum paid out of the privy purse;
but it is to be borne in mind that these persons were allowed diet and
lodging in the Court, so that, after all, the payments were not quite
as insignificant as they may at first seem. Whatever also may have
been the case with the ladies, it is certain that the gentlemen had
other sources of emolument derived from the Crown, such as monopolies,
valuable grants of royal domains, leases of customs, &c., which
altogether made up an ample income. Sir Christopher Hatton, for
instance, could not have built Holdenby out of his 50l. a year as
Gentleman of the Privy Chamber.

ANTIQUARIUS.

    [8] The names are spelt precisely as they stand in the
    document itself.

       *       *       *       *       *


EXTRACTS FROM PARISH REGISTERS OF EAST PECKHAM, KENT.

Sir,--In my commonplace book I find the following notes, being
extracts from the ancient Registers of East Peckham Church, Kent,
which have never (I believe) been published, and which may perhaps be
of service to the historian or antiquary.

    1637. This yeare was the Communion-table rayled in by the
    appointment of Dr. Ryves, Dean of Shorham {42} Deanery, and
    Chancellor to the most Reverend Father in God, William Laud,
    Archbishop of Canterbury, who commanded this uniformity to
    be general throughout the kingdom.

    1638. This time of lent being to be kept holy by fasting and
    abstinence from flesh, notwithstanding Sir Roger Twisden, Knt
    and Baronett and Dame Isabella his wife, being both very sick
    and weake, in my judgement and opinion [are] to be tolerated
    for the eating of flesh.

    FRANCISC. WORRALL, Vicar.

A similar entry occurs for the three following years.

    1648. Upon the third of June the following Infants all born in
    the parish of Brenchley were baptized in this parish Church, by
    an order granted from Sir John Sedley, Knight and Baronett, Sir
    John Rayney, and Sir Isaac Sedley, Knights:--

    "Whereas complaints have often been made unto us by many of the
    principal inhabitants of the Parish of Brenchley, that they having
    desired Mr. Gilbert, minister of the said Parish, to baptize their
    children, and according to the Directorie offered to present them
    before the Congregation, he hath neglected or refused so to do;
    whereby divers infants remain unbaptized, some of them above a
    year old, expressly contrary to the said Directorie.

    "We do therefore order that the parents of such children do bring
    them unto the Parish Church of East Peckham, where we desire that
    Mr. Topping, minister of the said Parish, would baptize them
    according to the sayd Directorie, they acquainting him with the
    day they intend to bring them beforehand.

    "Dated ye 25th of May 1648.

    "JOHN SEDLEY.

    "JOHN RAYNEY.

    "ISAAC SEDLEY."

The last extract may illustrate the progress of Anabaptism, under
the Parliamentary rule, and serves by way of curious sequel to the
preceding excerpta.

In a window of the same church I observed this inscription:--"Here
stoode the wicked fable of Mychael waying of [souls]. By the law of
Qvene Elizabeth according to God[s] Word is taken away."

C.F.S.

       *       *       *       *       *


PAWNBROKERS' THREE BALLS.

Mr. Editor,--The Edinburgh Reviewer, cited by your correspondent Mr.
W.J. Thoms, seems to have sought rather too far for the origin of a
pawnbroker's golden balls.

He is right enough in referring their origin to the Italian bankers,
generally called Lombards; but he has overlooked the fact that the
greatest of those traders in money were the celebrated and eventually
princely house of the Medici of Florence. They bore pills on their
shield, (and those pills, as usual then, were gilded,) in allusion
to the professional origin from whence they had derived the name of
Medici; and their agents in England and other countries put that
armorial bearing over their doors as their sign, and the reputation
of that house induced others to put up the same sign.

H.W.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE LIONS IN THE TOWER.

Mr. Editor,--Some one of your readers may be interested in knowing
that there was a royal menagerie in the Tower of London in the reign
of Edward III. In the Issue Roll of the forty-fourth year of his
reign, 1370, there are five entries of payments made to "William de
Garderobe, keeper of the king's lions and leopards" there, at the rate
of 6d. a day for his wages, and 6d. a day for each beast.--pp. 25.
216. 298. 388. 429.

The number of "beasts" varied from four to seven. Two young lions are
specially mentioned; and a "lion lately sent by the Lord the Prince
from Gascony to England to the Lord the King."

[Greek: Phi]

    [Our correspondent's NOTE is an addition to what Bayley has given
    us on this subject; who tells us, however, that as early as 1252,
    Henry III. sent to the Tower a white bear, which had been brought
    to him as a present from Norway, when the Sheriffs of London were
    commanded to pay four pence every day for its maintenance.]

       *       *       *       *       *


NOTES ON AUTHORS AND BOOKS, NO. 1.

THE "BIBLIOGRAPHIE BIOGRAPHIQUE."

A lover of literature, and aspiring to promote its extension
and improvement, I sometimes form projects for the adoption of
others--sensible, be it also said, of the extent of my own engagements
with certain learned societies.

One of these projects has been a tabular view of the literary
biography of the British Islands. In the midst of my reflections on
the plans of Blair, Priestly, Playfair, Oberlin, Tytler, Jarry de
Mancy, &c. I received a specimen of a _Bibliographie biographique_, by
Edouard-Marie Oettinger, now in the press at Leipzic.

As books multiply, the inexpediency of attempting general bibliography
becomes more {43} and more apparent. Meritorious as are the works of
Brunet and Ebert, and useful as they may be to _collectors_, they
are inadequate to the wants of _men of letters_. Henceforth, the
bibliographer who aims at completeness and accuracy must restrict
himself to one class of books.

M. Oettinger appears to have acted on this principle, and has been
happy in the choice of his subject--

  "The proper study of mankind is man."

The work is comprehensive in its object, judicious in its plan,
accurate in its details, as far as the specimen proceeds, and an
unquestionable desideratum in literature.

Ainsi, vive M. Edouard-Marie Oettinger! Vive la _Bibliographie
biographique_!

BOLTON CORNEY.

       *       *       *       *       *

FORM OF PETITION.

When a Petition ends with "Your Petitioner shall ever pray, &c." what
form of words does the "&c." represent?

B.

       *       *       *       *       *

QUERY AS TO NOTES--GREENE OF GREEN'S NORTON.

Mr. Editor,--I congratulate you on your happy motto, but will you give
your readers the results of your own experience and practice, and
tell them the simplest _mode of making Notes_, and when made, how to
arrange _them_ so _as to find them when required?_

I have been in the habit of using slips of paper--the blank turn-overs
of old-fashioned letters before note paper came into fashion--and
arranging in subjects as well as I could; but many a note so made has
often caused me a long hour's looking after: this ought not so to
be; pigeon-holes or portfolios, numbered or lettered, seem to be
indispensable.

Has any reader a _Note_ whereby to tell who are the present
representatives of Greenes of "Green's Norton?" or who was "Richard
Greene, Apothecary," who was living 1770, and bore the arms of that
family?

H.T.E.

    [Our answer to our correspondent's first Query is, send your
    Notes to us, who will print _and index_ them.--ED.]

       *       *       *       *       *

BUSTS OF CHARLES I. AND JAMES I.--ANCIENT TAPESTRY.

1. Where is now the bust of Charles I., formerly in Westminster
Hall, and engraved by Peter Mazell, for Pennant's _London_, in which
engraving the bust is attributed to Bernini, though Vertue thought
differently? (See Dallaway's _Walpole_, 1826, ii. 109.)

2. Also, where is the correspondent bust of James I., formerly at
Whitehall, of which there is an engraving by N. Smith?

3. What has become of the tapestry of the reign of Henry VI.
which formerly adorned the Painted Chamber in the ancient Palace
of Westminster? It appears that it remained in one of the lower
apartments from the time when it was taken down in 1800 until the
year 1810; that it was then sold to Charles Yarnold, Esq., of Great
Helen's, Bishopsgate Street, for 10l. After his death in 1825, in the
auction of his collection at Southgate's (June 11. that year, lot
238), it was sold as "Seven pieces representing the Siege of Troy, for
7l. to Mr. Matheman." Who was Mr. Matheman? and what has now become of
his acquisition?

Another piece of tapestry in Mr. Yarnold's possession, but it may be
presumed in far better condition, was bought by Mr. Teschmaker, his
executor, for 63l. This was described as "The Plantagenet Tapestry,
in fine preservation, containing 23 full-sized portraits of the
different branches of the Houses of York and Lancaster: among the most
prominent are Margaret of Anjou; Cicely, Duchess of York; the Duke of
Gloucester, afterwards Richard III.; Edward of Lancaster, Henry VI.;
Earl of March, son of Richard (Duke of York and) afterwards Edward
IV.; Henry VII.; Clarence [?] Duke of York," &c. This description
raises one's curiosity greatly, and query, has this tapestry been
elsewhere described? At the meeting of the Archaeological Association
at Warwick in 1847, it was supposed to have come from St. Mary's
Hall, Coventry; but that idea seems to have arisen merely from its
similarity of design to the tapestry which is now there.

N.

       *       *       *       *       *

ORIGIN OF EPITHET "FACTOTUM."

Sir,--The following expression in Cavendish's _Life of Wolsey_, p.
42.--"He was {44} Dominus fac totum with the king"--seems to point
us to some ecclesiastical origin for the derivation of our familiar
word "factotum." Does any one know the precise whereabouts of such a
phrase in the Ancient Service books?

C.F.S.

       *       *       *       *       *

INSCRIPTION ON ANCIENT ALMS-BASINS.

Mr. Editor,--In the parish church in which I officiate are preserved
four ancient and curious alms-basins, of latten; They appear to be of
Flemish workmanship, and, from inventories of the church goods, made
at different times, we may gather that they were given for their
present use during the seventeenth century. They represent:--1. The
Martyrdom of St. Sebastian; 2. The Annunciation of the Blessed Virgin;
3. The Temptation in Eden; and 4. The Spies bearing the Grapes. Around
each of these subjects is a legend in foreign characters, "DER.
INFRID. GEHWART." I have submitted this inscription to antiquaries
and German scholars in vain; it still remains a puzzle. It has been
suggested that it may have been only an arbitrary mark of the maker.
Is this probable? If not, will you, or one of your readers, give the
interpretation to

CLERICUS?

Nov. 8, 1849.

    [We have much pleasure in inserting the foregoing QUERY, and
    trust that many of our correspondents will follow the example of
    _Clericus_, by furnishing us with copies of the inscriptions on
    any ancient church plate in their possession, or which may come
    under their notice. A comparison of examples will often serve to
    remove such difficulties as the present, which perhaps may be read
    DERIN FRID GEHWART, "Therein Peace approved;" _Gewaeren_ being used
    in the sense of _Bewaehren_, authority for which may be found in
    Wackernagel.]

       *       *       *       *       *


NOTES OF BOOK SALES--CATALOGUES, ETC.

It is our purpose from time to time to call the attention of our
book-buying friends to the approaching sales of any collections which
may seem to us to deserve their attention; and to any catalogues which
may reach us containing books of great rarity and curiosity. Had we
entertained no such intention we should have shown our respect for
the memory of that intelligent, obliging, and honourable member of
the bookselling profession (to whom a literary man rarely addressed
a QUERY, without receiving in reply a NOTE of information worth
preserving), the late Mr. Thomas Rodd, by announcing that the sale of
the first portion of his extensive and valuable stock of books will
commence on Monday next, the 19th instant, and occupy the remainder
of that week.

The following Lots are among the specimens of the rarities contained
in this portion of Mr. Rodd's curious stock:--

  189 ACTS OF PARLIAMENT, Orders, Declarations,
        Proclamations, &c. 1657 to 1660, _the original
        Papers and Broadsides collected and bound in
        1 vol. calf_                 1657-60

  *** This very important volume contains the Acts, &c.
        during the period intervening between Scobell's
        Collection and the recognized Statutes of
        Charles II. As the laws during this period
        have never been collected into a regular edition,
        a series of them is of the greatest rarity.

  194 AESOP, FABLES, TRANSLATED FROM THE FRENCH
        WILLIAM CAXTON, _curious wood engravings_
        BLACK LETTER, VERY RARE, _imperfect, old russia_
        EMPRYNTED BY RICHARD PYNSON (NO DATE)

  *** This edition is altogether unknown and undescribed.
        The present copy commences with signature C1, and
        extends to sig. S(v) in sixes, on the reverse of
        which is the colophon, with Pynson's device
        underneath. _It wants sheets A and B, and E_ (iiii).

  380 Cellii (E.) Eques Auratus Anglo-Wirtembergieus;
        id est, actus admodum Solennis; quo
        Jacobus Rex Angliae, &c. Regii Garteriorum
        supremus ac Frid. Ducem Wirtembergicum,
        per Rob. Spencer Barnoem declaravit,
        _portrait woodcut             Tubing. 1605_

  *** This was Sir Wm. Dethick's copy, Garter King at
        Arms, who accompanied Lord Spencer in his
        journey; in it he has written some very curious
        circumstances respecting the journey, and of
        the ill-treatment he experienced from Sir Rob.
        Spencer and Wm. Seager, "a poore paynter,
        sonne of a base fleminge and spawne of a Jew,"
        with an account of the family of Dethick, or De
        Dyk, of Derbyshire and Staffordshire.

  475 CHRISTINE OF PISA. THE FAYT OF ARMES AND OF CHYVALRYE
        BLACK LETTER, _one leaf inlaid and three or four
        beautifully fac-similed, otherwise a fine and
        perfect copy, russia extra, gilt leaves, by C.
        Lewis_ WESTMESTRE, PER CAXTON, MCCCCLXXXIX

  *** This work consists of 139 leaves, exclusive of
      the table, occupying two leaves. The Colophon of
      the Printer is one of great interest, filling
      the two last pages. It thus commences:--"Thur
      endeth this boke, whiche xpyne of pyse made
      drewe out of the boke named Vegecius de re
      militari and out of tharbre of bataylles
      wyth many other thynges sett in to the same
      requisite to werre and batailles, which boke
      beyng in Frenshe was delyvered to me Willm
      Caxton by the most crysten kinge and sedoubted
      prynce, my naturel and souvrayn {45}
      Lord Kyng Henry the VII, Kyng of England
      and of France, in his Palais of Westmestre,
      the 23 day of Janyuere, the III of his regne,
      and desire and wylsed me to translate this
      said boke and reduce it into our enlish natural
      tonge and to put it in enprynte, &c."

  522 ENGLAND:--Copy of a Letter written by a Spanish
      Gentleman to his Friend in England in refutation
      of sundry Calumnies there falsely bruited among
      the People, 1589--An Advertisement written to a
      Secretarie of my Lord Treasurer of Ingland by an
      Inglish Intelligencer as he passed through Germanie
      towards Italie; also a Letter written by the
      Lord Treasurer, 1592.

  *** Two very rare and curious historical pieces, written
      by a zealous Catholic in defence of Philip II.

  944 Neumayr van Ramszla (J.W.) Johann fursten des
      Jungern Hertzogen zu Sachsen, Reise in Franckreich
      Engelland und Nederland, _port. and plates_
      _russia extra, gilt leaves           Lips. 1620_

  *** The volume contains accounts of many of the
      pictures and curiosities in the royal palaces of
      Westminster, St. James, &c.

On the following Monday will commence the sale of the theological
portion of his collection, which will occupy eight days, and conclude
on the 4th of December. The sales are entrusted to the management of
Messrs. S. Leigh Sotheby & Co. of Wellington Street.

We have also received from Mr. Asher of Berlin, a copy of the
_Bibliotheca Tieckiana_--the sale catalogue of the library of Ludwig
Tieck, the distinguished German poet, novelist, and critic. The
sale will commence at Berlin on the 10th December, with the English
portion of the library, which besides the 2nd, 3rd, and 4th folios,
is particularly rich in works illustrative of Shakespeare, and of
translations of various portions of our great dramatist's writings.
The following lot, comprising an edition, we believe, not very
generally known, and containing the manuscript notes and comments
of so profound a critic as Ludwig Tieck, ought to find an English
purchaser.

  2152  THE PLAYS OF W. SHAKSPEARE, with the Corrections
        and Illustrations of various Commentators,
        to which are added Notes by Johnson and
        Steevens. 23 vols. gr. in 8vo. Basil 1800-1802

  "Exemplaire unique et de la plus grande importance,
      contenant des notes sans nombre de la main de
      M. Tieck. Ces notes renferment les fruits d'une
      etude de plus de 40 ans sur le grand poete, par
      son plus grand traducteur et commentateur, et
      forment le texte du grand ouvrage sur Shakspeare,
      promis depuis si longtemps."

One of the most curious articles in this catalogue, copies of which
may be obtained from the London Agent for the sale, Mr. Nutt, of the
Strand, is No. 1965, a copy of Lilly's _Sixe Court Comedies_, which
had belonged to Oliver Cromwell, and appears to contain his autograph.

There are few literary men who have not, in the course of some one
or other of their inquiries, experienced the difficulty there is in
procuring copies of pamphlets which being for the most part originally
published for purposes of temporary interest, are rarely preserved
by binding, and consequently when afterwards wanted become extremely
difficult of attainment. We all remember the valuable Catalogue
published many years since by Mr. Rodd, of Newport Street, the father
of Mr. Thomas Rodd, and have often regretted the loss of our copy of
that extensive collection; and we record now for the information of
our readers the publication by Mr. Russell Smith, of 4. Old Compton
Street, of Part I. of a Catalogue of a singular and unique collection
of 25,000 ancient and modern Tracts and Pamphlets: containing I.
Biography, Literary History, and Criticism; II. Trials, Civil and
Criminal; III. Bibliography and Typography; IV. Heraldry and Family
History; V. Archaeology; VI. Architecture, Painting, and Sculpture;
VII. Music; VIII. Metaphysics.

       *       *       *       *       *


QUERIES STILL ON OUR LIST.

                                                            NO.   PAGE
  The Times, Chronicle, and Herald, when first established   I.     7
  Lord Chatham's Speech on American Stamp Act, Notes of      I.    12
  Dorne, the Bookseller                                      I.    12
  Henno Rusticus                                             I.    12
  The Signe of the End                                       I.    20
  Lines in the style of Suckling                            II.    20
  Pedlar's Song, attributed to Shakspeare, and
    Tradition respecting Hamlet                             II.    23
  Sir William Skipwith                                      II.    23
  Thistle of Scotland                                       II.    24
  Sermones Sancti Borromaei                                  II.    27
  Luther and Erasmus, Lines on                              II.    27
  Tower Royal                                               II.    28
  Constitution Hill                                         II.    28
  Countess of Pembroke's Letter                             II.    28
  Tennison's Sermon on Nell Gwynne                          II.    28
  Colley Cibber's Apology                                   II.    29
  White Gloves at Maiden Assizes                            II.    29
  Flemish Account                                            I.     8
  Grog, Origin of Word                                      II.    28
  Bishop Barnaby, why Lady-birds so called                  II.    28

       *       *       *       *       *{46}


BOOKS AND ODD VOLUMES

WANTED TO PURCHASE.

JONES' (EDMUND) GEOGRAPHICAL, HISTORICAL AND RELIGIOUS ACCOUNTS OF
ABERYSTWITH, 8vo. Trevecka, 1779.

CARTARI.--LA ROSA D'ORO PONTIFICA, ETC. 4to. Rome. 1681.

SHAKSPEARE'S DRAMATIC WORKS--The _Fourth_ Volume of WHITTINGHAM'S
Edition, in 7 vols. 24mo. Chiswick. 1814.

M.C.H. BROEMEL, FEST-TANZEN DER ERSTEN CHRISTEN. Jena. 1705.

BUDDEN'S DISCOURSE FOR PARENT'S HONOUR AND AUTHORITIE. 8vo. 1616.

THE TWO WOLVES IN LAMB'S SKINS, OR OLD ELI'S LAMENTATIONS OVER HIS TWO
SONS. 8vo. 1716.

AVERELL'S FOUR NOTABLE HISTORIES, ETC. 4to. 1590.

NATURE, A POEM. Folio. 1736.

BARNEFIELD'S PLOWMAN'S COMPLAINT. 4to. 1580.

GILL'S INSTRUCTION FOR CHILDREN, in Verse. 1709.

JERMIN'S FATHER'S INSTITUTION OF HIS CHILD. 1658.

COOPER'S (C.P.) ACCOUNT OF THE MOST IMPORTANT PUBLIC RECORDS. 8vo.
1832.--The First Volume of.

PASSIONAEL EFTE DAT LEVENT DER HELLIGEN. Folio. Basil. MDXXII.

LIVY.--Vol. I. of Crevier's Edition. 6 vols. 4to. Paris. 1739.

*** Letters stating particulars and lowest price, _carriage free_,
to be sent to Mr. BELL, Publisher of "NOTES AND QUERIES," 186. Fleet
Street.

       *       *       *       *       *


NOTICES TO CORRESPONDENTS.

The matter is so generally understood with regard to the management
of periodical works, that it is hardly necessary for the Editor to
say that HE CANNOT UNDERTAKE TO RETURN MANUSCRIPTS; but on one point
he wishes to offer a few words of explanation to his correspondents
in general, and particularly to those who do not enable him to
communicate with them except in print. They will see, on a very little
reflection, that it is plainly his interest to take all he can get,
and make the most, and the best, of everything; and therefore he begs
them to take for granted that their communications are received, and
appreciated, even if the succeeding Number bears no proof of it. He is
convinced that the want of specific acknowledgment will only be felt
by those who have no idea of the labour and difficulty attendant on
the hurried management of such a work, and of the impossibility of
sometimes giving an explanation, when there really is one which would
quite satisfy the writer, for the delay or non-insertion of his
communication. Correspondents in such cases have no reason, and if
they understood an editor's position they would feel that they have
no right, to consider themselves under-valued; but nothing short
of personal experience in editorship would explain to them the
perplexities and evil consequences arising from an opposite course.

       *       *       *       *       *

PASQUIN will find his suggestion attended to very shortly.

COMMUNICATIONS RECEIVED--W.B.B.--E.H.--R.V.--Philo.--J.B.--
Philobiblion.--J.M.W.--W.--Anglo Cambrian (with many thanks for his
excellent suggestion).--A.T.--Odo.--J. Miland--L.--G.J.K.--Melanion.

CONTENTS AND INDEX.--Our correspondents will see that their wish for
a _Table of Contents_ to each number has been complied with. We are
fully aware how much the value of a work like "NOTES AND QUERIES" is
enhanced by a good INDEX. It is intended to give a very copious one
at the end of each volume, so as to make the work one not merely of
temporary interest, but of permanent utility.

BOOKS AND ODD VOLUMES WANTED. We believe that this will prove one of
the most useful divisions of our weekly Sheet. Gentlemen who may be
unable to meet with any book or volume, of which they are in want, may
be upon furnishing name, date, size, &c., have it inserted in this
list, _free of cost_. Persons having such volumes to dispose of are
requested to send reports of price, &c. to Mr. Bell, our Publisher.

We have received many complaints of a difficulty in procuring our
paper. Every Bookseller and Newsvendor will supply it _if ordered_,
and gentlemen residing in the country may be supplied regularly with
the Stamped Edition by giving their orders direct to the publisher,
Mr. GEORGE BELL, 186. Fleet Street, accompanied by a Post Office
order for a quarter (4s. 4d.). All communications should be addressed
To the Editor of "NOTES AND QUERIES," 186. Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

Vols. I. and II. 8vo. Price 28s. cloth.

THE JUDGES OF ENGLAND; from the time of the Conquest.

By EDWARD FOSS, F.S.A.

"It supplies what was much wanted--a regular and progressive account
of English legal institutions. The result is a correction of many
errors, in addition of much new information, and a better general view
of our strictly legal history than any other jurist, historian, or
biographer had hitherto attempted to give."--_Examiner._

LONGMAN, BROWN, GREEN, and LONGMANS.

       *       *       *       *       *{47}

SIX DAYS SALE of the First Portion of the Extensive and Valuable STOCK
OF BOOKS of the late eminent Bookseller, Mr. Thos. Rodd, of Great
Newport Street.


MESSRS. S. LEIGH SOTHEBY and Co., Auctioneers of Literary property and
Works illustrative of the Fine Arts will SELL by AUCTION, at their
House, 3. Wellington Street, Strand, on MONDAY, Nov. 19 and Five
following Days, the First Portion of the extensive and Valuable, STOCK
of BOOKS of the late eminent Bookseller Mr. Thomas Rodd, of Great
Newport Street, London; comprising among other important works,
Anselme (P.) Histoire Genealogique et Chronologique de la Maison
Royale de France, 9 vols., a fine copy of the best edition, on large
paper; Clutterbuck's (R.) History and Antiquities of the County of
Hertford, 3 vols., large paper, uncut; Christina of Pisa, the Fayt of
Armes and of Chyvalrye, by Caxton, in Russia extra, by Lewis; AEsop's
Fables, a very rare edition, by R. Pynson, unknown and undescribed;
Critici Sacri, a fine copy, in 13 vols.; Dumont et Rousset, Corps
Universel Diplomatique du Droit des Gens, a fine copy of this truly
important work, on large paper, in 30 vols.; Edmondson (J.) Baronagium
Genealogicum, 6 vols. large paper; Dugdale's Origines Juridiciales, a
fine illustrated copy, in Russia extra; Graevii et Gronovii Thesaurus
Antiquitatem, 34 vols.; Holinshed's (R.) Chronicles of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, black letter, a choice copy of the best
edition; Grafton's Chronicle at large, fine copy, by C. Lewis, from
the Grenville Collection; Monstrelet Chroniques, large paper, very
scarce; Pellerin Oeuvres sur les Medailles; Somer's (Lord) Collection
of Tracts, by Sir Walter Scott, 13 vols., Russia extra; Surtees'
History of Durham, 4 vols.; a large Collection of the Works of
Tempesta, in 2 vols.; Bryan's Biographical Dictionary of Painters and
Engravers, extensively illustrated with an assemblage of 2500 plates;
Versions of the Scriptures; various Works relating to America, Private
Acts of Parliament, rare and curious Historical Pieces and Tracts,
Pageants, &c.


EIGHT DAY'S SALE of highly interesting British Historical PORTRAITS,
forming the Second Portion of the very important and valuable Stock of
Prints, the Property of Messrs. W. and G. Smith, the long-established,
well-known, and eminent Printsellers, of Lisle Street, having retired
from Business.


MESSRS.S. LEIGH SOTHEBY and Co., Auctioneers of Literary Property and
Works illustrative of the Fine Arts, will SELL by AUCTION, at their
House, 3. Wellington Street, Strand, on MONDAY, Dec 3, and Seven
following Days (Sunday excepted), at One precisely each day, the
Second Portion of the important and valuable STOCK of PRINTS, the
property of Messrs. W. and G. Smith; comprising one of the most
numerous and interesting collections of British historical portraits
ever offered for sale, and containing a vast number of extremely rare
prints by the most eminent English engravers, generally in the finest
condition, and a large number of fine proofs and prints after the
works of Sir Joshua Reynolds.

May be viewed four days prior to the sale and catalogues had.


UNIVERSITY PRESS, OXFORD

Books recently Published.

A GREEK-ENGLISH LEXICON, based on the German work of F. Passow, by
Henry George Liddell, M.A., and Robert Scott, M.A. Third editions,
crown 4to. 2l. 4s. in boards; 2l. 12s. 6d. in Russia.

A LEXICON, chiefly for the use of Schools, abridges from the
Greek-English Lexicon of H.G. Liddell, M.A., and R. Scott, M.A., Third
edition, square 12mo. 7s. 6d. in boards; 9s. bound.

GRAECAE GRAMMATICAE Rudiments in usum Scholarum. Seventh Edition, 12mo.
3s. 6d. in boards; 4s. bound.

APSINIS ET LONGINI RHETORICA e Codicibus MSS., adhibita Supellectili
Ruhukeniana recensuit Joh. Bakius. 8vo. 6s. 6d. in boards.

DEMOSTHENES ex recensione G. Dindorfii. Vols. I.--IV. 8vo. Textus. 2l.
2s. in boards. Vols. V. VI. VII. Annotationes Interpretum. 1l. 16s.
6d. in boards.

ETYMOLOGICON MAGNUM seu verius Lexicon saepissime vocabulorum origines
indagans ex pluribus Lexicis Scholiastis Grammaticis anonymi cujusdam
Opera concinnatum. Ad Codd. MSS. recensuit et notis variorum instruxit
T. Gaisford, S.T.P. Folio. 3l. 3s. in boards; 4l. bound.

RELIQUIAE SACRAE, secundi tertiique saeculi. Ad codices MSS recensuit
notisque illustravit Martinus Josephus Routh, S.T.P. collegii S.
Magdalenae Oxon. Praeses. Second Edition. Vol. V. 8vo. 9s. in boards.

SOPHOCLIS Tragoediae et Fragmenta, ex recensione et cum notis G.
Dindorfii. Third Edition, 2 vols. 8vo. 13s. in boards.

VETUS TESTAMENTUM ex Versione Septuaginta Interpretum, secundum
Exemplar Vaticanum Romae editum. Accedit potior varietas codicis
Alexandrini. 3 vols. 12mo. 13s. 6d. in boards.

NOVUM TESTAMENTUM GRAECUM Accedunt parallela S. Scripturae loca, necnon
vetus capitulorum notatio et canones Eusebii, 18mo, 4s. 6d. in boards.

The above 4 volumes neatly bound uniform, in old style 1l. 12s.

A HISTORY OF CONFERENCES, and other proceedings connected with the
Revision of the Book of Common Prayer, from 1558 to 1690. By Edward
Cardwell, D.D., Principal of St. Alban's Hall. Third Edition, 8vo. 7s.
{48}

CLARENDON'S HISTORY OF THE REBELLION AND CIVIL WARS IN ENGLAND,
together with an Historical View of the Affairs in Ireland, now for
the first time carefully printed from the original MS. preserved in
the Bodleian Library. To which are subjoined the Notes of Bishop
Warburton. 7 vols. 8vo. 2l. 10s. in boards.

BISHOP JEWEL'S WORKS. By Rev. R.W. JELF, D.D. A New Edition. 8 vols.
8vo. 3l. 12s. in boards.

PEARSON'S EXPOSITION OF THE CREED. Revised and corrected by the Rev.
E. BURTON, D.D. A New Edition, 2 vols. 8vo. 10s. in boards.

THREE PRIMERS put forth in the reign of King Henry the Eighth. A New
Edition. 8vo. 9s. in boards.

SHUCKFORD'S SACRED AND PROFANE HISTORY OF THE WORLD CONNECTED. A New
Edition. 2 vols. 8vo. 16s. in boards.

Sold by JOHN HENRY PARKER, Oxford, and 377. Strand, London; T. PAYNE
and H. FOSS, Pall Mall; and E. GARDNER, 7. Paternoster Row.

       *       *       *       *       *

Folio, price 30s.

THE CHORAL RESPONSES and LITANIES of the UNITED CHURCH of ENGLAND and
IRELAND. Collected from Authentic Sources, by the Rev. JOHN JEBB,
A.M., Rector of Peterstow.

The present Work contains a full collection of the harmonized
compositions of ancient date, including nine sets of pieces and
responses, and fifteen litanies, with a few of the more ancient Psalm
Chants. They are given in full score, and in their proper cliffs. In
the upper part, however, the treble is substituted for the "cantus"
or "medius" cliff: and the whole work is so arranged as to suit the
library of the musical student, and to be fit for use in the Choir.


Post 8vo. Cloth. 10s. 6d.

THE HISTORY OF JUNIUS AND HIS WORKS, and a Review of the Controversy
respecting Junius, with an Appendix, containing Portraits and
Sketches, by Junius, selected from the Letters. By JOHN JAQUES.

    "This is a very able book; well arranged in its plan, and complete
    in its matter. To those who are interested in the controversy, or
    even to any readers of Junius who wish for further information
    than the common editions furnish, we strongly recommend this
    volume. They will find it full, without being overcharged; and
    it possesses an advantage even over Woodfall's edition, in only
    containing what is essential to the point, besides exhibiting much
    which does not appear in that elaborate publication. The 'History
    of Junius and his Works' is an essential companion to the 'Letters
    of Junius.'"--_Spectator_, March 4. 1843.


Now ready, royal 4to, price 2l. 2s.

EXAMPLE OF ANCIENT PULPITS EXISTING IN ENGLAND. Selected and drawn
from Sketches and Measurements taken on the Spot, with Descriptive
Letter-press. By FRANCIS T. DOLLMAN, Architect.

This work contains 30 Quarto Plates, three of which are highly
finished in colours, restored accurately from the existing
indications. The Pulpits delineated are: St. Westburga, Chester; SS.
Peter and Paul, Shrewsbury; St. Michael, Coventry; St. Mary, Wendon;
St. Mary and All Saints, Fotheringay; All Saints, North Cerney;
Holy Trinity, Nailsea; St. Peter, Winchcombe; St. John Baptist,
Cirencester; St. Mary, Totness; St. Mary, Frampton; Holy Trinity,
Old Aston; St. Benedict, Glastonbury; St. Peter, Wolverhampton;
St. Andrew, Cheddar (coloured); St. Andrew, Banwell; St. George,
Brokworth; Holy Trinity, Long Sutton (coloured); St. Saviour,
Dartmouth (coloured); All Saints, Sudbury; All Saints, Hawstead;
St. Mary de Lode, Gloucester; St. Mary, North Petherton.


Royal 4to, cloth, Vol. I. price 3l. 13s. 6d.

GOTHIC ORNAMENTS; being a Series of Examples of Enriched Details and
Accessories of the Architecture of Great Britain. Drawn from existing
Authorities. By JAMES K. COLLING, Architect.

The particular object of this work is "to exhibit such a number of
examples of foliage and other ornamental details of the different
styles as clearly to elucidate the characteristic features peculiar to
each period; and drawn sufficiently large in scale to be practically
useful in facilitating the labours of the Architect and Artist."

The first volume consists of 104 plates, 19 of which are highly
finished in colours. The second volume, which will complete the work,
is now in progress, and will be finished during 1850.


2 vols. fcap. 8vo, with 240 Figures, price 16s.

ON THE HISTORY AND ART OF WARMING AND VENTILATING Rooms and Buildings
by Open Fires, Hypocausts, German, Dutch, Russia, and Swedish Stoves,
Steam, Hot Water, Heated Air, Heat of Animals, and other methods; with
Notices of the progress of Personal and Fireside Comfort, and of the
management of Fuel. By WALTER BERNAN, Civil Engineer.

    "Since Stuart's 'Anecdotes of the Steam Engine,' there has been no
    such bit of delicious mechanical gossip as this little book of Mr.
    Bernan.... For six months or more every year, we must depend much
    more on the resources of science and the practical arts for our
    health and comfort, than on the natural climate: in short, we
    must create our own climate. To help us to the means of doing
    this appears to be one of the objects of these little volumes, in
    which, as we have shown, are collected a multitude of expedients
    of all times and nations, collected with research, selected with
    judgment, and skilfully arranged and described. The interest
    with which one reads is sustained and continuous, and you devour
    a two-volume inventory of stoves, grates, and ovens, with the
    voracity of a parish school-boy, and then--ask for more."--_The
    Athenaeum_.

London: GEORGE BELL, 186. Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

Printed by THOMAS CLARK SHAW, of No. 8. New Street Square, at No. 5.
New Street Square, in the Parish of St. Bride, in the City of London;
and published by GEORGE BELL, of No. 186. Fleet Street, in the Parish
of St. Dunstan in the West, in the City of London, Publisher, at No.
186. Fleet Street aforesaid.--Saturday, November 17. 1849.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Notes & Queries 1849.11.17, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES & QUERIES 1849.11.17 ***

***** This file should be named 11577.txt or 11577.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/1/5/7/11577/

Credits: Jon Ingram, William Flis and PG Distributed Proofreaders.
Produced from page scans provided by Internet Library of Early
Journals,


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year. For example:

     http://www.gutenberg.net/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/GUTINDEX.ALL


