The Project Gutenberg EBook of Notes & Queries 1849.12.22, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Notes & Queries 1849.12.22

Author: Various

Release Date: March 22, 2004 [EBook #11652]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES & QUERIES 1849.12.22 ***




Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Joshua Hutchinson and PG Distributed
Proofreaders. Produced from page scans provided by Internet Library
of Early Journals.





NOTES AND QUERIES:

A MEDIUM OF INTER-COMMUNICATION FOR LITERARY MEN, ARTISTS, ANTIQUARIES,
GENEALOGISTS, ETC.

       *       *       *       *       *

"When found, make a note of."--CAPTAIN CUTTLE.

       *       *       *       *       *

NO. 8.]
SATURDAY, DECEMBER 22. 1849.
[Price Threepence. Stamped Edition, 4d.

       *       *       *       *       *

CONTENTS.

NOTES:--
  Otloh, the Scribe, by S.W. Singe
  Notes on Cunningham's London, by E. Rimbault
  Wives of Ecclesiastics
  Tower Royal
  Ancient Inscribed Dish, by Albert Way
  Barnacles, by W. B. MacCabe
  Dorne the Bookseller
  Rev. W. Stephen's Sermons
  Roger de Coverley
  Minor Notes:--Omission of Dei Gratia--Grace's
    Card--Florins--John Hopkins the Psalmist
  Notes in answer to Minor Queries:--Genealogy of
    European Sovereigns--Countess of Pembroke's Letter,
    Drayton's Poems, &c.--Viz. the corruption of
    Videlicot--Authors of Old Plays--Birthplace of
    Coverdale--Caraccioli

QUERIES:--
  Love, the King's Fool
  Mare de Saham, &c.
  The Advent Bells
  The Poets
  Mr. Poore's Literary Collections, &c., by S. Britton
  The Middle Temple, by E. Foss
  Minor Queries:--Henry Lord Darnley--Coffee the
    Lacedaemonian Black Broth--Letters of Mrs.
    Chiffinch--Sangred--Dowts of Scripture--Catsup--Nation's
    Ballads--To endeavour Oneself--Date of
    Anonymous Ravennas--Battle of Towton--A Peal of
    Bells--Lines quotes by Goethe--MS. Sermons by
    Jeremy Taylor--Papers of John Wilkes--John Ross
    Mackay

MISCELLANEOUS:--
  Notes on Books, Catalogues, Sales, &c.
  Books and Odd Volumes wanted
  Notices to Correspondents
  Advertisements

       *       *       *       *       *

WHAT BOOKS DID OTLOH WRITE?

Sir,--In Dr. Maitland's able vindication of the _Dark Ages_ (p. 419. 1st
ed.), he concludes his interesting extract from the scribe Otloh's
account of himself by saying:--"One would like to know what books they
were which Otlohnus thus multiplied; but this, perhaps, is now
impossible." I have it accidentally in my power to identify two at least
of the number; and if it was his universal practice to subscribe his
name, as he does in these instances, a search into the principal
repositories of MSS. would, no doubt, give a large list. A valuable MS.
volume in my possession has been thus described by a learned
Benedictine: "Codex Membranaceus constans foliis 223 numerando; saeculis
ix. desinente, x. et xi. incipiente, variis manibus scriptus, per partes
qui in unum collectus, ex scriptis variis natidae scripturae carlovingicae,
varia continens: 1 deg. Vita et Passio, seu Martirium S. Dionisii; scripta
fuit ab Hilduino Abbate Coenobii S. Dionisii in Francia sub Ludovico
Pio." It is said that Hilduinus was the first writer who gave the
marvellous story of the saint carrying his own head in his hand for
nearly two miles after his decapitation. But he tells us that he
abridged his narration _ex Graecam et Latinorum Historiis_.

2 deg. Revelatio facta S. Stephano Papae de consecratione altaris SS. Petri
et Pauli ante Sepulchrum S. Martirii Dionisii quae consecratio facta fuit
v. kal. Aug. 754. This part of the MS. is remarkable for containing in
one place the date written in Roman ciphers, thus--dccLiiii. v. kl.
aug.; a circumstance so rare in MSS. of this age, as to have astonished
the learned diplomatists Papebroch and Germon.

3 deg. Historia S. Simeonis Trevirensis Solitarii. Of whom it is recorded
that he lived _sub Poppone Episcopo Trevirense, in quaedam cellula ad
portam nigram sita_. At fol. 36. an interesting account of the death of
the saint is given by the author, who was present, and with the
assistance of two other monks, piously performed his obsequies. It
appears that the abbey of S. Maximin was about 120 paces from the cell
of the saint at Treves, and it is therefore most probable that the
writer was a monk of the Benedictine order then belonging to that
foundation; but he puts his name out of doubt by the following couplet,
inscribed at the end of the narrative:--

  "Presbiter et monachus OTLOH quidam vocitatus
  Sancte tibi librum BONIFACII tradidit istum."

This dedication of his labours to S. Boniface may only indicate his
veneration for the national saint; but, as he tells us he worked a great
deal in the monastery at Fulda (of which S. Boniface was the patron
saint and founder), may not this have been one of his labours there? At
a subsequent period, it appears, he revised and amplified Wilibald's
_Life of Boniface_.

I must summarily indicate the other contents of this interesting MS.,
which are: 4. Passio SS Sebastiani et Vincentii. 5. Vita S. Burchardi.
6. Vita et Passio S. Kiliani (genere Scoti). 7. Vita S. Sole. 8. Vita S.
Ciri. 9. Depositio S. Satiri. 10. Alphabetum Graecum. 11. Officio pro
Choro cum notis musicis, pro festo S. Pancratii; sequitur ipsiis
martiriis passio. 12. Vita S. Columbani [this is anonymous, but is
attributed to his disciple Jonas, and contains much valuable historical
matter]. Lastly, 13. Vita S. Wolfgangi, by the hand of our interesting
scribe OTLOH, written at the instance of the Benedictine Coenobites of
his monastery of S. Emmeram, at Ratisbon, where the saint was buried.
This, as in the case of the _Life of S. Boniface_, is a _rifaccimento_;
it was made from two older lives of S. Wolfgang, as Otloh himself tells
us, one of them by a certain monk named Arnolfus, the other having been
brought out of France. He is here, therefore, more an author than a
scribe; but he declares modestly that it was a task he would willingly
avoid for the future. The passage of his Preface is worth transcribing:
"Fratrum quorundam nostrorum hortatu sedulo infimus ego, O coenobitarum
S. Emmerammi compulsus sum S. Wolfgangi vitam in libellulis duobus
dissimili interdum, et impolita materie descriptam in unum colligere, et
aliquantulum sublimiori modo corrigere.... Multa etiam quae in libro
neutro inveniebantur, fidelium quorundam attestatione comperta addere
studui, sicque quaedam addendo, quaedam vero fastidiose vel inepte dicta
excerpendo, pluraque etiam corrigendo, sed et capitularia praeponendo.
Vobis O fratres mei exactoresque hujus rei prout ingenioli mei parvitas
permisit obedivi. Jam rogo cessate plus tale quid exigere a me." At the
end of the Life he has written:--

  "Presul Wolfgange cunctis semper vererande
  Haec tua qui scripsi jam memor esto milii
  Presbiter et Monachus Otloh quidam vocitatus
  Sancte tibi librum Bonifacii tradidit istum."

We have here sufficient evidence that Otloh was a worthy predecessor of
the distinguished Benedictines to whom the world of letters has been so
deeply indebted in more recent times.

Dr. Maitland's mention of the calligraphic labours of the nun Diemudis,
Otloh's contemporary, is not a solitary instance: in all ages, the world
has been indebted to the pious zeal of these recluse females for the
multiplication of books of devotion and devout instruction. An instance,
of so late a date as the eve of the invention of printing, now lies
before me, in a thick volume, most beautifully written by fair hands
that must have been long practised in the art. As the colophon at the
end preserves the names of the ladies, and records that the parchment
was charitably furnished by their spiritual father, I think it worth
transcribing:--

     "Expliciunt, Deo laus omnipotente, quinque libri de VITA &
     CONVERSATIONE SANCTORVM PATRVM Scripti per manibus Sororum AUE
     TRICI et GHEEZE YSENOUDI in festivus diebus suis consororibus
     dilectis in memoriam earum. Finiti ano dni M deg. CCCC deg. XLIX deg. in festo
     decollationis Sci Johannis baptiste ante sumam missam. Et habebant
     ad hoc pergamenum sibi ex caritate provisum de venerabi li
     presbitero Dno NICOLAO WYT tunc temporis earundem patre spirituali
     & sibi ipsiis spiritualiter ac in Dno sat reverenter dilectio. Ex
     caritativo amore sitis propter Deum memores eorum cum uno AVE
     MARIA."

I omitted to mention that Massmann, in his _Kleinen Sprachdenkmale des
VIII. bis XII. Jahrhunderts_, Leipsig, 1830, p. 50, says: "The
Benedictine priest Otloh, of Regensburg, left behind him a work, _De
Ammonicione Clericorum et Laicorum_, in which is twice given a Latin
prayer (Cod. Monacens. Emmeram. f. cxiii. mbr. saec. xi.), at fol. 51.
_d_., as _Oratio ejus qui et suprascripta et sequentia edidit dicta_,
and at fol. 158. as _Oratio cuidam peccatoris_." On fol. 161. _b_. is an
old German version, first printed by Pez (Thes. i. 417.), corrected by
Graff. Diutiska, 111. 211., by Massmann, at p. 168. Otloh mentions in
this prayer the destruction of his monastery of St. Emmeram, which took
place in 1062.

I have advisedly called him Otloh, and not Otlohnus.

S. W. SINGER.

Mickleham, Dec. 10. 1849.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTES UPON CUNNINGHAM'S HANDBOOK FOR LONDON.

No. 1. "_Gerrard Street, Soho._ * * * At the Turk's Head, in Gerrard
Street, Johnson and Sir Joshua Reynolds founded, in the year 1764, 'The
Literary Club.'"

It would appear from the following extracts in my Common-place Book,
that the _original_ Turk's Head, at which the Literary Club first held
their meetings, was in _Greek_ Street, Soho, not in Gerrard Street:--

     "The Literary Club was first held at the Turk's Head in Greek
     Street, which tavern was almost half a century since removed to
     Gerrard Street, where it continued nearly as long as the house was
     kept open."--_European Mag._ Jan. 1803.

     "The Turk's Head, in Gerrard Street, Soho, was, more than fifty
     years since, removed from a tavern of the same sign the corner of
     Greek and Compton Streets. This place was a kind of head-quarters
     for the Loyal Association during the rebellion of 1745."--Moser's
     _Memorandum Book_, MS. dated 1799.

No. 2. _Storey's Gate, Birdcage Walk, St. James's Park._--I have seen it
stated, but do not recollect where, that "Storey's" was a house of
public entertainment. "Webb's," mentioned in the following extracts, was
also a place of a similar description:--

     "April 25. 1682.--About nine, this night, it began to lighten,
     thunder, and rain. The next morning, there was the greatest flood
     in St. James's Park ever remembered. It came round about the
     fences, and up to the gravel walks--people could not walk to
     _Webb's_ and _Storie's_.

     "April 3, 1685.--This afternoon nine or ten houses were burned or
     blown up, that looked into S. James's Park, between _Webb's_ and
     _Storie's_."--_Diary of Phillip Madox_, MS. formerly in the
     possession of Thorpe the bookseller.

No. 3. _Capel Court_.--So named from Sir William Capell, draper, Lord
Mayor in 1503, whose mansion stood on the site of the present Stock
Exchange.--Pennant's _Common-place Book_.

No. 4. _Bloomsbury Market_.--This market, built by the Duke of Bedford,
was opened in March, 1730. Query, was there a market on the site
before?--_Ibid_.

No. 5. _Bartlet's Buildings_.--_Mackeril's Quaker Coffee-house_,
frequently mentioned at the beginning of the last century, was in these
buildings.--_Ibid_.

No. 6. _St. Olave's, Crutched Friars_.--Names of various persons who
have occupied houses in this parish: Lady Sydney, 1586--Lady Walsingham,
1590--Lady Essex, 1594--Lord Lumley, 1594--Viscount Sudbury,
1629--Philip Lord Herbert, 1646--Dr. Gibbon, 1653--Sir R. Ford,
1653--Lord Brounker, 1673--Sir Cloudesley Shovel, 1700--_Extracts from
the Registers made by the Rev. H. Goodhall_, 1818.

EDWARD F. RIMBAULT.

       *       *       *       *       *

WIVES OF ECCLESIASTICS.

In reply to your correspondent's query as to the "wives of
ecclesiastics," I find amongst my notes one to this effect:--

     ERROR, to assume in ancient genealogies that a branch is
     necessarily extinct, simply because the last known representative
     is described as "Clericus," and _ergo_, must have died S.P.L.

It will be obvious to many of your readers that Clericus is _nomen
generale_ for all such as were learned in the arts of reading and
writing, and whom the old law deemed capable of claiming benefit of
clergy,--a benefit not confined to those in orders, if the ordinary's
deputy standing by could say "_legit ut clericus_."

The title of Clericus, then, in earlier times as now, belonged not only
to those in the holy ministry of the Church, and to whom more strictly
applied the term Clergy, either regular or secular, but to those as well
who by their function or course of life practised their pens in any
court or otherwise, as Clerk of the King's Wardrobe, Clerks of the
Exchequer, &c. Though in former times clerks of this description were
frequently in holy orders and held benefices, it must be evident that
they were not all so of necessity; and the instances are so numerous
where persons having the title of "Clericus" appear nevertheless to have
been in the married state, and to have discharged functions incompatible
with the service of the Church, that the assertion will not be denied
that the restrictions as to contracting matrimonial alliances did not
extend to clerks not in holy orders or below the grade of _subdiaconus_.
The _Registrum Brevium_ furnishes a precedent of a writ, "_De clerico
infra sacros ordines constituto non eligendo in officium_." This
distinction alone would prove that other clerks were not ineligible to
office. The various decrees of the Church may be cited to show that the
prohibition to marry did not include all clerks generally. Pope Gregory
VII., in a synod held in 1074, "interdixit clericis, maxime divino
ministerio consecratis uxores habere, vel cum mulicribus habitare, nisi
quas Nicena Synodus vel alii canones exceperunt."

The statutes made by Anselm, Archbishop of Canterbury, Thomas,
Archbishop elect of York, and all the other bishops of England, in 1108,
in presence of King Henry I., and with the assent of his barons, confine
the interdiction respecting marriages to _Presbyteri, Diaconi et
Subdiaconi_, and a provision is made by them for those cases where
marriages had been contracted since the interdict at the Council of
London (that probably in 1103), viz. that such should be precluded
thereafter from celebrating mass, if they persist in retaining their
wives. "Illi vero presbyteri, diaconi, subdiaconi, qui post interdictum
Londoniensis Concilii foeminas suas tenuerunt vel alins duxcrunt, si
amplius missam celebrare voluerint, eas a se omnino sic facient alienas,
ut nec illae in domos eorum, nec ipsi in domos earum intrent.... Illi
autem presbyteri qui divini altaris et sacrorum ordinum contemptores
praelegerint cum mulicribus habitare a divino officio remoti, omnique
ecclesiastico beneficio privati, extra chorum ponantur, infames
pronunciati. Qui vero rebellis et contemptor foeminam non reliquerit, et
missam celebrare presumpserit, vocatus ad satisfactionem si neglexerit,
viiij. die excommunicetur. Eadem sententia archidiaconos et cononicos
omnes complectitur, et de mulieribus relinquendis et de vitanda carum
conversatione, et de districtione censurae si statuta transgressi
fuerint.... Presbyteri vero qui relictis mulieribus, Deo et sacris
altaribus servire elegerint, xl. dies ab officio cessantes, pro se
interim vicarios habebunt, injuncta eis poenitentia secundum hoc quod
episcopis corum visum fuerit." In 1138 the penalty for priests marrying
was deprivation of their benefices, and exclusion from the celebration
of divine service:--"Sanctorum patrum vestigiis inhaerentes,
presbyteros, diaconos, subdiaconos uxoratos, aut concubinarios,
ecclesiasticis officiis et beneficiis privamus, ac ne quis eorum missam
audire praesumat Apostolica auctoriate prohibemus."

Many such decrees have been made at various synods and councils holden
for reformation of the clergy, but I can find none wherein marriage is
interdicted to clerks generally. I will refer to one more only, viz.
that made in the Council of London, held at Westminster in 1175. Here it
will be seen most distinctly that the prohibition against entering the
marriage state was confined expressly to _Clerici in sacris ordinibus
constituti_, and that is was not only lawful for clerks below the grade
of subdeacon to marry, but that having subsequently once entered the
marriage state and being subsequently desirous _ad religionem transire_,
and to continue in the service of the Church, they could not do so and
be separated from their wives unless _de communi consensu_; if they
continued, however, to live with their wives, they could not hold an
ecclesiastical benefice: "Si quis sacerdos vel clericus in sacris
ordinibus constitutus, ecclesiam vel ecclesiasticum beneficium habens
publice fornicarium habeat," &c.... "Si qui vero infra subdiaconatum
constituti matrimonia contraxerint, ab uxoribus sius nisi de communi
consensu ad religionem transire voluerint, et ibi in Dei servitio
vigilanter permanere, nullatenus separentur: sed cum uxoribus viventes,
ecclesiastica benficia nullo modo percipiant. Qui autem in subdiaconatu,
vel supra, ad matrimonia convolaverint, mulieres etiam invitas et
renitentes relinquant."

This it will be seen that the title "Clericus" under some circumstances,
affords no certain indication that a lawful marriage may not have been
contracted by the person so described and consequently that he might not
have _prolem legitimam_.

W.H.

It does not follow that William de Bolton was an ecclesiastic because he
was called Clericus; that designation being, even in that early time,
often used in a lay sense.

I have just come across an instance of a prior date. In the Liberate
Roll of 26 Henry III. the king directs a payment to be made "to
Isabella, the wife of our beloved clerk, Robert of Canterbury, to
purchase a robe for our use." Even in the reign of Richard I. it may be
doubtful whether the term was not used with both meanings; for in the
charter of Walter Mapes, granting certain lands, among the witnesses are
"Rogero, capellano, Willelmo, capellano, Thoma, _clerico meo_, Waltero,
clerico, Jacobo, clerico, Bricio, fermario meo."

[Symbol: Phi]

     [In addition to the information afforded by the preceding
     communications "A SUBSCRIBER" will find much curious illustration
     of this subject in Beveridge's _Discourses on the Thirty-Nine
     Articles_, where he treats of the Thirty-second article "On the
     Marriage of Priests."

     He must however consult the edition printed at the Oxford
     University Press in 1840, which contains for the first time
     Beveridge's _Discourses on the last Nine Articles_.]

       *       *       *       *       *

TOWER ROYAL.

Sir,--In your second number I find a query by Mr. Cunningham, respecting
the origin of the name of _Tower Royal_; although I cannot
satisfactorily explain it, I enclose a few notes relative to the early
history of that place, which may, perhaps, afford a clue to its
derivation.

In early records it is invariably called "la Real," "la Reole," "la
Riole," or "la Ryal or Ryole;" and it is described simply as a
"tenement;" I have never found an instance of its being called a
"tower". At the close of the reign of Henry III. it was held by one
Thomas Bat, citizen of London, who demised it to Master Simon of
Beauvais, surgeon to Edward I.; this grant was confirmed by that
sovereign by charter in 1277. (Rot. Cart. 5 Edw. I. m. 17.--Placita de
Quo Warranto, p. 461.) This Simon of _Beauvais_ figures in Stow and
Pennant as Simon de Beawmes. In 1331 Edward III. granted "la Real" to
his consort Philippa, for the term of her life, that is might be used as
a depository for her wardrobe. (Rot. Pat. 4 Edw. III. 2nd part, m. 15.)
By Queen Philippa it was extensively repaired, if not rebuilt, and the
particulars of the works executed there by her direction, may be seen in
the Wardrobe Account of the sixth year of her reign, preserved in the
Cottonian MS. Galba E iii. fo. 177, et seq.; this account is erroneously
attributed in the catalogue to Eleanor, consort of Edward I. One Maria
de Beauvais, probably a descendant of Master Simon, received
compensation for quitting a tenement which she held at the time
Philippa's operations commenced. In 1365 Edward III. granted to Robert
de Corby, in fee, "one tenement in the street of la Ryole, London" to
hold by the accustomed services. Finally, in 1370 Edward gave the "inn
(hospitium) with its appurtenances called le Reole, in the city of
London," to the canons of St. Stephen's, Westminster, as of the yearly
value of 20_l_. (Rot. Pat. 43 Edw. III. m. 24.)

It is sufficiently clear that in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries
this place was not called _Tower Royal_; nor does there appear to be any
ground for supposing it was so named in earlier times, or, indeed, that
it was ever occupied by royalty before it became Philippa's wardrobe.
The question, therefore is narrowed to this point:--what is the
significance of "la Real, Reole, or Riole?" I should be glad if any of
your correspondents would give their opinions on the subject. I may add,
that the building was in the parish of St. Thomas Apostle, not in that
of St. Michael Pater Noster Church, as Stow wrote. (Rot. Pat. 4 Edw.
III. 2nd part, m. 38.)

T.H.T

Let me refer Mr. P. Cunningham to "Stow's _Survey_, p. 27. 92. Thoms'
Edition," for a full answer to his query. The passages are too long to
cite, but Mr. C. will find sufficient proof of the part of a royal
residence having once stood in this obscure lane, now almost demolished
in the sweeping city improvements, which threaten in time to leave us
hardly a fragment of the London of the old chronicler.

The Tower was also called the Queen's Wardrobe, and it was there,
Froissart tells us, that Joan of Kent, the mother of Richard II., took
refuge during Wat Tyler's rebellion, when forced to fly from the Tower
of London. The old historian writes that after the defeat of the rebels
"pour le premier chemin que le Roy fit, il vint deuers sa Dame de mere,
la Princesse, qui estoit en un chastel _de la Riolle_ (que l'on dit la
Garderobbe la Reyne) et la s'estoit tenue deux jours et deux nuits,
moult ebahie; et avoit bien raison. Quand elle vit le Roy son fils, elle
fut toute rejouye, et luy dit, 'Ha ha beau fils, comment j'ay eu
aujourd'huy grand peine et angoisse pour vous.' Dont respondit le Roy,
et dit, 'Certes, Madame, je le say bien. Or vous rejouissez et louez
Dieu, car il est heure de le louer. J'ay aujourd'huy recouvre mon
heritage et le royaume d'Angleterre, que j'avoye perdu.' Ainsi se tint
le Roy ce jour delez sa mere." (Froissart, ii 123. Par. 1573.)

In Stow's time this interesting locality had been degraded into stable
for the king's horses, and let out in divers tenements.

E.V.

     [We are indebted to J.E., R.T.S., and other correspondents for
     replies to Mr. Cunningham's Query; but as their answers contain
     only general references to works which it is reasonable to suppose
     that gentleman must have consulted during the preparation of his
     _Handbook for London_ we have not thought it necessary to insert
     them.]

       *       *       *       *       *

ANCIENT INSCRIBED DISH.

Mr. Editor,--The subject of inscribed dishes of latten, of which so many
varieties have recently been imported, appears to be regarded with
interest by several of your readers. I am indebted to the Rev. William
Drake, of Coventry, for a rubbing from one of these mysterious
inscriptions, upon an "alms-plate" in his possession. In the centre is
represented the Temptation. There are two inscribed circles;
on the inner and broader one appear letters, which have been
read,--RAHEWISHNBY. They are several times repeated. On the exterior
circle is the legend On the exterior circle is the legend--ICH. SART.
GELUK. ALZEIT. This likewise is repeated, so as to fill the entire
circle. I have never before met with these inscriptions in the large
number of dishes of this kind which I have examined. The have been
termed alms-dishes, and are used still in parochial collections in
France, as doubtless they have been in England. They were also used in
ancient times in the ceremony of baptism, and they are called baptismal
basins, by some foreign writers. This use is well illustrated by the
very curious early Flemish painting in the Antwerp Gallery, representing
the seven sacraments. The acolyte, standing near the font, bears such a
dish, and a napkin. The proper use of these latten dishes was, as I
believe, to serve as a laver, carried round at the close of the banquet
in old times, as now at civic festivities. They often bear devices of a
sacred character; but it is probable that they were only occasionally
used for any scared purpose, and are more properly to be regarded as
part of the domestic appliances of former times.

ALBERT WAY.

       *       *       *       *       *

BARNACLES.

In Brand's _Popular Antiquities_, vol. iii. pp. 361, 362., there is an
account given of _the barnacle_, "a well-known kind of shell-fish, which
is found sticking on the bottoms of ships," and with regard to which the
author observes, that "it seems hardly credible in this enlightened age,
that so gross an error in natural history should so long have
prevailed," as that this shell-fish should become changed into "a
species of goose." The author then quotes Holinshed, Hall,
Virgidemiarum, Marston, and Gerard; but he does not make the slightest
reference to Giraldus Cambrensis, who is his _Topographia Hiberniae_
first gave the account of the barnacle, and of that account the writers
referred to by Brand were manifestly but the copyists.

The passage referring to "the barnacle" will be found in the _Topog.
Hiber._ lib. i. e. xi. I annex a translation of it, as it may be
considered interesting, when compared with the passages quoted in
Brand:--

     "There are," says Giraldus, "in this country (Ireland) a great
     number of birds called barnacles (Bernacre), and which nature
     produces in a manner that is contrary to the laws of nature. The
     birds are not unlike to ducks, but they are somewhat smaller in
     size. They make their first appearance as drops of gum upon the
     branches of firs that are immersed in running waters; and then they
     are next seen hanging like sea-weed from the wood, becoming encased
     in shells, which at last assume in their growth the outward form of
     birds, and so hang on by their beaks until they are completely
     covered with feathers within their shells, and when they arrive at
     maturity, they either drop into the waters, or take their flight at
     once into the air. Thus from the juice of this tree, combined with
     the water, are they generated and receive their nutriment until
     they are formed and fledged. _I have many times with my own eyes
     seen several thousand of minute little bodies of these birds
     attached to pieces of wood immersed in the sea, encased in their
     shells, and already formed._ These then are birds that never lay
     eggs, and are never hatched from eggs; and the consequence is, that
     in some parts of Ireland, and at those seasons of fasting when meat
     is forbidden, bishops and other religious persons feed on these
     birds, because they are not fish, nor to be regarded as flesh meat.
     And who can marvel that this should be so? When our first parent
     was made of mud, can we be surprised that a bird should be born of
     a tree?"

The notion of the _barnacle_ being considered a fish is, I am aware, one
that still prevails on the western coast of Ireland; for I remember a
friend of mine, who had spent a few weeks in Kerry, telling me of the
astonishment he experienced upon seeing pious Roman Catholics eating
barnacles on Fridays, and being assured that they were nothing else than
fishes! My friend added that they had certainly a most "fish-like
flavour," and were, therefore, very nasty birds.

W.B. MACCABE.

       *       *       *       *       *

DORNE THE BOOKSELLER.

Mr. Editor,--I beg to add my protest to your own, respecting the
conclusion drawn by your valuable correspondent W. as to his competency
to his arduous task, which no person could doubt who knows him. My
remarks had reference to the supposed scribe of the catalogue, whose
brains, according to W., were in some degree of confusion at times. His
name is still _in obscuro_, it seems. "Henno Rusticus" is clear. W., I
trust, will accept my apology. I say with Brutus, _verbis paulo
mutatis_--

  "By heaven, I had rather coin my heart,
  And drop my blood for drachmas, than to _plant
  In the kind bosom of a friend a thorn_,
  By any indirection."

J.I.

       *       *       *       *       *

REV. WM. STEPHENS' SERMONS.

Sir,--Amongst the books wanted in your sixth number is "a Tract or
Sermon" of the Rev. Wm. Stephens. It is a sermon, and one of four, all
of which are far above the ordinary run of sermons, and deserving of a
place in every clergyman's library. They are rarely met with together,
though separately they turn up now and then upon book stalls amongst
miscellaneous sermons; it is a pity they are not better known, and much
is every day republished less deserving of preservation. The author's
widow published her husband's sermons in two volumes; but, strange to
say, these, which are worth all the rest, are not included in the
collection. The titles of the four sermons are--

     "The Personality and Divinity of the Holy Ghost proved from
     Scripture, and the Anti-Nicene Fathers." Preached before the
     University of Oxford, St. Matthias' Day, 1716-17. Third Edition,
     1725.

     "The Catholic Doctrine concerning the Union of the Two Natures in
     the One Person of Christ stated and vindicated." Preached at the
     visitation of the Bishop of Oxford, 1719. Second Edition, 1722.

     "The Divine Persons One God by an Unity of Nature: or, That Our
     Saviour is One God with His Father, by an External Generation from
     His Substance, asserted from Scripture and the Anti-Nicene
     Fathers." Preached before the University of Oxford, 1722. Second
     Edition, 1723.

     "The Several Heterodox Hypotheses, concerning both the Persons and
     the Attributes of the Godhead, justly chargeable with more
     inconsistencies and Absurdities than those which have been
     groundlessly imputed to the Catholic system." Preached at the
     visitation of the Bishop of Exeter, 1724.

I shall be glad to learn from any of your readers whether the author
published any other sermons or tracts which are not included in the two
volumes of his sermons.

WM. DENTON

Shoreditch, Dec. 11. 1849.

       *       *       *       *       *

ROGER DE COVERLEY.

Sir,--In No. 4 of your "NOTES AND QUERIES" it is asked, if any notice of
the tune called _Roger de Coverley_ is to be met with earlier than 1695,
when it was printed by H. Playford in his _Dancing Master_? I am happy
in being able to inform your correspondent that the tune in question may
be found in a rare little volume in my possession, entitled "The
Division-Violin, containing a Choice Collection of Divisions to a Ground
for the Treble-Violin. Being the first Musick of this kind ever
published. London, Printed by J.P. and are sold by John Playford, near
the Temple-Church, 1685, small oblong."

I have every reason to believe, from considerable researches, that no
earlier copy can be found in print.

EDWARD F. RIMBAULT.

       *       *       *       *       *

MINOR NOTES.

_Omission of the Words DEI GRATIA from the new Florin._

Ruding, in his _Annals of the Coinage_, iv. 9., furnishes a precedent
for the omission of the words DEI GRATIA from the coinage, in the case
of the Irish half-pence and farthings coined at the Tower in 1736-7. And
he supplies, also, a precedent for the dissatisfaction with which their
omission from the new florin has been received, in the shape of two
epigrams written at that time, for which he is indebted (as what writer
upon any point of English literature and history is not) to Sylvanus
Urban. The first (from the _Gentlemen's Magazine_ for June, 1837) is as
follows:--

  "No Christian kings that I can find,
    However match'd or odd,
  Excepting ours have ever coin'd
    Without the _grace of God_.

  "By this acknowledgment they show
    The mighty King of Kings,
  As him from whom their riches flow,
    From whom their grandeur springs.

  "Come, then, Urania, aid my pen,
    The latent cause assign,--
  All other kings are mortal men,
    But GEORGE, 'tis plain, 's divine."

The next month produced this address:--

  _To the Author of the Epigram on the new Irish Halfpence._

  "While you behold th' imperfect coin
    Receiv'd without the _grace of God_,
  All honest men with you must join,
    And even Britons think it odd.

  The _grace of God_ was well left out,
    And I applaud the politician;
  For when an evil's done, no doubt,
    'Tis not by _God's grace_, but permission."

  _Grace's Card, the Six of Hearts._

As a note to the communications which have lately amused your readers,
respecting the nine of diamonds, and the curse of Scotland, allow me to
remind you of another card which has a peculiar name, the origin of
which is better ascertained.

At the Revolution of 1688, one of the family of Grace, of Courtstown in
Ireland, raised and equipped a regiment of foot and a troop of horse, at
his own expense, for the service of King James, whom he further assisted
with money and plate, amounting, it is said, to 14,000_l_. He was
tempted with splendid promises of royal favour, to join the party of
King William. A written proposal to that effect was sent to him by one
of the Duke of Schomberg's emissaries. Indignant at the insulting
proposal, the Baron of Courtstown seized a card, which was accidentally
lying near him, and wrote upon it this answer: "Go, tell your master, I
despise his offer! Tell him that honour and conscience are dearer to a
gentleman than all the wealth and titles a prince can bestow!" The card
happened to be the "six of hearts," and to this day that card is
generally known by the name of "Grace's card," in the city of Kilkenny.

I derive these particulars principally from the _Memoirs of the Family
of Grace_, by Sheffield Grace, Esq. 4to. London, 1823, p. 42.

W.L.

_Florins._

The following extract from the Issue Roll of Easter I Edward III. 1327,
may interest the inquirers into the antiquity of the FLORIN, lately
introduced into our coinage:--

     "To Robert de Wodehouse, keeper of the King's Wardrobe, for the
     price of 174 florins from Florence, price each florin as purchased,
     39-1/2_d_. paid to the same keeper by the hands of John de Houton,
     his clerk, for one pound and one mark of gold, to make oblations on
     the day of the coronation for the Lord the King:--and in the manner
     was delivered 104 florins and a mark of 70_s_. by the king's
     command, under the privy seal, which was used before he received
     the government of this kingdom,--L28.12.6."

     [Greek: Phi].

_John Hopkins, the Psalmist._

Sir,--Little is known of the personal history of John Hopkins, the
coadjutor of Sternhold in the translation of the Psalms. It is generally
agreed that he was a clergyman and a schoolmaster in Suffolk, but no one
has mentioned in what parish of that county he was beneficed. It is
highly probably that the following notes refer to this person, and if
so, the deficiency will have been supplied by them.

In Tanner's List of the Rectors of Great Waldingfield in Suffolk, taken
from the Institution Book at Norwich, there is this entry:--

"Reg. xix. 55  12 Aug. 1561
               Joh. Chetham, ad praes. Willi Spring, Arm.
                   Jo. Hopkins.
               168. 3 April, 1571.
               Tho. Cooke, ad praes. Edw. Colman, B.D."

In the Parish Register of Great Waldingfield is the following:--

"Buried, 1570.  Mr. John Hopkins, 23rd Oct."

D.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTES IN ANSWER TO MINOR QUERIES.

_Genealogy of European Sovereigns._

Sir,--Perhaps the following books will be of service to your
correspondent Q.X.Z., viz.:--

     "A Genealogical History of the present Royal Families of Europe,
     the Stadtholders of the United States, and the Succession of the
     Popes from the 15th century, &c. &c., by the Rev. Mark Noble."
     London, 1781.

     "Historical and Genealogical, Chronological, and Geographical
     Atlas, exhibiting all the Royal families in Europe, their origin,
     Descent, &c., by M. Le Sage." London, 1813.

     "Complete Genealogical, Historical, Chronological, and Geographical
     Atlas, &c., by C.V. Lavoisne." Philadelphia, 1821.

W.J.B.

_Countess of Pembroke's letter--Drayton's Poems--A Flemish
Account--Bishop Burnet._

Your correspondent, at p. 28., asks whether there is any contemporary
copy of the celebrated letter, said to have been written by Anne,
Countess of Pembroke, to Sir Joseph Williamson? I would refer him to Mr.
Hartley Coleridge's _Lives of Distinguished Northerns_, 1833, p. 290.
His arguments for considering the letter _spurious_, if not conclusive,
are very forcible, but they are too copious for this paper.

Your readers, who may not be conversant with that undeservedly neglected
volume, will confess their obligation, when they have consulted its
pages, in having been directed to so valuable and so original a work. It
may be observed, that those letters of the Countess which are authentic,
are certainly written in a very different style to the one in question;
but this letter, if addressed by her to Sir Joseph Williamson, would be
written under peculiar circumstances, and being in her 84th year, she
might naturally have asked the assistance of the ablest pen within her
reach. I have the copy of an interesting letter, addressed by the late
Mr. John Baynes to Ritson, in 1785, stating his admiration of the
Countess's "spirit and industry, having seen the collections made by her
order relative to the Cliffords--such as no other noble family in the
world can show."

I join in wishing that Mr. Pickering would add a judicious selection
from Drayton's poetical works to his _Lives of Aldine Poets_. To the
list given by your correspondent (p. 28.), may be added a work entitled
_Ideas Mirrour Amours in quatorzains_ (London, 1594, 4to. p. 51.), which
was lent to me about forty years ago, but which I have not seen since.
Some notice of it, by myself, will be found in the _Censura Literaria_.
with the following note by Sir C. Brydges:--"The extreme rarity of this
publication renders a farther account desirable, and also more copious
extracts. It appears wholly unknown to Herbert, and to all the
biographers of Drayton." It is unnoticed by Ritson also. Chalmers, in
his _Series of English Poets_, has referred to this communication, but
he has not printed the poem amongst Drayton's works.

The expression "a Flemish account" is probably not of very long
standing, as it is not found in the most celebrated of our earlier
dramatists, unless, indeed, Mrs. Page's remark on Falstaff's letter may
be cited as an illustration:--"What an unweighed behaviour hath this
Flemish drunkard _picked out of my conversation_, that he dares in this
manner assay me."

If the habit of drinking to excess prevailed in the Low Countries in the
sixteenth century to the extent represented, may not the expression have
arisen from that circumstance, and been equivalent to the contempt which
is usually entertained for the loose or imperfect statements made by a
tipsy or drunken man?

When quoting opinions upon Burnet, we must not forget the brief but
pregnant character which Burke has given of the Bishop's _History of his
Own Times_. In his admirable speech at Bristol, previous to the election
if 1780, Burke says, "Look into the History of Bishop Burnet; _he is a
witness without exception_."

Dr. Johnson was not so laudatory:--"Burnet is very entertaining. The
style, indeed, is mere chit-chat. I do not believe that he intentionally
lied; but he was so much prejudiced, that he took no pains to find out
the truth."

The reader may refer to Dr. Hickes's _Criticism_ (Atterbury's
_Correspondence_, i. 492.). Calamy's expression is a significant, if not
a very complimentary one, as regards Burnet's candour (_Life and Times_,
i. 59.).

I.H.M.

Bath, Dec. 1849.

_Viz., why the contracted form of Videlicet._

I shall be much obliged if any one of your readers can inform me of the
_principle_ of the contraction viz. for videlicet, the letter _z_ not
being at all a component part of the three final syllables in the full
world.

[Cross symbol]

     [Is not our correspondent a little mistaken in supposing that the
     last letter in "viz." as originally a letter z? Was it not one of
     the arbitrary marks of contraction used by the scribes of the
     middle ages, and being in form something like a "z," came to be
     represented by the early printers by that letter? In short, the
     sign3 was a common abbreviation in records for terminations, as
     omnib3 for omnib_us_, hab3 for hab_et_. Vi3, corruptly viz. is
     still in use.]

_Authors of Old Plays._

We are enabled by the courtesy of several correspondents, to answer two
of the Queries of Q.D., in No. 5. p. 77., respecting the authors of
certain old plays.

G.H.B. informs us that _Sicily and Naples_ was written by Samuel
Harding; of whom, as we learn from J.F.M., an account will be found in
Wood's _Athenae_.

NASO informs Q.D. that _Nero_ was written by Matthew Gwinne; there are
two editions of it, viz. 1603 and 1633,--and that a copy of it may be
procured at 17. Wellington Street, Strand, for 2_s_.

_Birthplace of Coverdale._

Can you inform me of the birthplace of Miles Coverdale?

W.C.

     ["Bishop Myles Coverdale is supposed to have been born in the year
     of our Lord 1488, in the district of Coverdale, in the parish of
     Coverham, near Middleham, in the North Riding of Yorkshire; and it
     is the opinion of the learned historian of Richmondshire, that it
     is an assumed, and not a family name." These are the words of the
     Rev. Geo. Pearson, B.D., the very competent editor of the works of
     Bishop Coverdale, published by the Parker Society. His reference is
     to Whitaker's _Hist. of Richmondshire_, vol. i. p. 17.]

_Caraccioli--Author of Life of Lord Clive._

In reply to K.'s query in No. 7., I have to inform him that "Charles
Caraccioli, Gent." called himself "the Master of the Grammar School at
Arundel," and in 1766 published a very indifferent _History of the
Antiquities of Arundel_; and deprecating censure, he says in his
preface, "as he (the author) was educated and till within these few
years has lived abroad, totally unconversant with the English tongue, he
flatters himself that the inaccuracies so frequently interspersed
through the whole, will be observed with some grains of allowance." His
_Life of Lord Clive_ was a bookseller's compilation.

WM. DURRANT COOPER.

       *       *       *       *       *

QUERIES.

LOVE, THE KING'S FOOL OF THAT NAME.

In Rawlinson's Manuscripts in the Bodleian (c. 258.), which I take to
have been written either in, or very soon after, the reign of Henry
VIII., there is a poem thus entitled:--

  "THE EPITAPHE OF LOVE, THE KYNGE'S FOOLE."

Can any of your readers furnish me with information regarding him? He
was clearly a man worthy of notice, but although I have looked through
as many volumes of that period, and afterwards, as I could procure, I do
not recollect meeting with any other mention of him. Skelton, who must
have been his contemporary, is silent regarding him; and John Heywood,
who was also living at the same time, makes no allusion to him that I
have been able to discover. Heywood wrote the "Play of Love," but it has
nothing to do with the "King's fool."

The epitaph in question is much in Heywood's humorous and satirical
style: it is written in the English ballad-metre, and consists of seven
seven-line stanzas, each stanza, as was not unusual with Heywood, ending
with the same, or nearly the same, line. It commences thus:

  "O Love, Love! on thy sowle God have mercye;
  For as Peter is _princeps Apostolorum_,
  So to the[e] may be sayd clerlye,
  Of all foolys that ever was _stultus stultorum_.
  Sure thy sowle is in _regna polorum_,
    By reason of reason thou haddest none;
    Yet all foolys be nott dead, though thou be gone."

In the next stanza we are told, that Love often made the King and Queen
merry with "many good pastimes;" and in the third, that he was "shaped
and borne of very nature" for a fool. The fourth stanza, which mentions
Erasmus and Luther, is the following:--

  "Thou wast nother Erasmus nor Luter;
  Thou dyds medle no forther than thy potte;
  Agaynst hye matters thou wast no disputer,
  Amonge the Innocentes electe was thy lotte:
  Glad mayst thou be thou haddyst that knotte,
    For many foolys by the[e] thynke them selfe none,
    Yet all be nott dead, though thou be gone."

The next stanza speaks of "Dye Apguylamys," who is told to prepare the
obsequy for Love, and of "Lady Apylton," who had offered a "mass-penny,"
and the epitaph ends with these stanzas:

  "Now, Love, Love! God have mercy on thy mery nowle;
  And Love! God have mercye on thy foolysche face,
  And Love! God have mercye on thy innocent sowle,
  Which amonges innocentes, I am sure, hath a place,
  Or ellys thy sowle ys yn a hevy case;
    Ye, ye, and moo foolys many [a] one,
    For foolys be alyve, Love, though thou be gone.

  "Now, God have mercye on us all,
  For wyse and folysche all dyethe,
  Lett us truly to our myndes call;
  And to say we be wyse owr dedes denyethe,
  Wherefore the ende my reason thys aplyethe:
    God amend all foolys that thynke them selfe none,
    For many be alyve, thoughe Love be gone."

It is very possible that I have overlooked some common source of
information to which I may be referred; and it is very possible also,
that this epitaph has been reprinted in comparatively modern times, and
I may not know of it. This is one of the points I wish to ascertain.

J. PAYNE COLLIER.

     [Was there no such person as Love, and does the writer mean merely
     to pun upon the word? Cupid certainly played the fool in the court
     of Henry VIII. as much as any body.]

       *       *       *       *       *

MARE DE SAHAM--POSTUM PUSILLUM--WATEWICH.

I am much obliged by J.F.M's answers respecting those places. If he will
look to the _Historia Eliensis_, lib. ii. c. 84, 85. vol. i. pp.
200-204. (_Anglia Christiana_), he may be certain whether or not he has
correctly designated them. He may at the same time, if he be well
acquainted with Cambridgeshire, give me the modern interpretation for
_Watewich_, also mentioned in chap. 84. of the _Hist. Eliens_.

W.B.M.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE ADVENT BELLS.

The Advent bells are ringing in many parishes throughout various parts
of England during this month of December, if I may judge from my own
neighbourhood--on the western borders of Berks--where, at least three
times in the week, I hear their merry peals break gladsomely upon the
dark stillness of these cold evenings, from many a steeple around. In
the Roman States and the kingdom of Naples and Sicily, the "pifferari"
go about playing on a kind of rough hautboy and bag-pipes, before the
pictures of the Madonna, hung up at the corners of streets and in shops,
all through Advent time; but why are the church bells rung in England?
What reference in ancient documents can be pointed out for the meaning
or antiquity of the usage?

He who draws upon a joint-stock bank of literature as rich as yours, Mr.
Editor, already is, should bring a something to its capital, though it
be a mite. Allow me, then, to throw in mine. At p. 77. "A SUBSCRIBER"
asks, "if William de Bolton was an ecclesiastic, how is it that his wife
is openly mentioned?" For one of these two reasons: 1st. By the canon
law, whether he be in any of the four minor orders, or in any of the
three higher or holy orders, a man is, and was always, called
"Clericus," but clerks in lower or minor orders did, and still do, marry
without censure; 2d. The Church did, and still does, allow man and wife
to separate by free mutual consent, and to bind themselves by the vows
of perpetual continence and chastity, the man going into a monastery, or
taking holy orders, the woman becoming a nun. Such, I suspect, was the
case with Sir William de Bolton ("Sir" being the ancient title of a
priest) and his wife, whose joint concurrence in the transfer of
property by charter would be legally required, if, as is likely, she had
an interest in it.

Your correspondent "MUSAFIR," while on the subject of the _Flemish
account_, p. 74., is in error, in assigning to a Count of Flanders the
"old story" of the cloaks; it belongs to Robert, Duke of Normandy, who
played off the joke at Constantinople in the court of the Greek emperor,
as Bromton tells us (ed. Twysden, i. 911.)

CEPHAS

       *       *       *       *       *

THE POETS.

Many years ago a _Sonnet_, by Leigh Hunt, characterising the poets,
appeared in the _Examiner_. Can any of your readers inform me whether
the following, which I quote from memory, is correct?

C. DAY.

  "Were I to name, out of the times gone by,
    The poets dearest to me, I should say,
    Pulci for spirits, and a fine, free way,
  Chaucer for manners, and a close, silent eye;
    Spenser for luxury and sweet sylvan play,
    Horace for chatting with from day to day;
  Milton for classic taste and harp strung high,
  Shakspeare for all--but most, society.
    But which take with me could I take but one?
  Shakspeare, as long as I was unoppress'd
    With the world's weight, making sad thoughts intenser;
    But did I wish out of the common sun
  To lay a wounded heart in leafy rest,
    And dream of things far off and healing--Spenser."

       *       *       *       *       *

MR. POORE'S LITERARY COLLECTIONS--INIGO JONES--MEDAL OF STUKELEY--SIR
JAMES THORNHILL.

Sir,--With thanks for the insertion of my former letter, I proceed to
submit a few literary queries for solution through the medium of your
pages.

In connection with the country of Wilts, I will first mention the
literary collections of the late Edward Poore, Esq., of North Tidworth,
which I examined, with much satisfaction, on my visits to him there, in
the year 1798 and 1799. Mr. Poore was a man of considerable attainments,
and corresponded with many distinguished characters, both at home and
abroad. He travelled over many parts of the continent, and his letters
and notes relating to public and private occurrences and persons were
remarkably curious and interesting. I have long lost all trace of them,
and should be glad to ascertain where they are likely to be found.

An immense boon would be conferred on the cause of Architecture and
Archaeology by the recovery of Inigo Jones's Sketches and Drawings of
Ancient Castles. These, together with his Plans, Views, and Restorations
of _Stonehenge_, probably descended to his nephew, Webb. The latter were
engraved, and published in Webb's volume on Stonehenge; but the Sketches
of Castles have never yet been published. On the ground of Inigo Jones's
intimacy with Lord Pembroke, I was referred to the library at Wilton as
a probable despositor of his drawings, but without success; as I am
informed, they do not form a part of that valuable collection. Perhaps I
may be allowed to correct the error which so commonly ascribes the
erection of Wilton House to Jones. In the _Natural History of
Wiltshire_, by John Aubrey, which I edited in 1847 (4to.), it is clearly
shown that the mansion was built in 1633 by, or from the designs of,
Solomon de Caus, architect, who was probably aided by his brother Isaac,
and that it was rebuilt in 1648, after an extensive fire, by Webb, who,
as is well known, married a niece of Inigo Jones. The latter celebrated
architect recommended the employment of these parties, and probably
approved of their designs, but had no further share in their production.
His advice, however, to the Earl of Pembroke, was the means of
preserving the famous _Porch at Wilton_, ascribed to Hans Holbein, which
gives him a peculiar claim to the gratitude of all architectural
antiquaries.

I possess a large collection of the manuscript journals, papers,
drawings, and correspondence of Dr. Stukeley. To the kindness of my old
friend Dr. Ingram, President of Trinity College, Oxford, I also owe a
large Bronze Medal, with a medallion portrait of Stukeley on the
obverse, and a view of Stonehenge on the reverse. This is evidently a
cast from moulds, and rather crudely executed, and I am induced to
regard it as unique. I shall be much gratified if any of your
correspondents can furnish me with a clue to its history, or to the name
of its maker. I would here venture to suggest some inquiry into the
biography of _Charles Bertram_, of Copenhagen, who furnished Dr.
Stukeley with the manuscript of the _Itinerary of Richard of
Cirencester_, which has led to so much curious discussion. It would be
interesting to learn whether Bertram's papers were bequeathed to any
public library at Copenhagen.

Sir James Thornhill was in the habit of making sketches and descriptive
memoranda in his various travels and excursions. Some years ago one of
his pocket-books was lent to me, in which he had not only written
notices of the places visited, but made very clever pen sketches of
several objects. Whilst in my possession, I copied many pages, and also
traced some of the drawings. Among the latter is a Market Cross at
Ipswich, long since destroyed, also the Sessions House and the Custom
House of Harwich, with various antiquities, &c., at Ryswich, Delph,
Tournay, Brussels, and the Hague. I have often regretted that I did not
copy the whole volume, as it contained many curious facts and anecdotes.
I have tried in vain to ascertain the name and address of the possessor.
He was a country gentleman, and lodged in Southampton Row, Russell
Square. The volume is dated 1711, and contains full accounts of
buildings and works of art. He says, "Killigrew told King Charles that
Ipswich had a large river without water, streets without names, and a
town without people."

In July, 1817, I published a small volume entitled _Antiquarian and
Architectural Memoranda relating to Norwich Cathedral_, in which were
two copper-plates, a ground-plan of the church, and a view of the west
front; with woodcuts of the font, and of the Erpingham gateway, both
engraved by John Thompson. The plates and cuts were sold by auction (by
Mr. Southgate of Fleet Street), with the stock of the work, and have
been resold by the purchaser. I have sought in vain to re-obtain the
woodcuts, and shall be gratified to find that it is still practicable.

After many years' search for the documents, &c., referred to in this and
my preceding letter, I am still reluctant to abandon their pursuit. That
valuable collections are sometimes protected from destruction, in
obscurity, for years, is shown by the loss and recovery of the
well-known collection of Architectural Designs and Drawings by John
Thorpe, now in the Soane Museum. That singular and interesting series
was in the possession of the Earl of Warwick, in the latter part of the
last century. In 1807 I applied to his lordship for permission to
examine it; but he informed me that Richard Cumberland, the author, had
borrowed it many years before, in order to submit it to Lord George
Germaine, and that it had not since been heard of. Thus, from before
1785, when Lord George Germaine died, the drawings were lost until about
thirty years afterwards, when I purchased them for Sir John Soane, at
the sale of the library of ---- Brooke, Esq., of Paddington (probably a
relative of the Earl of Warwick), into whose possession they had
unaccountably passed.

JOHN BRITTON.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE MIDDLE TEMPLE.

In Mr. Frederick Devon's _Pell Records_, vol. iii. p. 34., there is an
entry in the Issue Roll of Easter, 41 Henry III. 1257, of a payment.

     "To the Brethren of the _Middle_ Temple, L4. in part of L8.
     appointed alms for the support of three chaplains to celebrate
     divine service, at Easter Term, in the 41st year, by writ patent."

And in p. 88. is the following writ for payment at Easter Term, 4 Edward
I. 1276:--

     "Pay out of our Treasury, from the day of the death of the Lord
     King Henry, our Father, of renowned memory, for each year, to our
     beloved Master and Brethren of the Knights Templars in England, L8.
     _which our father granted_ to them by his charter to be received
     yearly at our Exchequer, for the support of three chaplains, daily
     for ever, to perform divine service in the New Temple, London, one
     of whom is to perform service for our aforesaid father, the other
     for all Christian people, and the third for the faithful deceased,
     as was accustomed to be done in the time of our aforesaid father.
     Witness, &c."

I presume that there can be no doubt that the grant referred to in the
last extract is that which is mentioned in the first. But if so, what is
meant by "Brethren of the _Middle Temple?_"

Both entries are before the suppression of the order, and it was not
till long after the suppression that the Temple was occupied by the
lawyers as a place of study; nor till long after the establishment of
lawyers there, that is to say, more than a hundred years after the date
of the first extract, that the Temple was divided into two houses,
called, as now, the Inner Temple and the Middle Temple. Added to which,
the church of the Temple is in that division which is called the _Inner_
Temple.

Can any of your correspondents favour me with the precise words of the
original record, or explain the meaning of the term used?

EDWARD FOSS.

       *       *       *       *       *

MINOR QUERIES.

_Henry Lord Darnley._

Can any of your readers inform me where the celebrated Darnley, second
husband of Mary, Queen of Scots, was born? His birth took place in
England, where his father, Matthew Stuart, Earl of Lennox, was residing,
being banished from Scotland. Henry VIII. gave the Earl his niece in
marriage, and several estates in Yorkshire; among others, the lands of
Jervaux Abbey, and the adjacent manor of West Scrafton. Middleham
Castle, which was then perfect, and belonged to the King, lies between
these, and was probably at least an occasional residence of the Earl,
though we have no correct account of its occupants after the death of
Richard III.

W.G.M.J. Barker.

Banks of the Yere, Nov. 28. 1849.

_Coffee, the Lacedaemonion Black Broth._

Your "notes on Coffee" in No. 2. reminded me that I had read in some
modern author a happy conjecture that "coffee" was the principal
ingredient of the celebrated "Lacedaemonian black broth," but as I did
not "make a note of it" at the time, and cannot recollect the writer
from whom I derived this very probable idea, I may perhaps be allowed to
"make a query" of his name and work.

R.O.

Eton, Nov. 26. 1849.

_Letters of Mrs. Chiffinch._

The Chafins, of Chettle, in Dorsetshire, possessed at one time some
interesting family memorials. In the third volume of Hutchins's
_Dorset_, pp. 166, 167., are printed two or three letters of Thomas
Chafin on the battle of Sedgemoor. In a manuscript note, Hutchins
alludes to letters, written by a female member of the family, which
contain some notices of the court of Charles II. Can your Dorsetshire
correspondents inform me whether these letters exist? I suspect that the
lady was wife of the notorious Chiffinch; and she must have seen and
heard strange things. The letters may be worthless, and it is possible
that the family might object to a disclosure of their contents. The
manuscript memorandum is in Gough's copy of the _History of Dorset_ in
the Bodleian Library.

J.F.M.

_Sangred--Dowts of Holy Scripture._

In the will of John Hedge, of Bury St. Edmund's, made in 1504, is this
item:--

     "I beqweth to the curat of the seid church iiij_s_. iiij_d_. for a
     _sangred_ to be prayed for in the bedroule for my soule and all my
     good ffrends soulls by the space of a yeer complete."

In the same year Thomas Pakenham, of Ixworth Thorpe, bequeathed 6 hives
of bees to the sepulchre light, "to pray for me and my wyffe in y'e
_comon sangered_;" and in 1533, Robert Garad, of Ixworth, bequeathed to
the high altar ij_s_. "for _halfe a sangred_."

Can any of your reader explain what the _sangred_ is? or give me any
information about the book referred to in the following extract from the
will of William Place, Master of St. John's Hospital, Bury St. Edmund's,
made in 1504:--

     "Item. I beqweth to the monastery of Seynt Edmund forseid my book
     of the _dowts of Holy Scryptur_, to ly and remain in the cloyster,"
     &c.

BURIENSIS.

_Catsup, Catchup, or Ketchup._

Will any of your philological readers be so obliging as to communicate
any _note_ he may have touching the original or definition of the word
_Catchup?_

It does not appear in Johnson's _Dictionary_. Mr. Todd, in his edition,
inserts it with an asterisk, denoting it as a new introduction, and
under _Catsup_ says, see _Catchup_. Under this latter word he
says--"Sometimes _improperly_ written _Ketchup_, a poignant liquor made
from boiled mushrooms, mixed with salt, used in cooking to add a
pleasant flavour to sauces." He gives no _derivation_ of the word
_itself_, and yet pronounces the very common way of spelling it
improper.

What reference to, or connexion with, _mushrooms_ has the word?--and why
_Catsup_, with the inference that it is synonymous with _Catchup_?

G.

"_Let me make a Nation's Ballads, who will may make their Laws!_"

One perpetually hears this exclamation attributed to different people.
In a magazine which I took up this morning, I find it set down to "a
certain orator of the last century;" a friend who is now with me, tells
me that it was unquestionably the saying of the celebrated Lord Wharton;
and I once heard poor Edward Irving, in a sermon, quote it as the
exclamation of Wallace, or some other Scottish patriot. Do relieve my
uncertainty, and, for the benefit of our rising orator, tell us to whom
the saying ought to be set down.

C.U.B.E.R.

_To endeavour Oneself._

In the Collect for the 2nd Sunday after Easter, in the preface to the
Confirmation Service, and in the form of Ordering of priest, the verb
"endeavour" takes (clearly, I think) a middle-voice form, "to endeavour
one's self." Is there any other authority for this usage? No dictionary
I have seen recognises it.

G.P.

_Date of the Anonymous Ravennas._

Can you inform me of the date of the _Chorographia Britanniae Anonymi
Ravennatis?_

W.C.

     [This is a very difficult question. We should be glad to hear any
     of our correspondents upon the subject.]

_The Battle of Towton._

The "Note" on the battle-field of Sedgemoor, induces a "Query"
concerning another equally celebrated locality.

It is well known in the neighbourhood, that the field of Towton, at
least that part of it which is now, and, according to tradition, has
remained pasture since the days of the wars of York and Lancaster,
produces two species of roses, which grow in stunted patches throughout
its extent. Has their presence ever been noticed or accounted for? If we
again allow tradition to give its evidence, we are told they were
planted on the graves of the fallen combatants.

PETER H. JENNINGS.

Tadcaster.

_A Peal of Bells._

Mr. Editor,--The following question was put to me by a clergyman and a
scholar, who, like myself, takes an interest in the subject of Bells. At
first sight I fancied that a satisfactory answer could easily be given:
but I found that I was mistaken, and I shall be very glad if any of your
correspondents will favour me with a solution of the difficulty.

Can you _define_ what is a _Peal?_ Of course we know what is meant by a
_Peal of Bells_, and to _ring a Peal_; but I want it defined as to
duration, mode of ringing it, &c. &c. None of the old writers explain
what they mean by ringing a _Peal_.

ALFRED GATTY.

Ecclesfield Vicarage, Dec. 11. 1849.

_Lines quoted by Goethe._

If any of your readers can inform me who is the author of the following
lines, quoted by Goethe in his _Autobiography_, he will greatly oblige
me:--

  "Then old age and experience, hand in hand,
  Lead him to death, and make him understand,
  After a search so painful and so long,
  That all his life he has been in the wrong."

TREBOR.

King's College, Dec. 8. 1849.

_MS. Sermons by Jeremy Taylor._

I venture to send you the following note, as embodying a query, which I
am sure deserves, if possible, to be answered.

     "Southey, _Omniana_, i. 251. Coleridge asserts (_Literary Remains_,
     i. 303.), that there is now extent, in MS., a folio volume of
     unprinted sermons by Jeremy Taylor. It would be very interesting to
     learn in what region of the world so great a treasure has been
     suffered to rust during a hundred and fifty years."--Willmott's
     _Life of Bishop Jeremy Taylor_, p. 87.

OXONIENSIS.

_Papers of John Wilkes._

John Wilkes, it is well known, sent to the newspapers copies of Lord
Weymouth's and Lord Barrington's Letters respecting the riots in St.
George's Fields in 1768. We Can easily conjecture how he did or how he
might have, got possession of a copy of Weymouth's Letter, which was
addressed to the magistrates of Surrey; but Barrington's letter was
strictly official, and directed to the "Field officers, in staff
waiting, for the three regiments of Foot Guards." Has the circumstance
ever been explained? If so, where? Can any of your readers inform me the
_exact date_ of the first publication of Barrington's Letter in the
newspaper? Is it not time that Wilkes' Letters and MSS. were deposited
in some of our public libraries? They would throw light on many obscure
points of history. They were left by Miss Wilkes to Mr. Elmsley, "to
whose judgement and delicacy" she confided them. They were subsequently,
I believe, in the legal possession of his son, the Principal of St.
Alban's; but really of Mr. Hallam.

W.

_John Ross Mackay._

The following is from a work lately published, _Chronicles and
Characters of the Stock Exchange_, by John Francis:--

     "'The Peace of 1763,' said John Ross Mackay, Private Secretary to
     the Earl of Bute, and afterwards Treasurer to the Ordnance, 'was
     carried through and approved by pecuniary distribution.'"

Will Mr. Francis, or any of your contributors, inform me where I can
find the original statement?

D.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTES ON BOOKS, CATALOGUES, SALES, ETC.

Mr. Darling is preparing for publication a new edition of his
_Bibliotheca Clericales, a guide to Authors, Preachers, Students, and
Literary Men_. The object of this very useful publication, which
deserves to be made a Note of by all who may have Queries to solve in
connection with the bibliography of theology, cannot be better described
than in Mr. Darling's own words, namely, that it is intended to be "a
Catalogue of the Books in the Clerical Library, greatly enlarged, so as
to contain every author of any note, ancient and modern, in theology,
ecclesiastical history, and the various departments connected therewith,
including a selection in most branches of literature, with complete
lists of the works of each author, the contents of every volume being
minutely described; to which will be added an entirely new volume, with
a scientific as well as alphabetical arrangement of subjects, by which a
ready reference may be made to books, treatises, sermons, and
dissertations, on nearly all heads of divinity, the books, chapters, and
verses of Holy Scripture, the various festivals, fasts &c., observed
throughout the year, and useful topics in literature, philosophy, and
history, on a more complete system than has yet been attempted in any
language, and forming an universal index to the contents of all similar
libraries, both public and private." The work will be published in about
24 monthly parts, and will be put to press so soon as a sufficient
number of subscribers are obtained to cover the expense of printing.

Mr. Jones, the modeller, of 125. Drury Lane, who as our readers may
remember, produced some time since so interesting "a copy in little" of
the monument of our great bard in the church of Stratford-upon-Avon, has
just completed similar models of Bacon's monument, in St. Michael's
Church, St. Alban's; of Sir Isaac Newton's, in the chapel of Trinity
College, Cambridge; and, lastly, of that of the "Venerable Stow," from
the church of St. Andrew Undershaft. Many of the admirers of those old
English worthies will, we doubt not, be glad to possess such interesting
memorials of them.

Mr. Thorpe has published a _Catalog of some Interesting, Rare, and
Choice Books_, which he has recently purchased, and which had been
collected by the celebrated antiquary and author, Browne Willis. Many of
them contain important manuscript notes and anecdotes by him,
particularly in his own publications; and the Catalogue, therefore, like
all which Mr. Thorpe issues, contains numerous notes highly interesting
to bibliographical and literary antiquaries. Thus, in a copy of
_Antonini Iter Britanniarum_, he tells us Browne Willis has inserted the
following biographical note:--

     *.* "My very worthy friend Roger Gale, the Author of this and many
     other learned works, dyed at his seat at Scruton, co. York, June
     26, 1744, aged about 72, and was by his own direction buried
     obscurely in the churchyard there."

The following interesting articles we reprint entire, as forming
specimens of the rarities which Mr. Thorpe offers in the present
Catalogue, and the tempting manner in which he presents them:--

3450 BOECEUS DE CONSOLACIONE PHILOSOPHIE, TRANSLATED OUT OF LATIN INTO
ENGLISH BY MAISTER GEFFREY CHAUCER, WITH EPITAPH FOR CHAUCER IN LATIN
VERSE BY STEPHEN SURIGO, POET LAUREATE OF MILAN, AT THE COST AND
INSTANCE OF W. CAXTON, A MOST BEAUTIFUL AND QUITE PERFECT COPY, WITHOUT
THE SLIGHTEST DEFECT OR REPAIR, folio, _in old Oxford calf binding, from
Browne Willis's Library, L105_.

PRINTED BY CAXTON, WITH HIS NAME.

*.* One of the most interesting specimens of Caxton's press. No other
perfect copy, I believe, has occurred for sale. The Aleborne copy,
(imperfect, wanting the Epitaph upon Chaucer, WHICH IS REPRINTED IN SOME
EDITIONS OF HIS WORKS, and other leaves,) sold for 53l. 11s. It is one
of the earliest productions of the father of the English press, and
claims a very great additional interest from being translated by the
Poet Chaucer. CAXTON gives us the following reasons that induced Chaucer
to translate, and himself to print it:--"Forasmoche as the stile of it
is harde, and difficile to be understoode of simple persones, therefore
the worshipful Fader and first founder and embelisher of ornate
eloquence in our _English_, I mene Maister _Geffrey Chaucer_, hath
translated it out of _Latyn_, as neygh as is possible to be understande;
wherin, in myne oppynon, he hath deserved a perpetual lawde and thanke
of al this noble Royame of _England_. Thenne, forasmoche as this sayd
boke so translated is rare, and not spred ne knowen as it is digne and
worthy for the erudicion of such as ben ignoraunte, atte requeste of a
singuler frend and gossop of myne, _I, William Caxton_, have done my
devoir temprynte it in fourme as is hereafore made."

3653 FOX (EDWARD) BISHOP OF HEREFORD, True Dyfferens Between ye Regall
Power and the Ecclesiasticall Power, translated out of Latyn by Henry
Lord Stafforde, _and dedicated by him to the Protector Somerset_, black
letter, 8vo. _fine copy, morocco, gilt edges_, EXTREMELY RARE, 6l. 6s.

_Imprinted at the sign of the Rose Garland, by W. Copland, n.d._

*.* This extraordinarily rare volume was written by Edward Fox, Bishop
of Hereford, according to Strype and Leland--_see the latter's encomium
upon it_. Lord Herbert supposed it to have been written by King Henry
VIII. It is one of the most interesting and rare volumes relative to
church history. The noble translator states that it was lent him by his
friend Master Morison, and finding the difference between the power
regal and ecclesiastical so plainly set out, and so purely explained,
that rather than his countrie should be utterly frustrated of so great
fruyte as myght growe by redynge thereof, I thought it well-bestowed
labour to turn it into Englishe.

3318 LANE (JOHN) TOM TEL-TROTH'S MESSAGE AND HIS PEN'S COMPLAINT, a
worke not unpleasant to be read, nor unprofitable to be followed, IN
VERSE, _dedicated to George Dowse_, 4to. _remarkably fine copy_, UNCUT,
_morocco elegant, gilt edges_, EXCESSIVELY RARE IF NOT UNIQUE, 10l. 10s.

_Imprinted for R. Howell, 1600_.

*.* This curious poem, consisting of 120 verses of six lines each, is of
such EXTRAORDINARY RARITY, AS TO HAVE ESCAPED THE RESEARCHES OF ALL
BIBLIOGRAPHERS. The author is styled by Phillips, in his Theatrum
Poetarum, as that "fine old Queen Elizabeth's gentleman," and is ranked
in the class of poets next to Spenser. The present volume acquires an
additional interest from being the _first production of the Author_,
which is thus expressed in the dedication: "These first fruites of my
barren braine, the token of my love, the seale of my affection, and the
true cognizance of my unfained affection," &c.

We have also received Supplements A, B, C, and D, the last part issued,
of the Catalogue of Miscellaneous Books, in various languages, on sale
by Charles Dolman, of 61. New Bond Street, which contain many rare and
curious works, more especially in the department of Foreign Divinity.

To these we may add Parts V. and VI. of Catalogues of "Cheap Books,
Autographs, &c.," on sale by Bell, 10. Bedford Street, Covent Garden;
the "Cheap Catalogue," Part XXIV., of Thomas Cole, 15. Great Turnstile,
Holborn; a "Miscellaneous Catalogue of remarkably cheap Old Books," on
sale by C. Hamilton, 4. Bridge Place, City Road; Russell Smith's
Catalogue of "Choice, Useful, and Curious Books," Part VII., which he
describes, very justly, as "containing some very cheap books;" Parts CV.
and CVI. of Petheram's, 94. High Holborn, "Catalogue of Old and New
Books," containing, among other things, Collections of the works of the
various publishing Societies, such as the Camden, Calvin, Parker,
Shakspeare, Ray, &c., and also of the Record publications; and lastly,
which we have just received from the worthy bibliopole of Auld Reekie,
T.G. Stevenson, his curious "List of Unique, Valuable, and Interesting
Works, chiefly illustrative of Scottish History and Antiquities, printed
at private expense," and "Bannatyniana,--Catalogue of the privately
printed publications of the Bannatyne Club from MDCCCXXIII. to
MDCCCXLVIII.," both of which are well deserving the attention of our
bibliographical friends.

       *       *       *       *       *

BOOKS AND ODD VOLUMES

WANTED TO PURCHASE.

(_In continuation of Lists in Nos. 5, 6, and 7._)

A DISCOVERY OF THE AUTHOR OF THE LETTERS OF JUNIUS. Lond. (Taylor and
Hessey), 1813. (Seven Shillings will be given for this if sent within a
fortnight.)

A COLLECTION OF SCARCE TRACTS. Published by Debrett. 4 vols. 8vo. 1788.

VOX SENATUS. Published between 1771 and 1774.

PORTA LINGUARUM TRILINGUIS RESERATA ET APERTA, SIVE SEMINARUM LINGUARUM
ET SCIENTIARUM ONNIUM, ETC. 12mo. or 16mo. London (E. Griffin). 1630.

THE HOOP PETTICOAT, A POEM. 1748.

DR. S. CLARKE'S ESSAY TO PROVE WOMEN HAVE SOULS.

ART OF COOKERY, A POEM. Folio. 1708.


_Odd Volumes._

GREENHILL ON EZEKIEL. Vols. III. IV. and V.

FASCICULUS RERUM EXPETENDARUM ATQUE FUGIENDARUM. Vol. II. Folio. Lond.
(Brown), 1690.

A COMPLEAT HISTORY AND MISTERY OF THE OLD AND NEW TESTAMENT. By
Christopher Ness. Vol. II. Fol. Lond. 1690.

JOANNIS FORBESII A CORSE OPERA OMNIA. Fol. Amstelaedami apud Wetstenium,
1703. Tom II., continens INSTRUCTIONES HISTORICO-THEOLOGICAS.

Q. SECTANI SATYRAE, CONCINNANTE P. ANTONLANO. Liber _Primus_. 8vo.
Amstelod. apud Elsevirios, 1700.

LUKE MILBOURN'S VINDICATIONS OF THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND FROM THE
OBJECTIONS OF PAPISTS, ETC., EXPLAINING THE NATURE OF SCHISM. Vol. II.
8vo. Lond. 1726.

*.* Letters, stating particulars and lowest price, _carriage free_, to
be sent to Mr. BELL, publisher of "NOTES AND QUERIES," 186. Fleet
Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTICES TO CORRESPONDENTS.

_We are sorry to have been unable to supply perfect sets of our Paper to
so many applicants. With the view of doing so, we will give_ sixpence
_each for clean copies of No. 1., and full price for No. 2_.

_We have to explain to correspondents who inquire as to the mode of
procuring_ "NOTES and QUERIES," _that every bookseller and newsman will
supply it_, if ordered, _and that gentlemen residing in the country may
be supplied regularly with the_ stamped _edition, by giving their orders
direct to the publisher_, Mr. GEORGE BELL, _186. Fleet Street,
accompanied by a Post Office order for a quarter (4s. 4d.)._

B. _requests us to correct an omission in his transcript from Mr. De
Morgan's Note in our last week's Number, p. 108.: Johnson's remark
should have been--"Let me see: forty times forty is sixteen hundred._ As
three to sixteen hundred, _so is the proportion, &c. The words in Roman
were omitted._"

MELANION _and other valued contributors are begged not to suppose their
contributions are declined because they are postponed. We have procured
the book_ MELANION _has referred us to, and hope in the course of two or
three weeks to bring the subject forward in a manner to give general
satisfaction._

_Greenhill's_ Exposition of Ezekiel with Observations thereupon,
_reprinted in 1839, in imp. 8vo., is marked in C. J. Stewart's
Catalogue, at 18s_.

COMMUNICATIONS RECEIVED._--C. S.--Pwcca.--T.S.D.--W.
Bell.--E.W.E.--Auctor.--F.E.M.--David
Stevens.--Melanion.--W.H.C.--B.N.--Vox.--S. Beauchamp.--G.W.--C.W.G.
(who is thanked for his private communication)--H.C. de St.
C.--J.G.--C.B.B.--W.R.O. (thanks)--S.L.--J.P.--J.G.
(Kilkenny)--H.M.--S.W.--E.S.J.--D. and W.--R.T.
Hampson.--F.R.A.--H.B.--B.W.G.--J.F.M._

_A neat Case for holding the Numbers of_ "NOTES AND QUERIES," _until the
completion of each volume, is now ready, price 1s. 6d., and may be had_,
by Order, _of all Booksellers and Newsmen_.

       *       *       *       *       *

Nearly ready, 8vo., with etched Frontispiece, by Wehnert, and Eight
Engravings,

SABRINAE COROLLA: a Volume of Classical Translations with original
Compositions contributed by Gentlemen educated at Shrewsbury School.

Among the Contributors are the Head Masters of Shrewsbury, Stamford,
Repton, and Birmingham Schools; Andrew Lawson, Esq., late M.P.; the Rev.
R. Shilleto, Cambridge; the Rev. T.S. Evans, Rugby; J. Riddell, Esq.,
Fellow of Ballol College, Oxford; the Rev. E.M. Cope, H.J. Hodgson,
Esq., H.A.J. Munro, Esq., W.G. Clark, Esq., Fellows of Trinity College,
Cambridge, and many other distinguished Scholars from both Universities.

This Work is edited by three of the principal Contributors.

GEORGE BELL, 186. Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

Illustrated with numerous Woodcuts, 8vo, 19s. 6d.

THE PRIMEVAL ANTIQUITIES OF DENMARK.

By J.J.A. WORSAAE, M.R.S.A., of Copenhagen.

Translated and applied to the Illustration of similar Remains in
England; by WILLIAM J. THOMS, Esq., F.S.A., Secretary of the Camden
Society.

This work was originally written to show how the early history of
Denmark might be read through its monuments, and has been translated and
applied to the history of similar remains in England, in the hope that
it will be found a useful hand-book for the use of those who desire to
know something of the nature of the numerous primeval monuments
scattered over these Islands, and the light which their investigation is
likely to throw over the earliest and most obscure periods of our
National History.

JOHN HENRY PARKER, Oxford, and 377. Strand, London.

       *       *       *       *       *

WORKS BY THOMAS CARLYLE.

OLIVER CROMWELL'S LETTERS AND SPEECHES. With Elucidations. With a
Portrait of Cromwell. Third Edition, with numerous additions and
corrections. In Four Volumes. Post 8vo. 42s.

       *       *       *       *       *

SARTOR RESARTUS; or, THE LIFE AND OPINIONS OF HERR TEUFELSDROeKH. Third
Edition. Post 8vo., cloth, 10s. 6d.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE LIFE of SCHILLER. Comprehending an Examination of his Works. New
Edition, with a Portrait. Small 8vo., cloth, 8s. 6d.

       *       *       *       *       *

PAST AND PRESENT. Second Edition. Post 8vo., cloth, 10s. 6d.

       *       *       *       *       *

LECTURES ON HEROES AND HERO-WORSHIP. Third Edition. Small 8vo., cloth,
9s.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. A HISTORY. Vol. I. The Bastile; Vol. II. The
Constitution; Vol. III. The Guillotine. Third Edition. Three Volumes.
Post 8vo., cloth, 1l. 11s. 6d.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHARTISM. Second Edition. Crown 8vo. cloth, 5s.

  "It never smokes but there is fire."--_Old Proverb._

       *       *       *       *       *

CRITICAL AND MISCELLLANEOUS ESSAYS. Third Edition. Four Volumes. Post
8vo., cloth, 2l. 2s.

       *       *       *       *       *

TRANSLATION OF GOETHE'S WILHELM MEISTER; containing Meister's
Apprenticeship and Meister's Travels. Second Edition, revised. Three
Volumes. Small 8vo., cloth, 18s.

London: CHAPMAN and HALL, 186. Strand.

       *       *       *       *       *

MEMOIRS OF MUSICK. By the Hon. ROGER NORTH, Attorney-General to James I.
Now first printed from the original MS. and edited, with copious Notes,
by EDWARD F. RIMBAULT, LL.D., F.S.A., &c. &c. Quarto; with a Portrait;
handsomely printed in 4to.; half-bound in morocco, 15s.

This interesting MS., so frequently alluded to by Dr. Burney in the
course of his "History of Music," has been kindly placed at the disposal
of the Council of the Musical Antiquarian Society, by George Townshend
Smith, Esq., Organist of Hereford Cathedral. But the Council, not
feeling authorised to commence a series of literary publications, yet
impressed with the value of the work, have suggested its independent
publication to their Secretary, Dr. Rimbault, under whose editorial care
it accordingly appears.

It abounds with interesting Musical Anecdotes; the Greek Fables
respecting the origin of Music; the rise and progress of Musical
Instruments; the early Musical Drama; the origin of our present
fashionable Concerts; the first performance of the Beggar's Opera, &c.

A limited number have been printed, few copies remain for sale: unsold
copies will shortly be raised in price to 1l. 11s. 6d.

Now ready, Part XII., completing the Work, containing Fifteen Plates and
Letter-press, price 7s. 6d. (folio, 12s., India paper, 20s., in a few
days), royal 8vo.

THE MONUMENTAL BRASSES of ENGLAND: a Series of Engravings on Wood, with
Descriptive Notices. By the Rev. CHARLES BOUTELL, M.A., Rector of
Downham Market, Norfolk.

The volume, containing 149 Plates, will be ready on the 11th inst.
Price, royal 8vo., cloth 1l. 8s. (The folio edition, cloth, 2l. 5s.,
India paper, 4l. 4s., in a few days.) Subscribers are requested to
complete their sets at once, as the numbers will shortly be raised in
price.

Also, by the same Author, royal 8vo. 15s.; large paper, 21s.

MONUMENTAL BRASSES and SLABS: an Historical and Descriptive Notice of
the Incised Monumental Memorials of the Middle Ages. With upwards of 200
Engravings.

     "A handsome large octavo volume, abundantly supplied with
     well-engraved woodcuts and lithographic plates; a sort of
     Encyclopaedia for ready reference.... The whole work has a look of
     painstaking completeness highly commendable."--_Athenaeum._

     "One of the most beautifully got up and interesting volumes we have
     seen for a long time. It gives in the compass of one volume an
     account of the History of those beautiful monuments of former
     days.... The illustrations are extremely well chosen."--_English
     Churchman._

A few copies only of this work remain for sale; and, as it will not be
reprinted in the same form and at the same price, the remaining copies
are raised in price. Early application for the Large Paper Edition is
necessary.

By the same Author, to be completed in Four Parts,

CHRISTIAN MONUMENTS in ENGLAND and WALES: an Historical and Descriptive
Sketch of the various classes of Monumental Memorials which have been in
use in this country from about the time of the Norman Conquest.
Profusely illustrated with Wood Engravings. To be published in Four
Parts. Part I. price 7s. 6d.; Part II. 2s. 6d.

     "A well conceived and executed work."--_Ecclesiologist._

8vo., cloth, price 12s., with a Coloured Plate of King Alfred's Jewel,

THE LIFE AND TIMES OF ALFRED THE GREAT. By the Rev. J. A. GILES, D.C.L.,
late Fellow of Corpus Christi College, Oxford, Author of "The History of
the Ancient Britons," &c.

     "A useful volume, as collecting into one view all the facts that
     are known respecting the Life of Alfred, exhibiting the various
     opinions on disputed points, and containing a very fair, sensible
     summing up by the biographer."--_Spectator._

Two vols., 8vo., 30s.

HISTORY of the ANCIENT BRITONS, From the Earliest Period to the Invasion
of the Saxons. Compiled from the Original Authorities. By the Rev. J. A.
GILES, D.C.L, late Fellow of Corpus Christi College, Oxford.

     "The longer and more important passages are full and clear in
     matter, always well presented, often in a masterly mode.... Dr.
     Giles is in thorough possession of his materials and of his
     intention, which produces the clearness that arises from mastery;
     and he exhibits the same general _bon hommie_ and chronicler
     disposition for minute and picturesque narrative which we noted in
     his 'Life of Becket,' with more of a critical
     spirit."--_Spectator._

8vo., price 5s.

A HISTORY of the PICTS' or ROMANO-BRITISH WALL, and the ROMAN STATIONS,
and VALLUM, with an Account of their present State, taken during a
Pilgrimage along that part of the Island during the month of June, 1849.

Foolscap 8vo., with Woodcuts and Map of the Locality, price 5s.

THE BALLAD of EDWIN and EMMA. By DAVID MALLET. A New Edition, with Notes
and Illustrations, by FREDERICK T. DINSDALE, Esq., LL.D., F.S.A.

     "This volume is a curious instance of the effect of early
     association ... Early knowledge of the genius loci has left an
     impression on the editor's mind which has produced this very
     completely illustrated edition. All that research can furnish
     touching the families of Wrightson and Railton, the surnames of
     Edwin and Emma, is collected."--_Spectator._

     "The editor's great merit is that of exhausting every probable
     source of information, and equal industry spent in illustration of
     a more important subject, would have led to equally curious and
     more important results."--_Athenaeum._

GEORGE BELL, 186. Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

Printed by THOMAS CLARK SHAW, of No. 8, New Street Square, at No. 5. New
Street Square, in the Parish of St. Bride, in the city of London; and
published by GEORGE BELL, of No. 186. Fleet Street, in the Parish of St.
Dunstan in the West, in the City of London, Publisher, at No. 186. Fleet
Street aforesaid.--Saturday, December 22. 1849.







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Notes & Queries 1849.12.22, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES & QUERIES 1849.12.22 ***

***** This file should be named 11652.txt or 11652.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/1/6/5/11652/

Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Joshua Hutchinson and PG Distributed
Proofreaders. Produced from page scans provided by Internet Library
of Early Journals.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year. For example:

     http://www.gutenberg.net/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/GUTINDEX.ALL


