The Project Gutenberg EBook of Samuel Brohl & Company, by Victor Cherbuliez

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Samuel Brohl & Company

Author: Victor Cherbuliez

Release Date: March 28, 2006 [EBook #2470]
Last Updated: November 3, 2016

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SAMUEL BROHL & COMPANY ***




Produced by Dagny; John Bickers





SAMUEL BROHL & COMPANY

By Victor Cherbuliez




CHAPTER I

Were the events of this nether sphere governed by the calculus of
probabilities, Count Abel Larinski and Mlle. Antoinette Moriaz would
almost unquestionably have arrived at the end of their respective
careers without ever having met. Count Larinski lived in Vienna,
Austria; Mlle. Moriaz never had been farther from Paris than Cormeilles,
where she went every spring to remain throughout the fine weather.
Neither at Cormeilles nor at Paris had she ever heard of Count Larinski;
and he, on his part, was wholly unaware of the existence of Mlle.
Moriaz. His mind was occupied with a gun of his own invention, which
should have made his fortune, and which had not made it. He had hoped
that this warlike weapon, a true _chef-d’oeuvre_, in his opinion
superior in precision and range to any other known, would be
appreciated, according to its merits, by competent judges, and would
one day be adopted for the equipment of the entire Austro-Hungarian
infantry. By means of unremitting perseverance, he had succeeded in
obtaining the appointment of an official commission to examine it.
The commission decided that the Larinski musket possessed certain
advantages, but that it had three defects: it was too heavy, the breech
became choked too rapidly with oil from the lubricator, and the cost
of manufacture was too high. Count Abel did not lose courage. He
gave himself up to study, devoted nearly two years to perfecting his
invention, and applied all his increased skill to rendering his gun
lighter and less costly. When put under test, the new firearm burst, and
this vexatious incident ruined forever the reputation of the Larinski
gun. Far from becoming enriched, the inventor had sunk his expenses, his
advances of every kind; he had recklessly squandered both revenue and
capital, which, to be sure, was not very considerable.

Mlle. Antoinette Moriaz had a more fortunate destiny than Count
Larinski. She did not plume herself on having invented a new gun, nor
did she depend upon her ingenuity for a livelihood; she had inherited
from her mother a yearly income of about a hundred thousand livres,
which enabled her to enjoy life and make others happy, for she was very
charitable. She loved the world without loving it too much; she knew how
to do without it, having abundant resources within herself, and being of
a very independent disposition. During the winter she went out a great
deal into society, and received freely at home. Her father, member of
the Institute and Professor of Chemistry at the College of France, was
one of those _savants_ who enjoy dining out; he had a taste also for
music and for the theatre. Antoinette accompanied him everywhere; they
scarcely ever remained at home except upon their reception evenings; but
with the return of the swallows it was a pleasure to Mlle. Moriaz to
fly to Cormeilles and there pass seven months, reduced to the society of
Mlle. Moiseney, who, after having been her instructress, had become
her _demoiselle de compagnie_. She lived pretty much in the open air,
walking about in the woods, reading, or painting; and the woods, her
books, and her paint-brushes, to say nothing of her poor people, so
agreeably occupied her time that she never experienced a quarter of an
hour’s _ennui_. She was too content with her lot to have the slightest
inclination to change it; therefore she was in no hurry to marry. She
had completed twenty-four years of her existence, had refused several
desirable offers, and wished nothing better than to retain her
maidenhood. It was the sole article concerning which this heiress had
discussions with those around her. When her father took it into his
head to grow angry and cry, “You must!” she would burst out laughing;
whereupon he would laugh also, and say: “I’m not the master here; in
fact, I am placed in the position of a ploughman arguing with a priest.”

It is very dangerous to tax one’s brains too much when one dines out
frequently. During the winter of 1875, M. Moriaz had undertaken an
excess of work; he was overdriven, and his health suffered. He was
attacked by one of those anemic disorders of which we hear so much
nowadays, and which may be called _la maladie a la mode_. He was obliged
to break in upon his daily routine, employ an assistant, and early in
July his physician ordered him to set out for Engadine, and try the
chalybeate water-cure at Saint Moritz. The trip from Paris to Saint
Moritz cannot be made without passing through Chur. It was at Chur that
Mlle. Antoinette Moriaz, who accompanied her father, met for the first
time Count Abel Larinski. When the decree of Destiny goes forth, the
spider and the fly must inevitably meet.

Abel Larinski had arrived at Chur from Vienna, having taken the route
through Milan and across the Splugen Pass. Although he was very short of
funds, upon reaching the capital of the canton of Grisons he had put up
at the Hotel Steinbock, the best and most expensive in the place. It was
his opinion that he owed this mark of respect to Count Larinski; such
duties he held to be very sacred, and he fulfilled them religiously. He
was in a very melancholy mood, and set out for a promenade in order to
divert his mind. In crossing the Plessur Bridge, he fixed his troubled
eyes on the muddy waters of the stream, and he felt almost tempted
to take the fatal leap; but in such a project there is considerable
distance between the dream and its fulfilment, and Count Larinski
experienced at this juncture that the most melancholy man in the world
may find it difficult to conquer his passion for living.

He had no reason to feel very cheerful. He had quitted Vienna in
order to betake himself to the Saxon Casino, where _roulette_ and
_trente-et-quarante_ are played. His ill-luck would have it that he
stopped on the way at Milan, and fell in with a circle of ill repute,
where this most imprudent of men played and lost. There remained to him
just enough cash to carry him to Saxon; but what can be accomplished in
a casino when one has empty pockets? Before crossing the Splugen he had
written to a petty Jew banker of his acquaintance for money. He counted
but little on the compliance of this Hebrew, and this was why he paused
five minutes to contemplate the Plessur, after which he retraced his
steps. Twenty minutes later he was crossing a public square, ornamented
with a pretty Gothic fountain, and seeing before him a cathedral, he
hastened to enter it.

The cathedral of Chur possesses, among other curiosities, a painting by
Albert Durer, a St. Lawrence on the gridiron, attributed to Holbein, a
piece of the true cross, and some relics of St. Lucius and his sister
Ernesta. Count Abel only accorded a wandering attention to either St.
Lucius or St. Lawrence. Scarcely had he made his way into the nave of
the building, when he beheld something that appeared to him far more
interesting than paintings or relics. An English poet has said that at
times there is revealed to us a glimpse of paradise in a woman’s face,
and it was such a rare blessing that was at this moment vouchsafed unto
Count Larinski. He was not a romantic man, and yet he remained for
some moments motionless, rooted to the spot in admiration. Was it a
premonition of his destiny? The fact is that, in beholding for the first
time Mlle. Antoinette Moriaz, for it was none other than she who thus
riveted his attention, he experienced an inexplicable surprise, a
thrilling of the heart, such as he never before had experienced. In his
first impression of this charming girl he made one slight mistake. He
divined at once that the man by whom she was accompanied, who had gray
hair, a broad, open brow, vivacious eyes, shaded by beautiful, heavy
eye-brows, belonged to some learned fraternity; but he imagined that
this individual with a white cravat, who had evidently preserved his
freshness of heart, although past sixty years of age, was the fortunate
suitor of the beautiful girl by his side.

There are some women whom it is impossible not to gaze upon. Wherever
Mlle. Antoinette Moriaz appeared she was the object of universal
observation: first, because she was charming; and, then, because she
had a way of her own of dressing and of arranging her hair, a peculiar
movement of the head, a grace of carriage, which inevitably must attract
notice. There were those who made so bold as to assert that she assumed
certain little peculiarities solely for the purpose of attracting
the chance observer. Do not believe a word of it. She was altogether
indifferent to public opinion and consulted her own taste alone, which
was certainly impregnated with a touch of audacity; but she did not seek
to appear audacious--she merely acted according to her natural bent.
Observing her from a distance, people were apt to fancy her affected,
and somewhat inclined to be fantastic; but on approaching her,
their minds were speedily disabused of this fancy. The purity of her
countenance, her air of refinement and thorough modesty, speedily
dispelled any suspicious thoughts, and those who had for a moment
harboured them would say mentally, “Pardon me, mademoiselle, I mistook.”
 Such, at least, was the mental comment of Count Abel, as she passed
close by him on leaving the church. Her father was telling her something
that made her smile; this smile was that of a young girl just budding
into womanhood, who has nothing yet to conceal from her guardian angel.
Count Larinski left the church after her, and followed her with his eyes
as she crossed the square. On returning to the hotel he had a curiosity
to satisfy. He questioned one of the _garcons_, who pointed out to him
in the hotel register for travellers the following entry: “M. Moriaz,
member of the Institute of France, and his daughter, from Paris, _en
route_ for Saint Moritz.” “And where then?” he asked himself; then
dismissed the subject from his mind.

When he had dined, he repaired to the post-office to inquire for a
letter he was expecting from Vienna. He found it, and returned to
shut himself up in his chamber, where he tore open the envelope with a
feverish hand. This letter, written in a more peculiar than felicitous
French, was the reply of the Jew banker. It read as follows:

“M. LE COMTE:

“Although you both write and understand German very well, you do not
like to read it, and therefore I write to you in French. It grieves
me deeply not to have it in my power to satisfy your honoured demand.
Business is very dull. It is impossible for me to advance you another
florin, or even to renew your note, which falls due shortly. I am the
father of a family; it pains me to be compelled to remind you of this.

“I wish to tell you quite freely what I think. I did believe in your
gun, but I believe in it no longer, no one believes in it any more. When
strong, it was too heavy; when you made it lighter, it was no longer
strong. What came next? You know it burst. Beware how you further
perfect it, or it will explode whenever it becomes aware that any one
is looking at it. This accursed gun has eaten up the little you had, and
some of my savings besides, although I have confidence that you will, at
least, pay me the interest due on that. It grieves me to tell you so, M.
de Comte, but all inventors are more or less crack-brained, and end in
the hospital. For the love of God, leave guns as they are, and invent
nothing more, or you will go overboard, and there will be no one to fish
you out.”

Abel Larinski paused at this place. He put his letter down on the table,
and, turning round in his arm-chair, with a savage air, his eye fixed
on a distant corner of the room, he fell to thus soliloquizing in a
sepulchral voice:

“Do you hear, idiot? This old knave is right. Accursed be the day when
the genius of invention thrilled your sublime brain! A grand discovery
you have made, forsooth! What have I gained from it? Grand illusions,
grand discomfitures! What hath it availed me that I passed whole nights
discussing with you breech-loaders, screw-plates, tumbrels, sockets,
bridges, ovoid balls, and spring-locks? What fruits have I gained from
these refreshing conversations? You foresaw everything, my great man,
except that one little thing which great men so often fail to see, that
mysterious something, I know not what, which makes success. When you
spoke to me, in your slow, monotonous tones, when you fixed upon me your
melancholy gaze, I should have been able to read in your eyes that you
were only a fool. The devil take thee and thy gun, thy gun and thee;
hollow head, head full of chimeras, true Pole, true Larinski!”

To whom was Count Abel speaking? To a phantom? To his double? He alone
knew. When he had uttered the last words, he resumed the perusal of his
letter, which ended thus:

“Will you permit me to give you a piece of advice, M. le Comte, a good
little piece of advice? I have known you for three years, and have taken
much interest in your welfare. You invent guns, which, when they are
strong, lack lightness. I beg your pardon, but I do not comprehend you,
M. le Comte. The name you bear is excellent; the head you carry on your
shoulders is superb, and it is the general opinion that you resemble
_Faust_; but neither name nor head does you any good. Leave the guns as
they are, and bestow your attention upon women; they, and they alone,
can draw you out of the deep waters where you are now floundering. There
is no time to lose. I beg your pardon, but you must be thirty years
old, and perhaps a little more. This _diable_ of a gun has made you lose
three valuable years.

“It pains me, M. le Comte, to be compelled to remind you that the little
note falls due shortly. I have had the value of the bracelet you left
with me as a pledge estimated; it is not worth a thousand florins, as
you believed; it is a piece of antiquity that has a value to only those
who can indulge in a caprice for fancy articles, and such caprices are
rare nowadays, the time for such is past.

“I am, M. le Comte, with much respect, your humble and obedient servant,

“MOSES GULDENTHAL.”


Abel Larinski turned once more in his chair. He crumpled up between his
fingers the letter of M. Moses Guldenthal, saying to himself as he did
so, that the Guldenthals are often very clear-sighted folks. “Ay, to
be sure,” thought he, “this Hebrew is right, I have lost three valuable
years. I have had fever, and my eyes have been clouded; but, Heaven
be praised! The charm is broken, the illusion fled, I am cured--saved!
Farewell, my chimera, I am no longer thy dupe! Many thanks, my dear
friend: I return to you your gun; do with it as it seemeth best to you.”

His eyes suddenly fell on his own reflection in the mirror above the
chimney-piece, and he regarded it fixedly for a few moments.

“The semblance truly of an inventor,” he resumed, mournfully smiling.
“This pale, emaciated face; these deep-set eyes, with dark circles about
them; these hollow, cadaverous cheeks! The three years have indeed left
their traces. Bah! a little rest in the Alpine pastures, and _Faust_
will become rejuvenated.”

He seized a pen, and wrote the following reply:

“You are truly kind, my dear Guldenthal: you refuse me the miserable
florins, but you give me in their stead a little piece of advice that
is worth a fortune. Unluckily, I am not capable of following it. Noble
souls like ours comprehend each other with half a word, and you are
a poet whenever it suits you. When in the course of the day you have
transacted a neat little piece of business, after having rubbed your
hands until you have almost deprived them of skin, you tune your violin,
which you play like an angel, and you draw from it such delightful
strains that your ledger and your cash-box fall to weeping with emotion.
I, too, am a musician, and my music is the fair sex. But, alas! women
never can be for me other than an adorable inutility, a part of the
dream of my life. Your dreams yield you a handsome percentage, as I have
sorrowfully experienced; my dreams yield me nothing, and therefore it is
that they are dear to me.

“I must prohibit--understand me clearly--your disposing of the trinket I
left with you; we have the weakness, we Poles, of clinging to our family
relics. Set your mind at rest; before the end of the month I shall have
returned to Vienna, and will honour the dear little note. One day you
will go down on your knees to beg of me to loan you a thousand florins,
and I will astonish you with my ingratitude. May the God of Abraham, of
Isaac, and of Jacob, have you in his holy keeping, my dear Guldenthal!”

As he finished his letter, he heard the sound of harps and violins. Some
itinerant musicians were giving a concert in the hotel-garden, which
was lit up as bright as day. Abel opened his window, and leaned on his
elbows, looking out. The first object that presented itself to his eyes
was Mlle. Moriaz, promenading one of the long garden-walks, leaning on
her father’s arm. Many eyes were fixed on her--we have already said it
was difficult not to gaze upon her--but no one contemplated her with
such close attention as Count Larinski. He never once lost sight of her.

“Is she beautiful? Is she even pretty?” he queried within himself. “I
cannot quite make up my mind, but I am very sure that she is charming.
Like my bracelet, this is a fancy article. She is a little thin, and her
shoulders are too vigorously fashioned for her waist, which is slender
and supple as a reed; but, such as she is, she has not her equal. Her
walk, her carriage, resemble nothing I ever have seen before. I can well
imagine that when she appears in the streets of Paris people turn to
look after her, but no one would have the audacity to follow her. How
old is she? Twenty-four or twenty-five years, I should say. Why is she
not married? Who is this withered, pinched-looking fright of a personage
who trots at her side like a poodle-dog? Probably some _demoiselle de
compagnie_. And there comes her _femme de chambre_, a very spruce little
lass, bringing her a shawl, which the _demoiselle de compagnie_ hastens
to put over her shoulders. She allows it to be done with the air of one
who is accustomed to being waited upon. Mlle. Moriaz is an heiress. Why,
then, is she not married?”

Count Larinski pursued his soliloquy as long as Mlle. Moriaz promenaded
in the garden. As soon as she re-entered the hotel, it appeared to him
that the garden had become empty, and that the musicians were playing
out of tune. He closed his window. He gave up his plan of starting
the next day for Saxon. He had decided that he would set out for Saint
Moritz, to pass there at least two or three days. He said to himself,
“It seems absurd; but who can tell?”

Thereupon he proceeded to investigate the state of his finances, and he
weighed and re-weighed his purse, which was very light. Formerly Count
Larinski had possessed a very pretty collection of jewellery. He had
looked upon this as a reserve fund, to which he would have recourse only
in cases of extreme distress. Alas! there remained to him now only two
articles of his once considerable store--the bracelet that was in the
hands of M. Guldenthal, and a diamond ring that he wore on his finger.
He decided that, before quitting Chur, he would borrow money on this
ring, or that he would try to sell it.

He remained some time seated at the foot of his bed, dangling his legs
to and fro, his eyes closed. He had closed them, in order to better
call up a vision of Mlle. Moriaz, and he repeated the words: “It seems
absurd; but who can tell? The fact is, we can know nothing of a surety,
and anything may happen.” Then he recalled one of Goethe’s poems,
entitled “Vanitas! vanitatum vanitas!” and he recited several time in
German these two lines:

“Nun hab’ ich mein’ Sach’ auf nichts gestellt, Und mein gehort die ganze
Welt!”

This literally signifies, “Now that I no longer count on anything, the
whole world is mine.” Abel Larinski recited these lines with a purity of
accent that would have astonished M. Moses Guldenthal.

M. Moriaz, after wishing his daughter good-night, and imprinting a kiss
upon her brow, as was his custom, had retired to his chamber. He was
preparing for bed, when there came a knock at his door. Opening this,
he saw before him a fair-haired youth, who rushed eagerly towards
him, seized both his hands, and pressed them with effusion. M. Moriaz
disengaged his hands, and regarded the intruder with a bewildered air.

“How?” cried the latter. “You do not know me? So sure as you are one of
the most illustrious chemists of the day, I am Camille Langis, son of
your best friend, a young man of great expectations, who admires you
truly, who has followed you here, and who is now ready to begin all over
again. There, my dear master, do you recognise me?”

“Ay, to be sure I recognise you, my boy,” replied M. Moriaz, “although,
to tell the truth, you have greatly changed. When you left us you were a
mere youth.”

“And now?”

“And now you have the air of a young man; but, I beg of you, where have
you come from? I thought you were in the heart of Transylvania.”

“It is possible to return from there, as you see. Three days ago I
arrived in Paris and flew to Maisons-Lafitte. Mme. De Lorcy, who bears
the double insignia of honour of being my aunt and the godmother of
Antoinette--I beg your pardon, I mean Mlle. Antoinette Moriaz--informed
me that you were in ill-health, and that your physician had sent you
to Switzerland, to Saint Moritz, to recruit. I hastened after you; this
morning I missed you by one hour at Zurich; but I have you now, and you
will listen to me.”

“I warn you, my dear child, that I am at this moment a most detestable
auditor. We have done to-day one _hotel de ville_, one episcopal palace,
one cathedral, and some relics of St. Lucius. To speak plainly, I am
overpowered with sleep. Is there any great haste for what you have to
say to me?”

“Is there any great haste? Why, I arrive breathless from Hungary to
demand your daughter in marriage.”

M. Moriaz threw up his arms; then, seating himself on the edge of his
bed, he piteously gasped:

“You could not wait until to-morrow? If a judge is desired to take a
favourable view of a case, he surely should not be disturbed in his
first sleep to consider it.”

“My dear master, I am truly distressed to be compelled to be
disagreeable to you, but it is absolutely necessary that you should
listen to me. Two years ago, for the first time, I asked of you your
daughter’s hand. After having consulted Antoinette--you will permit me
to call her Antoinette, will you not?--after having consulted her, you
told me that I was too young, that she would not listen seriously to my
proposal, and you gave me your permission to try again in two years. I
have employed these two mortal years in constructing a railroad and a
wire bridge in Hungary, and, believe me, I took infinite pains to forget
Antoinette. In vain! She is the romance of my youth, I never can have
another. On July 5, 1873, did you not tell me to return in two years? We
are now at July 5, 1875, and I return. Am I a punctual man?”

“As punctual as insupportable,” rejoined M. Moriaz, casting a melancholy
look at his pillow. “Now, candidly, is it the thing to seek the presence
of the President of the Academy of Sciences between eleven o’clock and
midnight, to pour such silly stuff into his ear? You are wanting in
respect for the Institute. Besides, my dear boy, people change in two
years; you are a proof of it. You have developed from boyhood almost
into manhood, and you have done well to let your imperial grow; it gives
you quite a dashing military air--one would divine at first sight that
you were fresh from Hungary. But, while you have changed for the better,
are you sure that Antoinette has not changed for the worse? Are you sure
that she is still the Antoinette of your romance?”

“I beg your pardon; I saw her just now, without her seeing me. She was
promenading on your arm in the hotel-garden, which was lit up in her
honour. Formerly she was enchanting, she has become adorable. If you
would have the immense goodness to give her to me, I would be capable of
doing anything agreeable to you. I would relieve you of all your little
troublesome jobs; I would clean your retorts; I would put labels on your
bottles and jars; I would sweep out your laboratory. I know German very
well--I would read all the large German books it might please you to
consult; I would read them, pen in hand; I would make extracts--written
extracts--and such extracts! _Grand Dieu!_ they would be like
copperplate. My dear master, will you give her to me?”

“The absurd creature! He imagines that it only depends upon me to give
him my daughter. I could as easily dispose of the moon. Since she has
had teeth, she had made me desire everything she desires.”

“At least you will give me permission to pay my addresses to her
to-morrow?”

“Beware, unlucky youth!” cried M. Moriaz. “You will ruin your case
forever. Since you have been away she has refused two offers, one of
them from a second secretary of legation, Viscount de R---, and at the
present moment she holds in holy horror all suitors. She is accompanying
me to Saint Moritz in order to gather flowers and paint aquarelle
sketches of them. Should you presume to interrupt her in her favourite
occupations, should you present yourself before her like a creditor on
the day of maturity, I swear to you that your note would be protested,
and that you would have nothing better to do than return to Hungary.”

“You are sure of it?”

“As sure as that sulphuric acid will turn litmus red.”

“And you have the heart to sent me back to Paris without having spoken
with her?”

“What I have said is for your good, and you know whether I mean you well
or not.”

“It is agreed, then, that you will take charge of my interests; that you
will plead my cause?”

“It is understood that I will sound the premises, that I will prepare
the way--”

“And that you will send me tidings shortly, and that these tidings will
be good. I shall await them here, at the Hotel Steinbock.”

“As you please; but, for the love of Heaven, let me sleep!”

M. Camille Langis pressed his two arms and said, with much emotion: “I
place myself in your hands; take care how you answer for my life!”

“O youth!” murmured M. Moriaz, actually thrusting Camille from the room.
“One might search in vain for a more beautiful invention.”

Ten hours later, a post-chaise bore in the direction of Engadine Mlle.
Antoinette Moriaz, her father, her _demoiselle de compagnie_, and
her _femme de chambre_. They breakfasted tolerably well in a village
situated in the lower portion of a notch, called Tiefenkasten, which
means, literally, _deep chest_, and certainly a deeper never has been
seen. After breakfast they pursued their way farther, and towards four
o’clock in the afternoon they reached the entrance of the savage defile
of Bergunerstein, which deserves to be compared with that of Via Mala.
The road lies between a wall of rocks and a precipice of nearly two
hundred metres, at the bottom of which rush the swift waters of the
Albula. This wild scenery deeply moved Mlle. Moriaz; she never had seen
anything like it at Cormeilles or anywhere about Paris. She alighted,
and, moving towards the parapet, leaned over it, contemplating at her
ease the depths below, which the foaming torrent beneath filled with its
roars.

Her father speedily joined her.

“Do you not find this music charming?” she asked of him.

“Charming, I grant,” he replied; “but more charming still are those
brave workmen who, at the risk of their necks, have engineered such a
suspended highway as we see here. I think you admire the torrent too
much, and the road not enough.” And after a pause he added, “I wish
that our friend Camille Langis had had fewer dangers to contend with in
constructing his.” Antoinette turned quickly and looked at her father;
then she bestowed her attention once more upon the Albula. “To be sure,”
 resumed M. Moriaz, stroking his whiskers with the head of his cane,
“Camille is just the man to make his way through difficulties. He has
a youthful air that is very deceptive, but he always has been
astonishingly precocious. At twenty years of age he became head of
his class at the Central School; but the best thing about him is that,
although in possession of a fortune, yet he has a passion for work. The
rich man who works accepts voluntary poverty.”

There arose from the precipice a damp, chill breeze; Mlle. Moriaz drew
over her head a red hood that she held in her hand, and scraping off
with her finger some of the facing of the parapet, which glittered with
scales of mica, she asked: “What do you call this?”

“It is gneiss, a sort of sheet-granite; but do not you too admire people
who work when they are not compelled to do anything?”

“Then you must admire yourself a great deal.”

“Oh, I! In my early youth I worked from necessity, and then I formed a
habit which I cannot now get rid of; while Camille Langis--”

“Once more?” she ejaculated, with a gesture of impatience. “What prompts
you to speak to me of Camille?”

“Nothing. I often think of him.”

“Do not let us two play at diplomacy. You have had news of him lately?”

“You just remind me that I have, through a letter from Mme. De Lorcy.”

“Mme de Lorcy, my godmother, would do better to meddle with what
concerns her. That woman is incorrigible.”

“Of what would you have her correct herself?”

“Simply of her mania for making my happiness after her own fashion.
I read in your eyes that Camille has returned to Paris. What is his
object?”

“I know nothing about it. How should I know? I only presume--that is, I
suppose----”

“You do not suppose--you know.”

“Not at all. At the same time, since hypothesis is the road which leads
to science, a road we _savants_ travel every day, I--”

“You know very well,” she again interposed, “that I promised him
nothing.”

“Strictly speaking, I admit; but you requested me to tell him that
you found him too young. He has laboured conscientiously since then to
correct that fault.” Then playfully pinching her cheeks, he added: “You
are a great girl for objections. Soon you will be twenty-five years
old, and you have refused five eligible offers. Have you taken a vow to
remain unmarried?”

“Ah! you have no mercy,” she cried. “What! you cannot even spare me on
the Albula! You know that, of all subjects of conversation, I have most
antipathy for this.”

“Come, come; you are slandering me now, my child. I spoke to you of
Camille as I might have spoken of the King of Prussia; and you rose in
arms at once, taking it wholly to yourself.”

Antoinette was silent for some moments.

“Decidedly, you are very fond of Camille,” she presently said.

“Of all the sons-in-law you could propose to me----”

“But I do not propose any.”

“That is precisely what I find fault with.”

“Very good; since you think so much of him, this Camille, suppose you
command me to marry him?”

“If I were to command, would you obey?”

“Perhaps, just for the curiosity of the thing,” she rejoined, laughing.

“Naughty girl, to mock at her father!” said he. “If these twenty years
I have been in servitude, I can scarcely emancipate myself in a day.
However, since the great king deigns to hold parley with his ministers,
I am Pomponne--let us argue.”

“Ah, well! you know as well as I that I have a real friendship for
Camille, as the playmate of my childhood. I remember him when he was
ever so small, and he remembers me, too, when I was a tiny creature.
We played hide-and-seek together, and he humoured me in my ten thousand
little caprices. Delightful reminiscences these, but unfortunately I
think of them too much when I see him.”

“He has passed two years among the Magyars; two years is a good while.”

“Bah! he could never possibly have any authority over me. I intend that
my husband shall be my government.”

“So that you may have the pleasure of governing your government?”

“Besides, I know Camille too well. I could only fall in love with a
stranger,” said she, heedless of the last sally.

“Was not the Viscount R--- a stranger?”

“At the end of five minutes I knew him by heart. He is precisely like
all other second secretaries of legation in the world. You may be sure
that there is not a single idea in his head that is really his own. Even
his figure does not belong to himself; it is the _chef-d’oeuvre_ of the
united efforts of his tailor and his shirt-maker.”

“According to this, a prime requisite in the man whom you could love is
to be poorly clad.”

“If ever my heart is touched, it will be because I have met a man who
is not like all the other men of my acquaintance. After that I will not
positively forbid him to have decent clothing.”

M. Moriaz made a little gesture of impatience, and then set out to
regain the chaise, which was some distance in advance. When he
had proceeded about twenty steps, he paused, and, turning towards
Antoinette, who was engaged in readjusting her hood and rebuttoning her
twelve-button gloves, he said:

“I have drawn an odd number in the great lottery of this world. In our
day there are no romantic girls; the last remaining one is mine.”

“That is it; I am a romantic girl!” she cried, tossing her pretty, curly
head with an air of defiance; “and if you are wise you will not urge me
to marry, for I never shall make any but an ineligible match.”

“Ah, speak lower!” he exclaimed, casting a hurried glance around him,
and adding: “Thank Heaven! there is no one here but the Albula to hear
you.”

M. Moriaz mistook. Had he raised his eyes a little higher he would have
discovered, above the rock cornice bordering the highway, a foot-path,
and in this foot-path a pedestrian tourist, who had paused beneath a
fir-tree. This tourist had set out from Chur in the diligence. At the
entrance of the defile, leaving his luggage to continue without him to
Saint Moritz, he had alighted, and with his haversack on his back had
set forward on foot for Bergun, where he proposed passing the night,
as did also M. Moriaz. Of the conversation between Antoinette and her
father he had caught only one word. This word, however, sped like an
arrow into his ear, and from his ear into the innermost recesses of his
brain, where it long quivered. It was a treasure, this word; and he did
not cease to meditate upon it, to comment on it, to extract from it all
its essence, until he had reached the first houses of Bergun, like a
mendicant who has picked up in a dusty road a well-filled purse, and who
opens it, closes it, opens it again, counts his prize piece by piece,
and adds up its value twenty times over. Our tourist dined at the _table
d’hote_; he was so preoccupied that he ate the trout caught in the
Albula without suspecting that they possessed a marvellous freshness, an
exquisite flavour and delicacy, and yet it is notorious that the trout
of the Albula are the first trout of the universe.

Mlle. Moiseney, the duties of whose office consisted in serving as
chaperon to Mlle. Moriaz, was not a great genius. This worthy and
excellent personage had, in fact, rather a circumscribed mind, and she
had not the least suspicion of it. Her physiognomy was not pleasing to
M. Moriaz; he had several times besought his daughter to part with her.
In the goodness of her soul Antoinette always refused; she was not one
who could countenance rebuffs to old domestics, old dogs, old horses,
or worn-out governesses. Young Candide arrived at the conclusion, as the
result of his observations, that the first degree of happiness would
be to be Mlle. Gunegonde, and the second to contemplate her throughout
life. Mlle. Moiseney believed that it would be the first degree of
superhuman felicity to be Mlle. Moriaz, the second to pass one’s life
near this queen, who, arbitrary and capricious though she might be, was
most thoughtful of the happiness of her subjects, and to be able to
say: “It was I that hatched the egg whence arose this phoenix; I did
something for this marvel; I taught her English and music.” She had
boundless admiration for her queen, amounting actually to idolatry. The
English profess that their sovereigns can do nothing amiss: “The king
can do no wrong.” Mlle. Moiseney was convinced that Mlle. Moriaz could
neither do wrong nor make mistakes about anything. She saw everything
with her eyes, espoused her likes and her dislikes, her sentiments, her
opinions, her rights, and her wrongs; she lived, as it were, a reflected
existence. Every morning she said to her idol, “How beautiful we are
to-day!” precisely as the bell-ringer who, puffing out his cheeks,
cried: “We are in voice; we have chanted vespers well to-day!” M. Moriaz
excused her for finding his daughter charming, but could not so
readily approve of her upholding Antoinette’s ideas, her decisions,
her prejudices. “This woman is no chaperon,” said he; “she is an
admiration-point!” He would have been very glad to have routed her from
the field, and to give her place to a person of good sound sense and
judgment, one who might gain some influence over Antoinette. It would
have greatly surprised Mlle. Moiseney had he represented to her that she
lacked good sense. This good creature flattered herself that she had an
inexhaustible stock of this commodity; she placed the highest estimate
on her own judgment; she believed herself to be well-nigh infallible.
She discoursed in the tone of an oracle on future contingencies; she
prided herself on being able to divine all things, to foresee all
things, to predict all things--in a word, to be in the secret of the
gods. As her Christian name was Joan, M. Moriaz, who set little store by
his calendar, sometimes called her Pope Joan, which wounded her deeply.

Mlle. Moiseney had two weaknesses; she was a gormand, and she admired
handsome men. Let us understand the case: she knew perfectly well that
they were not created for her; that she had no attractions to offer
them; that they had nothing to give her. She admired them naively and
innocently, as a child might admire a beautiful Epinal engraving; she
would willingly have cut out their likenesses to hang on a nail on
her wall, and contemplate while rereading “Gonzalve de Cordue” and “Le
Dernier des Cavaliers,” her two favourite romances. At Bergun,
during the repast, her brain had been working, and she had made two
reflections. The first was, that the trout of Albula were incomparable,
the second that the stranger seated opposite her had a remarkably
handsome head, and was altogether a fine-looking man. Several times,
with fork halfway to mouth, and nose in the air, she had forgotten
herself in her scrutiny of him.

Antoinette, rather weary, had retired early to her chamber. Mlle.
Moiseney repaired thither to see if she needed anything, and, as she was
about leaving her for the night, candle in hand, she suddenly inquired,
“Do not you think, as I do, that this stranger is a remarkable-looking
person?”

“Of whom do you speak?” rejoined Antoinette.

“Why, of the traveller who sat opposite me.”

“I confess that I scarcely looked at him.”

“Indeed! He has superb eyes, nearly green, with fawn-coloured tinting.”

“Most astonishing! And his hair, is it green also?”

“Chestnut brown, almost hazel.”

“Pray be more exact; is it hazel or not?”

“You need not laugh at me--his whole appearance is striking, his figure
singular, but full of character, full of expression, and as handsome as
singular.”

“What enthusiasm! It seemed to me, so far as I noticed, that he was
inclined to stoop, and that his head was very badly poised.”

“What do you say?” cried Mlle. Moiseney, greatly scandalized. “How came
you to think his head badly poised?”

“There--there! Don’t let us quarrel about it; I am ready to retract.
Good-night, mademoiselle. Apropos, did you know that M. Camille Langis
had returned to Paris?”

“I did not know it, but I am not surprised. I had surmised it; in fact,
I was quite sure that he would be back about this time, perfectly sure.
And, of course, you think he has returned with the intention--”

“I think,” interrupted Antoinette, “that it costs me more to pain M.
Langis than any other man in the world. I think, also, that he possesses
most tiresome fidelity; it is always the way, one never loses one’s dog
when one wants to lose him; and I think, moreover, that a woman makes a
poor bargain when she marries a man for whom she feels friendship; for,
if she gains a husband, she is very sure to lose a friend.”

“How true your words are!” exclaimed Mlle. Moiseney. “But you are always
right. Has M. Langis forgotten that you thought him too young--only
twenty-three?”

“He has so little forgotten it that he has managed, I don’t know how, to
be at present twenty-five. How resist such a mark of affection? I shall
be compelled to marry him.”

“That will never do. People do not marry for charity,” replied Mlle.
Moiseney, deprecatingly.

“Adieu, my dear,” said Antoinette, dismissing her. “Do not dream too
much about your unknown charmer. I assure you he had a decided stoop
in his shoulders. However, that makes small difference; if your heart
speaks, I will see to arranging this affair for you.” And she added,
musingly, “How amusing it must be to marry other people!”

The next morning Mlle. Moiseney made the acquaintance of her unknown
charmer. Before leaving Bergun Mlle. Moriaz wished to make a sketch, and
she had gone out early with her father. Mlle. Moiseney descended to
the hotel _salon_, and, espying a piano, she opened it and played a
_fantasia_ by Schumann; she was a tolerably good musician. When she had
finished, Count Abel Larinski, the man with green eyes, who had entered
the _salon_ without her hearing him, approached to thank her for the
pleasure he had had in listening to her; but he begged to take the
liberty to tell her that she failed to properly observe the movement,
and had taken an _andantino_ for an _andante_. At her solicitation he
took her place at the instrument, and executed the _andantino_ as few
but professional artists could do. Mlle. Moiseney, ever ready with her
enthusiasm, declared that he must be a Liszt or a Chopin, and implored
him to play her something else, to which he consented with good grace.
After this they talked about music and many other things. The man with
the green eyes possessed one quality in common with Socrates, he was
master in the art of interrogating, and Mlle. Moiseney loved to talk.
The subject on which she discoursed most willingly was Mlle. Antoinette
Moriaz; when she was started under this heading she became eloquent.
At the end of half an hour Count Abel was thoroughly _au fait_ on the
character and position of Mlle. Moriaz. He knew that she had a heart
of gold, a mind free from all narrow prejudices, a generous soul, and
a love for all that was chivalrous and heroic; he knew that two days of
every week were devoted by her to visiting the poor, and that she
looked upon these as natural creditors to whom it was her duty to make
restitution. He knew also that Mlle. Moriaz could all the better satisfy
her charitable inclinations, as her mother had left her an income of one
hundred thousand livres. He learned that she danced to perfection, that
she drew like an angel, and that she read Italian and spoke English.
This last seemed of mediocre importance to Count Abel. St. Paul said:
“Though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, and have not
charity, I am become as sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal.” The count
was of St. Paul’s opinion, and had Mlle. Moriaz known neither how to
speak English, nor to draw, nor yet to dance, it would not in the
least have diminished the esteem with which he honoured her. The main
essential in his eyes was that she was benevolent to the poor, and that
she cherished a little tenderness for heroes.

When he had learned, with an air of indifference, all that he cared to
learn, he respectfully bowed himself away from Mlle. Moiseney, to whom
he had not mentioned his name, and, buckling his haversack, he put it on
his back, paid his bill, and set out on foot to make a hasty ascent of
the culminating point of the Albula Pass, which leads into the Engadine
Valley. One would have difficulty in finding throughout the Alps a
more completely barren, rugged, desolate spot, than this portion of
the Albula Pass. The highway lies among masses of rocks, heaped up in
terrible disorder. Arrived at the culminating point, Count Abel felt the
necessity of taking breath. He clambered up a little hillock, where he
seated himself. At his feet were wide open the yawning jaws of a cavern,
obstructed by great tufts of aconite (wolf’s-bane), with sombre foliage;
one would have said that they kept guard over some crime in which they
had been accomplices. Count Abel contemplated the awful silence that
surrounded him; everywhere enormous boulders, heaped together, or
scattered about in isolated grandeur; some pitched on their sides,
others standing erect, still others suspended, as it were, in mid-air.
It seemed to him that these boulders had formerly served for the games
of bacchanalian Titans, who, after having used them as skittles or
jack-stones, had ended by hurling them at one another’s heads. It is
most probable that He who constructed the Albula Pass, alarmed and
confused by the hideous aspect of his work, did justice to it by
breaking it into fragments with his gigantic hammer.

Count Abel heard a tinkling of bells, and, looking up, he saw
approaching a post-chaise, making its way from Engadine to Bergun. It
was a large, uncovered berlin, and in it sat a woman of about sixty
years of age, accompanied by her attendants and her pug-dog. This woman
had rather a bulky head, a long face, a snub-nose, high cheek-bones, a
keen, bright eye, a large mouth, about which played a smile, at the
same time _spirituel_, imperious, and contemptuous. Abel grew pale, and
became at once convulsed with terror; he could not withdraw his eyes
from this markedly Mongolian physiognomy, which from afar he had
recognised. “Ah, yes,” he said, “it is she!” He drew over his face the
cape of his mantle, and disappeared as completely as it is possible to
disappear when one is perched upon a hillock. It was six years since he
had seen this woman, and he had promised himself never to see her again;
but man is the plaything of circumstances, and his happiness as well
as his pride is at the mercy of a chance encounter. Count Abel was no
longer proud; for some moments he had humbled himself, he had ceased to
exist.

Happily he discovered that he had not been recognised; that the woman
of sixty years of age was not looking his way. She had good taste;
discovering the hideous aspect of the country, which is usually known as
the Vallee du Diable, she had opened a volume, bound in morocco, which
her waiting-woman had placed in her hands. This volume was not a new
novel; it was a German book, entitled “The History of Civilization,
viewed in Accordance with the Doctrines of Evolution, from the most
Remote Period to the Present Day.” She neither had made much progress
in the pages of the book nor in the history of civilization; she had not
got beyond the age of stone or of bronze; she was still among primitive
animal life, among the protozoa, the monads, the infusoria, the
vibratiles--in the age of albumen, or gelatinous civilization, as it was
called by the author, the sagacity of whose views charmed her. She only
interrupted her reading at intervals to lightly stroke the nose of her
pug, who lay snoring in her lap, and she was a thousand leagues from
suspecting that Count Abel Larinski was at hand, watching her.

The berlin passed by him without stopping, and soon it had begun the
descent towards Bergun. Then he felt a great weight roll from his heart,
which beat freely once more. The berlin moved rapidly away; the count
followed it with his prayers, smoothing its course, removing every
stone or other obstacle that might retard its progress. It was just
disappearing round one of the curves of the road, when it crossed
another post-chaise, making the ascent in a walk, and in it Count Abel
perceived something red: it was the hood of Mlle. Antoinette Moriaz. A
moment more and the berlin was gone; it seemed to him that the shadow of
his sorrowful youth, emerged suddenly from the realm of shades, had been
plunged back there forever, and that the fay of hope--she who holds
in her keeping the secrets of the future--was ascending toward him,
red-hooded, flowers in her hands, sunshine in her eyes. The clouds
parted, the deep shadow covering the Vallee du Diable cleared away,
and the dismal solitude began to smile. Count Abel arose, picked up his
staff, and shook himself. As he passed before the cavern, he discovered,
among the tufts of aconite which covered it, a mossy hollow, and
he perceived that this hollow was ornamented with beautiful blue
campanulas, whose little bells gracefully waved in the gentle breeze
which was stirring. He gathered one of these campanulas, carried it
to his lips, and found its taste most agreeable. Half an hour later
he turned from the highway into a foot-path which led through green
pastures and forests of larch-trees.

By the time he had reached the heart of the valley it was nightfall. He
traversed the hamlet of Cresta, crossed a bridge, found himself at the
entrance of the village of Cellarina, about twenty-five minutes’ walk
form Saint Moritz. After taking counsel with himself, he resolved to
proceed no farther; and so he put up at a neat, pretty inn, which had
just been freshly white-washed.

The air of the Engadine is so keen and bracing that the first nights
passed there are apt to be sleepless ones. Count Larinski scarcely slept
at all in his new quarters. Would he have slept better on the plains?
He became worn out with his thoughts. Of what was he thinking? Of the
cathedral at Chur, of the Vallee du Diable, of the tufts of aconite, the
campanulas, and the meeting of the two post-chaises, one ascending, the
other descending. After that he saw no longer anything but a red hood,
and his eyes were open when the first blush of the morning penetrated
his modest chamber. Eagles sleep little when they are preparing for the
chase.



CHAPTER II

The Baths of Saint Moritz are, according to the verdict of a large
number of people, by no means an enlivening resort, and here tarry
chiefly genuine invalids, who cherish a sincere desire to recover health
and strength. The invigorating atmosphere, the chalybeate waters, which
are unquestionably wholesome, although they do taste like ink, have
wrought more than one actual miracle; nevertheless, it is said to
require no little philosophy to tolerate existence there. “I am charmed
to have had the experience of visiting the Baths,” we once heard an
invalid say, “for I know now that I am capable of enduring anything
and everything.” But this, let us hasten to assure the reader, is an
exaggeration--the mere babbling of an ingrate.

The Upper Engadine Valley, in which Saint Moritz is situated, has, as
well as the Baths, its detractors and its admirers. This narrow valley,
throughout whose whole length flows the Inn, shut in by glacier-capped
mountains, whose slopes are covered with spruce, pine, and larch trees,
lies at an altitude of some five thousand feet above the level of the
sea. It often snows there in the month of August, but spring and early
summer in the locality are delightful; and dotted about are numerous
little romantic green lakes, glittering like emeralds in the sunshine.
Those who slander these by comparing them to wash-bowls and cisterns,
are simply troubled with the spleen, a malady which neither iron,
iodine, nor yet sulphur, can cure.

One thing these discontented folks cannot deny, and that is that it
would be difficult, not to say impossible, to find anywhere in the
mountains more flowery and highly perfumed mossy banks than those of
the Engadine. We do not make this assertion because of the rhododendrons
that abound on the borders of the lakes: we are not fond of this showy,
pretentious shrub, whose flowers look as if they were moulded in wax
for the decoration of some altar; but is it not delightful to walk on a
greensward, almost black with rich satyrion and vanilla? And what
would you think of a wealth of gentians, large and small; great yellow
arnicas; beautiful Martagon lilies; and St.-Bruno lilies; of every
variety of daphne; of androsace, with its rose-coloured clusters; of the
flame-coloured orchis; of saxifrage; of great, velvety campanulas; of
pretty violet asters, wrapped in little, cravat-like tufting, to protect
them from the cold? Besides, near the runnels, following whose borders
the cattle have tracked out graded paths, there grows that species of
immortelle called _Edelweiss_, an object of covetousness to every guest
at the Baths. Higher up, near the glacier approach, may be found the
white heart’s-ease, the anemone, and the glacial ranunculus (spearwort);
higher still, often buried beneath the snow, flourishes that charming
little lilac flower, delicately cut, sensitive, quivering, as it were,
with a cold, known as the soldanella. To scrape away the snow and find
beneath it a flower! Are there often made such delightful discoveries in
life?

Having said thus much, we must admit that the Rue de Saint Moritz does
not resemble the Rue de la Paix of Paris. We must also admit that the
markets of the place are poorly supplied, and that in an atmosphere
well calculated to stimulate the appetite the wherewithal to supply this
cannot always be obtained. We cannot have everything in this world;
but it is by no means our intention to advise any one to take up his
residence for life in the Engadine. There must, however, be some charm
in this valley, since those of its inhabitants who emigrate from it in
their youth are very apt, after they have made some money, to return
to pass their old age in their natal place, where they build some very
pretty houses.

Mlle. Moriaz did not find Saint Moritz disagreeable; the wildness of
the scenery and the rugged pines pleased her. From the terrace of Hotel
Badrutt she loved to gaze upon the green lake, slumbering at her feet,
and it never occurred to her to grumble because it had the form of
a wash-bowl. She loved to see the cows returning at evening from the
pasture. The cowherd in charge marshalled home in the most orderly
manner his little drove, which announced its coming from afar by the
tinkling of the cow-bells. Each one of the creatures stopped of itself
at the entrance to its stall and demanded admittance by its lowing. In
the morning, when they were turned out again, they awaited the arrival
of the entire herd, and fell into rank and file, each in its proper
place. The first time Mlle. Moriaz witnessed this ceremony, she found it
as interesting as a first presentation at the theatre or opera.

There were several rainy days, which she employed in reading, painting,
and making observations on the human animals of both sexes whom she
encountered at the _table d’hote_. She soon gained an increase of
occupation. With her, mind and heart were so constantly on the alert
that it was impossible for her to remain a week in a place without
discovering some work of charity to be performed. A woman to whom she
had taken a fancy, a little shopkeeper of the place, interested her in
her daughter, who was destined to be a governess, and who desired to
learn drawing. Antoinette undertook to give her drawing-lessons, making
her come every day to the hotel, and often keeping her there several
hours. Her pupil was rather dull of comprehension, and caused her to
grow a little cross sometimes; but she always made amends to the girl by
her caresses and sprightly talk.

The weather became fine again. Antoinette availed herself of
the opportunity to take long promenades; she clambered up the
mountain-slopes, over slippery turf, in the hope of carrying home some
rare plant; but her strength was not equal to her valour--she could not
succeed in scaling those heights where flourished the _Edelweiss_.
A week after her arrival she had a surprise, we might even say a
pleasurable emotion, which was not comprised in the programme of
amusements that the proprietor of Hotel Badrutt undertook to procure for
his guests. Returning from an excursion to Lake Silvaplana, she found
in her chamber a basket containing a veritable sheaf of Alpine flowers,
freshly gathered, and among them not only _Edelweiss_ in profusion, but
several very rare plants, and the rarest of all a certain bell-flower
creeper, which smells like the apricot, and which, except in some
districts of the Engadine, is only found now in Siberia. This splendid
bouquet was accompanied by a note, thus conceived:

“A man who had had enough of life, resolved to hang himself. To execute
his dolorous design, he selected a lonely and dismal spot, where there
grew a solitary oak, whose sap was nearly exhausted. As he was engaged
in securing his cord, a bird alighted on the half-dead tree and began to
sing. The man said to himself: ‘Since there is no spot so miserable that
a bird will not deign to sing in it, I will have the courage to live.’
And he lived.

“I arrived in this village disgusted with life, sorrowful and so weary
that I longed to die. I saw you pass by, and I know not what mysterious
virtue entered into me. I will live.

“‘What matters it to me?’ you will say, in reading these lines; and you
will be right. My sole excuse for having written them is, that I will
leave here in a few days; that you never will see me again, never know
who I am!”

The first impression of Antoinette was one of profound astonishment. She
would have taken it for granted that there was some mistake had not her
name been written in full on the envelope. Her second impulse was to
laugh at her adventure. She accorded full justice to Mlle. Moriaz; she
knew very well that she did not resemble the first chance comer;
but that her beauty would work miracles, resurrections; that a
hypochondriac, merely from seeing her pass by, was likely to regain his
taste for existence, scarcely appeared admissible to her. So great was
her curiosity, that she took the pains to make inquiries; the flowers
and the letter had been left by a little peasant, who was not of
the place, and who could not be found. Antoinette examined the
hotel-register; she did not see there the handwriting of the letter. She
studied the faces which surrounded her; there was not in Hotel Badrutt a
single romantic-looking person. Very speedily she renounced her search.
The bouquet pleased her; she kept it as a present fallen from the skies,
and preserved the letter as a curiosity, without long troubling herself
to know who had written it. “Do not let us talk about it any more, it is
doubtless some lunatic,” she replied one day to Mlle. Moiseney, who kept
constantly recurring to the incident whose mystery she burned to fathom.
The good demoiselle had been tempted to stop people in the road to ask,
“Was it you?” Perchance she might have suspected her Bergun unknown to
have a hand in the affair, had she had the least idea that he was at
Saint Moritz, where she never had met him. He came there, nevertheless,
every day, but at his own time; besides, the hotels were full to
overflowing, and it was very easy to lose one’s self in the crowd.

To tell the truth, when Count Abel Larinski came to Saint Moritz he
was far less occupied with Mlle. Moriaz than with a certain illustrious
chemist. The air of the Engadine and the waters that tasted like ink had
worked marvels: in a week M. Moriaz felt like a new man. There had come
to him a most formidable appetite, and he could walk for hours at a time
without becoming weary. He abused his growing strength by constantly
strolling through the mountains without a guide, hammer in hand; and
every day, in spite of the remonstrances of his daughter, he increased
the length of his excursions. The more people know, the more inquisitive
they become; and, when one is inquisitive, one can go to great lengths
without feeling fatigue; one only becomes conscious of this after the
exertion is over. M. Moriaz never for a moment suspected that he was
accompanied, at a respectful distance, on these solitary expeditions, by
a stranger, who, with eyes and ears both on the alert, watched over him
like a providence. The most peculiar part of the affair was that this
providence would gladly have caused him to take a misstep, or thrust him
into some quagmire, in order to have the pleasure of drawing him out,
and bearing him in his arms to the Hotel Badrutt. “If only he could fall
into a hole and break his leg!” Such was the daily wish of Count Abel
Larinski; but _savants_ have great license allowed them. Although M.
Moriaz was both corpulent and inclined to be absent-minded, he plunged
into more than one quagmire without sticking fast, more than one marsh
without having his progress impeded.

One morning he conceived the project of climbing up as high as a certain
fortress of mountains whose battlements overhang a forest of pine and
larch trees. He was not yet sufficiently accustomed to the mountains to
realize how deceptive distances become there. After having drained two
glasses of the chalybeate waters, and breakfasted heartily, he set out,
crossed the Inn, and began the ascent to the forest. The slope grew more
and more abrupt, and ere long he discovered that he had wandered from
the foot-path. He was not one to be easily disheartened; he continued
climbing, laying hold of the brushwood with his hands, planting his
feet among perfidious pine-needles, which form a carpet as smooth as
a mirror, making three steps forward and two backward. Great drops of
perspiration started out on his brow, and he sat down for a moment to
wipe them away, hoping that some wood-cutter might appear and show
him the way back to the path, if there was one. But no human soul came
within sight; and plucking up his courage again he resumed the ascent,
until he had nearly reached a breastwork of rock, in which he vainly
sought an opening. He was about retracing his steps when he remembered
that from the gallery of the hotel he had observed this breastwork
of reddish rock, and it seemed to him that he remembered also that it
formed the buttress of the mountain-stronghold of which he was in quest;
and so he concluded that this would be the last obstacle he would have
to overcome. He thought that it would be actually humiliating to be
so near the goal and yet renounce it. The rock, worn by the frost,
presented sundry crevices and indentures, forming a natural stairway.
Arming himself with all his strength, and making free use of his nails,
he undertook to scale it, and in five minutes had gained a sort of
plateau, which, unluckily for him, he found to be commanded by a smooth
granite wall of a fearful height. The only satisfactory procedure for
him now was to return whence he had come; but in these perilous passages
to ascend is easier than to descend; it being impossible to choose one’s
steps, descent might lead to a rather undesirable adventure. M. Moriaz
did not dare to risk this adventure.

He walked the whole length of the plateau where he found himself in the
hope of discovering some outlet; but the sole outlet he could discover
had already been monopolized by a mountain-torrent whose troubled waters
noisily precipitated themselves through it to the depths below. This
torrent was much too wide to wade, and to think of leaping over it would
have been preposterous. All retreat being cut off, M. Moriaz began to
regret his audacity. Seized by a sudden agony of alarm, he began to ask
himself if he was not condemned to end his days in this eagle’s-nest; he
thought with envy of the felicity of the inhabitants of the plains; he
cast piteous glances at the implacable wall whose frowning visage seemed
to reproach him with his imprudence. It seemed to him that the human
mind never had devised anything more beautiful than a great highway;
and it would have taken little to make him exclaim with Panurge, “Oh,
thrice--ay, quadruply--happy those who plant cabbages!”

Although there seemed small chance of his being heard in this solitude,
he called aloud several times; he had great difficulty in raising his
voice above the noise of the cataract. Suddenly he believed that he
heard below him a distant voice replying to his call. He redoubled his
cries, and it seemed to him that the voice drew nearer, and soon he saw
emerging from the thicket bordering the opposite bank of the torrent a
pale face with chestnut beard, which he remembered having beheld in the
cathedral at Chur, and to have seen again at Bergun.

“You are a prisoner, monsieur,” was the salutation of Count Larinski;
for, of course, the newcomer was none other than he. “One moment’s
patience, and I am with you.” And his face beamed with joy. He had him
at last, this precious game which has caused him so many steps.

He turned away, bounding from rock to rock with the agility of a
chamois. In about twenty minutes he reappeared, bearing on his shoulder
a long plank which he had detached from the inclosure of a piece of
pasture-land. He threw it across the torrent, secured it as well as he
could, crossed this impromptu foot-bridge of his own device, and joined
M. Moriaz, who was quite ready to embrace him.

“Nothing is more perfidious than the mountains,” said the count. “They
are haunted by some mysterious sprite, who fairly delights in playing
tricks with venturesome people; but ‘all’s well that ends well.’ Before
setting out from here you need something to revive you. The rarefied
atmosphere of these high regions makes the stomach frightfully hollow.
More prudent than you, I never undertake these expeditions without
providing myself with some refreshment. But how pale you are!” he added,
looking at him with sympathetic, almost tender, eyes. “Put on, I beg
of you, my overcoat, and I will wrap myself up in my plaid, and then we
will both be warm.”

With these words he took off his overcoat and handed it to M. Moriaz,
who, feeling almost frozen, offered feeble objections to donning the
garment, although he had some difficulty in getting into the sleeves.

During this time Count Abel had thrown down on the rock the wallet he
carried slung to a leathern strap over his shoulders. He drew forth from
it a loaf of light bread, some hard-boiled eggs, a _pate_ of venison,
and a bottle of excellent burgundy. These provisions he spread
out around him, and then presented to M. Moriaz a cup cut from a
cocoanut-shell, and filled it to the brim, saying, “Here is something
that will entirely restore you.” M. Moriaz drained the cup, and soon
felt his weakness disappear. His natural good spirits returned to him,
and he gaily narrated to his Amphitryon his deplorable Odyssey. In
return, Abel recounted to him a similar adventure he had had in the
Carpathian Mountains. It is very easy to take a liking to a man who
helps you out of a scrape, who gives you drink when you are thirsty, and
food when you are hungry; but, even had not M. Moriaz been under great
obligations to Count Larinski, he could not have avoided the discovery
that this amiable stranger was a man of good address and agreeable
conversation.

Nevertheless, so soon as the repast was finished, he said: “We have
forgotten ourselves in our talk. I am the happy father of a charming
daughter who has a vivid imagination. She will believe that I have
met with an untimely end if I do not hasten as speedily as possible to
reassure her.”

Count Abel hereupon gave his hand to M. Moriaz to aid him in preserving
his equilibrium as he crossed the plank, which was not wide. Throughout
the descent he overwhelmed him with attentions, sustaining him with his
arm when the descent became too abrupt. So soon as they had made their
way to a foot-path, they resumed their conversation. Abel was very
clear-sighted, and, like Socrates, as we said before, he was master in
the art of interrogating. He turned the conversation to erratic
glaciers and boulders. M. Moriaz was enchanted with his manner of asking
questions; as Professor of the College of France, he was well pleased to
owe his life to an intelligent man.

As they traversed a pine-forest, they heard a voice hailing them,
and they were shortly joined by a guide whom Mlle. Moriaz, mortally
disquieted at the prolonged absence of her father, had sent in quest of
him. Pale with emotion, trembling in every fibre, she had seated herself
on the bank of a stream. She was completely a prey to terror, and in her
imagination plainly saw her father lying half dead at the bottom of some
precipice or rocky crevasse. On perceiving him she uttered a cry of joy
and ran to meet him.

“Ah! truly, my love,” said he, “I have been more fortunate than wise.
And I shall have to ask my deliverer his name in order to present him to
you.”

Count Abel appeared not to have heard these last words. He stammered
out something about M. Moriaz having exaggerated the worth of the little
service it had been his good fortune to render him, and then with a
cold, formal, dignified air, he bowed to Antoinette and moved hurriedly
away, as a man who cares little to make new acquaintances, and who longs
to get back to his solitude.

He was already at some distance when M. Moriaz, who had been busily
recounting his adventures to his daughter, bethought him that he had
kept his deliverer’s overcoat. He searched in the pockets, and there
found a memorandum-book and some visiting-cards bearing the name of
Count Abel Larinski. Before dinner he made the tour of all the hotels in
Saint Moritz without discovering where M. Larinski lodged. He learned
it in the evening from a peasant who came over from Cellarina for the
overcoat.

The good Mlle. Moiseney was quite taken with Count Abel; first, because
he was handsome, and then because he played the piano bewitchingly.
There could be no doubt that Antoinette would feel grateful to this
good-looking musician who had restored to her her father. Certain
of being no longer thwarted in her enthusiasm, she said to her that
evening, with a smile which was meant to be excessively ironical:

“Well, my dear, do you still think that Count Larinski has a stoop in
his shoulders, and that his head is badly poised?”

“It is a matter of small import, but I do not gainsay it.”

“Ah, if you had only heard him play one of Schumann’s romances!”

“A talent for music is a noble one. Nevertheless, the man’s chief merit,
in my eyes, is that he has a taste for saving life.”

“Oh, I was sure from the first, perfectly sure, that this man had a
large heart and a noble soul. I read physiognomies very correctly, and
I never need to see people twice to know how far they can be relied on.”
 After a pause she added, “I wonder if I dare tell you, my dear, of an
idea that has occurred to me?”

“Tell me, by all means. Your ideas sometimes amuse me.”

“Might it not turn out that the author of a certain note, and sender of
a certain thing, was M. le Comte Abel Larinski?”

“Why he rather than any other?” queried Antoinette. “I believe you do
him wrong: he appears to be a gentleman, and gentlemen do not write
anonymous letters.”

“Oh! that was a very innocent one, and you may be sure that he wrote it
in perfect good faith.”

“You believe, then, mademoiselle, that in good faith a man about to
put a halter about his neck would renounce his project because he had
encountered Mlle. Antoinette Moriaz on a public highway?”

“Why not?” cried Mlle. Moiseney, looking at her with eyes wide open with
admiration. “Besides, you know the Poles are a hot-headed people, whose
hearts are open to all noble enthusiasms. One could pardon in Count
Larinski what could not be overlooked in a Parisian.”

“I will pardon him on condition that he will keep his promise and never
make himself known to me, for this is unquestionably the first duty of a
mysterious unknown. Just now he refused to let my father present him
to me, which is a good mark in his favour. If he alters his mind,
he becomes at once a condemned man. I pity you, my dear Joan,” added
Antoinette, laughingly. “You are dying with longing to hear one of those
romances without words, which M. Larinski plays so divinely; and if M.
Larinski be the man of the letter, his own avowal prohibits him from
appearing before me again. How can you extricate yourself from this
dilemma? The case is embarrassing.”

It was M. Moriaz who undertook the solution of this embarrassing
dilemma. Three days later, some moments before dinner, he was walking in
the hotel-grounds, smoking a cigar. He saw passing along the road Count
Abel, on his way back to Cellarina. A storm was coming up; already great
drops of rain were beginning to fall. M. Moriaz ran after the count and
seized him by the button, saying: “You have saved my life--permit me, at
least, to save you from the rain. Do me the honour to share our dinner;
we will have it served in my apartment.”

Abel strongly resisted this proposition, giving reasons that sounded
like mere pretences. A rumbling of thunder was heard. M. Moriaz took
his man by the arm, and led him in by force. He presented him to
his daughter, saying: “Antoinette, let me present to you M. le Comte
Larinski, a most excellent man, but little inclined to sociability. I
was compelled to use violence in bringing him here.”

The count acknowledged these remarks with a constrained smile. He wore
the manner of a prisoner; but, as he prided himself on his good-breeding
and on his philosophy, he seemed to be endeavouring to make the best
of his prison. During dinner he was grave. He treated Antoinette with
frigid politeness, paid some attention to Mlle. Moiseney, but reserved
his chief assiduities for Mr. Moriaz. He addressed his conversation
more particularly to him, and listened to him with profound respect. A
professor is always sensible to this kind of courtesy.

After the coffee was served, the crusting of ice in which Count Abel had
incased himself began to thaw. He had been all over the world; he knew
the United States and Turkey, New Orleans and Bucharest, San Francisco
and Constantinople. His travels had been profitable to him: he had
observed men and things, countries and institutions, customs and laws,
the indigenous races and the settlers, all but the transient visitors,
with whom he seemed to have had no time to occupy himself; at least they
formed no part of his conversation. He related several anecdotes, with
some show of sprightliness; his melancholy began to melt away, he even
indulged in little bursts of gaiety, and Antoinette could not avoid
comparing him and his discourse to some of the more rigorous passages of
the Engadine, where, amid the black shades of the pines, among frowning
rocks, there are to be found lilies, gentians, and lakes.

He resumed his gravity to reply to a question of M. Moriaz concerning
Poland. “Unhappy Poland!” cried he. “To-day the Jew is its master.
Active, adroit, inventive, little scrupulous, he makes capital out of
our indolence and our improvidence. He has over us one great advantage,
which is simply that, while we live from day to day, he possesses a
notion of a to-morrow; we despise him, and we could not do without him.
We are always thirsty, and he supplies us with drink; we never have
ready money, and he loans it to us at an enormous rate of interest; we
cannot return it to him, and he reimburses himself by seizing our goods
and chattels, our jewels, our land, and our castles. We take out our
revenge in insolence, and from time to time in petty persecutions, and
we gradually arrive at the conclusion that the sole means of freeing
ourselves from the yoke of the Jew would be to conquer the vices by
which he lives.” Count Abel added that for his part he had no prejudice
against these children of Abraham, and he quoted the words of an
Austrian publicist who said that each country had the kind of Jews it
deserved. “In fact,” he continued, “in England, as in France, and in
every country where they are placed on a footing of equality, they
become one of the most wholesome, most vigorous elements of the nation,
while they are the scourge, the leeches, of the countries that persecute
them.”

“And, truly, justice demands that it should be so,” cried Mlle. Moriaz.

For the first time the count addressed himself directly to her, saying,
with a smile: “How is this, mademoiselle? You are a woman, and you love
justice!”

“This astonishes you, monsieur?” she rejoined. “You do not think justice
one of our virtues?”

“A woman of my acquaintance,” he replied, “always maintained that it
would be rendering a very bad service to this poor world of ours to
suppress all injustice, because with the same stroke would also be
suppressed all charity.”

“That is not my opinion,” said she. “When I give, it seems to me that I
make restitution.”

“She is somewhat of a socialist,” cried M. Moriaz. “I perceive it
every January in making out her accounts, and it is fortunate that she
intrusts this to me, for she never takes the trouble to look at the
memorandum her banker sends her.”

“I am proud for Poland that Mlle. Moriaz has a Polish failing,” said
Abel Larinski, gallantly.

“Is it a failing?” queried Antoinette.

“Arithmetic is the most beautiful of the sciences and the mother of
certainty,” said M. Moriaz. And turning towards the count, he added:
“She is very wrong-headed, this girl of mine; she holds absolutely
revolutionary principles, dangerous to public order and the preservation
of society. Why, she maintains that people who are in need have a right
to the superfluities of others!”

“This appears to me self-evident,” said she.

“And, for example,” further continued M. Moriaz, “she has among her
_proteges_ a certain Mlle. Galard--”

“Galet,” said Mlle. Moiseney, bridling up, for she had been impatiently
awaiting an opportunity to put in a word.

“This Mlle. Leontine Galet, who lives at No. 25 Rue Mouffetard--”

“No. 27,” again interposed Mlle. Moiseney, in a magisterial tone.

“As usual, you are sure of it, perfectly sure. Very good! This Mlle.
Galard or Galet, residing at No. 25 or No. 27 Rue Mouffetard, was
formerly a florist by trade, and now she has not a sou. I do not wish
to fathom the mysteries of her past--it is very apt to be ‘lightly come,
lightly go’ with the money of these people--but certain it is that Mlle.
Galard--”

“Galet,” put in Mlle. Moiseney, sharply.

“Is to-day an infirm old woman, a worthy object of the compassion
of charitable people,” continued M. Moriaz, heedless of this last
interruption. “Mlle. Moriaz allows her a pension, with which I find no
fault; but Mlle. Galet--I mistake, Mlle. Galard--has retained from her
former calling her passion for flowers, and during the winter Mlle.
Moriaz sends her every week a bouquet costing from ten to twelve francs,
which shows, according to my opinion, a lack of common-sense. In the
month of January last, she sent for Parma violets for this _protégé_
of hers. Now, I appeal to M. Larinski--is this reasonable, or is it
absurd?”

“It is admirably absurd and foolishly admirable,” replied the count.

“The flowers I give her are never so beautiful as some that were sent me
the other day,” exclaimed Mlle. Moriaz.

She went then into the next room, and returned, carrying the vase of
water containing the mysterious bouquet. “What do you think of these?”
 she asked the count. “They are already much faded, and yet I think they
are beautiful still.”

He admired the bouquet; but, although Antoinette regarded him fixedly,
she detected neither blush nor confusion on his face. “It was not he,”
 she said to herself.

There was a piano in the room where they had dined. As Count Abel was
taking leave, Mlle. Moiseney begged him to give Mlle. Moriaz proof of
his talent. He slightly knit his brows at this request, and resumed that
sombre, almost savage, air he had worn when he met Antoinette at the
foot of the mountain. He urged in excuse the lateness of the hour, but
he allowed the promise to be wrested from him that he would be more
complaisant the next day.

When he was gone, accompanied by M. Moriaz, who said he would walk a
little distance with him, Antoinette exclaimed: “You see, my dear--it
was not he.”

“Suppose I was wrong,” replied Mlle. Moiseney, in a piqued tone--“you
will at least grant that he is handsome?”

“As handsome as you please. Do you know what I think of when I look at
him? A haunted castle. And I feel curious to make the acquaintance of
the goblins that visit it.”

Notwithstanding his promise, Count Larinski did not reappear before the
lapse of three days; but this time he gave all the music that was asked
of him. His memory was surprising, and his whole soul seemed to be
at the ends of his fingers; and he drew marvellous strains from an
instrument which, in itself, was far from being a marvel. He sang, too;
he had a barytone voice, mellow and resonant. After having hummed in a
low tone some Roumanic melodies, he struck up one of his own national
songs. This he failed to finish; tears started in his eyes, emotion
overpowered his voice. He broke off abruptly, asking pardon for the
weakness that had caused him to make himself ridiculous; but one glance
at Mlle. Moriaz convinced him that she did not find him ridiculous.

A most invaluable resource, indeed, in a mountain-country where the
evenings are long, is a Pole who knows how to talk and to sing. M.
Moriaz liked music; but he liked something else besides. When he could
not go into society and was forbidden to work, he grew sleepy after
dinner; in order to rouse himself he was glad to play a hand of
_bezique_ or _ecarte_. For want of some one better, he played with
Mlle. Moiseney; but this make-shift was little to his taste; he disliked
immensely coming into too close proximity with the pinched visage and
yellow ribbons of Pope Joan. He proposed to Count Larinski to take a
hand with him, and his proposal was accepted with the best grace in the
world. “Decidedly this man is good for everything,” thought M. Moriaz,
and he conceived a great liking for him. The result was, that during an
entire week Count Abel passed every evening at the Hotel Badrutt.

“Your father is a most peculiar man,” said Mlle. Moiseney, indignantly,
to Antoinette. “He is shockingly egotistical. He has confiscated M.
Larinski. The idea of employing such a man as that to play _bezique_! He
will stop coming.”

But the count’s former savageness seemed wholly subdued. He did not stop
coming.

One evening M. Moriaz committed an imprudence. In making an odd trick,
he carelessly asked M. Larinski who had been his piano professor.

“One whose portrait I always carry about me,” was the reply.

And, drawing from his vest-pocket a medallion, he presented it to M.
Moriaz, who, after having looked at it, passed it over to his daughter.
The medallion contained the portrait of a woman with blond hair,
blue eyes, a refined, lovely mouth, a fragile, delicate being with
countenance at the same time sweet and sad, the face of an angel, but an
angel who had lived and suffered.

“What an exquisite face!” cried Mlle. Moriaz.

Truly it was exquisite. Some one has asserted that a Polish woman is
like punch made with holy-water. One may like neither the punch nor the
holy-water, and yet be very fond of Polish women. They form one of the
best chapters in the great book of the Creator.

“It is the portrait of my mother,” said Count Larinski.

“Are you so fortunate as to still possess her?” asked Antoinette.

“She was a tender flower,” he replied; “and tender flowers never live
long.”

“Her portrait shows it plainly; one can see that she suffered much, but
was resigned to live.”

For the first time the count departed from the reserve he had shown
towards Mlle. Antoinette Moriaz. “I have no words to tell you,” he
exclaimed, “how happy I am that my mother pleases you!”

Othello was accused of having employed secret philters to win
Desdemona’s love. Brabantio had only himself to blame; he had taken a
liking to Othello, and often invited him to come to him; he did not
make him play _bezique_, but he questioned him on his past. The Moor
recounted his life, his sufferings, his adventures, and Desdemona
wept. The fathers question, the heroes or adventurers recount, and the
daughters weep. Such are the outlines of a history as old as the world.
Abel Larinski had left the card-table. He had taken his seat in an
arm-chair, facing Mlle. Moiseney. He was questioned; he replied.

His destiny had been neither light nor easy. He was quite young when
his father, Count Witold Larinski, implicated in a conspiracy, had been
compelled to flee from Warsaw. His property was confiscated, but luckily
he had some investments away from home, which prevented him from being
left wholly penniless. He was a man of projects. He emigrated to America
with his wife and his son; he dreamed of making a name and a fortune
by cutting a canal through the Isthmus of Panama. He repaired to New
Granada, there to make his studies and his charts. He made them so
thoroughly that he died of yellow fever before having begun his work,
having come to the end of his money and leaving his widow in the most
cruel destitution. Countess Larinski said to her son: “We have nothing
more to live on; but, then, is it so necessary to live?” She uttered
these words with an angelic smile about her lips. Abel set out for
California. He undertook the most menial services; he swept the streets,
acted as porter; what cared he, so long as his mother did not die of
hunger? All that he earned he sent to her, enduring himself the most
terrible privations, making her think that he denied himself nothing.
In the course of time Fortune favoured him; he had acquired a certain
competency. The countess came to rejoin him in San Francisco; but angels
cannot live in the rude, exciting atmosphere of the gold-seekers; they
suffer, spread their wings, and fly away. Some weeks after having lost
his mother--it was in 1863--Count Abel learned from a journal that fell
into his hands that Poland had risen again. He was twenty-one years of
age. He thought he heard a voice calling him, and another voice from the
skies whispered: “She calls thee. Go; it is thy duty.” And he went. Two
months later he crossed the frontier of Galicia to join the bands of
Langiewicz.

Othello spoke to Desdemona of caverns, deserts, quarries, rocks, and
hills whose heads touch heaven; of cannibals, the anthropophagi, and men
whose heads do grow beneath their shoulders. Count Abel spoke to Mlle.
Moriaz of the fortunes and vicissitudes of partisan warfare, of vain
exploits, of obscure glories, of bloody encounters that never are
decisive, of defeats from which survive hope, hunger, thirst, cold,
snow stained with blood, and long captivities in forests, tracked by the
enemy; then disasters, discouragements, the vanishing of the last hope,
punishment, the gallows, and finally a mute, feverish resignation,
swallowed up in that vast solitude with which silence surrounds
misfortune. After the dispersion of the band whose destinies he had
followed, he had gone over to Roumania.

This narration, exact and precise, bore the impress of truth. Count Abel
made it in a simple, modest tone, keeping himself as much as possible
in the background, and growing persuasive without apparent effort. There
were moments when his face would flame up with enthusiasm, when his
voice would become husky and broken, when he would seek for a word,
become impatient because he could not find it, find it at last, and this
effort added to the energy of his spasmodic and disjointed eloquence.
In conclusion, he said: “In his youth man believes himself born to roll;
the day comes when he experiences the necessity of being seated. I am
seated; my seat is a little hard, but when I am tempted to murmur, I
think of my mother and refrain.”

“What did you do in Roumania?” inquired M. Moriaz, who liked to have
stories circumstantially detailed.

“Ah! I beg of you to excuse me from recounting to you the worst employed
years of my life. I am my father’s own son. He dreamed of cutting
through an isthmus, I of inventing a gun. I spent four years of my life
in fabricating it, and the first time it was used it burst.”

And thereupon he plunged into a somewhat humorous description of his
invention, his hopes, his golden dreams, his disappointments, and his
chagrin. “The only admirable thing in the whole affair,” he concluded,
“and something that I believe never has happened to any other inventor,
is that I am cured entirely of my chimera; I defy it to take possession
of me again. I propose to put myself under discipline in order to
expiate my extravagance. So soon as my cure is entirely finished I will
set out for Paris, where I will do penance.”

“What kind of penance?” asked M. Moriaz. “Paris is not a hermitage.”

“Nor is it my intention to live there as a hermit,” was the reply,
given with perfect simplicity. “I go to give lessons in music and in the
languages.”

“Indeed!” exclaimed M. Moriaz. “Do you see no other career open to you,
my dear count?”

“I am no longer a count,” he replied, with an heroic smile. “Counts do
not run about giving private lessons.” And a strange light flashed in
his eyes as he spoke. “I shall run about giving private lessons until I
hear anew the voice that spoke to me in California. It will find me
ever ready; my reply will be: ‘I belong to thee; dispose of me at thy
pleasure.’ Ah! this chimera is one that I never will renounce!”

Then suddenly he started as one just awakening from a dream; he drew
his hand over his brow, looked confusedly around him, and said: “_Grand
Dieu!_ here I have been talking to you of myself for two hours! It is
the most stupid way of passing one’s time, and I promise you it shall
not happen again.”

With these words he rose, took up his hat, and left.

M. Moriaz paced the floor for some moments, his hands behind his back;
presently he said: “This _diable_ of a man has strangely moved me. One
thing alone spoils his story for me--that is the gun. A man who once has
drunk will drink again; one who has invented will invent again. No man
in the world ever remained satisfied with his first gun.”

“I beg of you, monsieur,” cried Mlle. Moiseney, “could you not speak to
the Minister of War about adopting the Larinski musket?”

“Are you your country’s enemy?” he asked. “Do you wish its destruction?
Have you sworn that after Alsace we must lose Champagne?”

“I am perfectly sure,” she replied, mounting on her high horse, “that
the Larinski musket is a _chef-d’oeuvre_, and I would pledge my life
that he who invented it is a man of genius.”

“If you would pledge your word of honour to that, mademoiselle,” he
replied, making her a profound bow, “you may well feel assured that the
French Government would not hesitate a moment.”

Mlle. Moriaz took no part in this conversation. Her face slightly
contracted, buried in her thoughts as in a solitude inaccessible to
earthly sounds, her cheek resting in the palm of her left hand, she held
in her right hand a paper-cutter, and she kept pricking the point into
one of the grooves of the table on which her elbow rested, while her
half-closed eyes were fixed on a knot of the mahogany. She saw in this
knot the Isthmus of Panama, San Francisco, the angelic countenance of
the beautiful Polish woman who had given birth to Count Abel Larinski;
she saw there also fields of snow, ambuscades, retreats more glorious
than victories, and, beyond all else, the bursting of a gun and of a
man’s heart.

She arose, and saluted her father without a word. In crossing the
_salon_ she perceived that M. Larinski had forgotten a book he had left
on the piano when he came in. She opened the volume; he had written
his name on the top of the first page, and Antoinette recognised the
handwriting of the note.

Shut up in her own room, while taking down and combing her hair, her
imagination long wandered through California and Poland. She compared
M. Larinski with all the other men she ever had known, and she concluded
that he resembled none of them. And it was he who had written: “I
arrived in this village disgusted with life, sorrowful and so weary
that I longed to die. I saw you pass by, and I know not what mysterious
virtue entered into me. I will live.”

It seemed to her that for long years she had been seeking some one, and
that she had done well to come to the Engadine, because here she had
found the object of her search.



CHAPTER III

Two, three, four days passed without Count Larinski reappearing at
the Hotel Badrutt, where every evening he was expected. This prolonged
absence keenly affected Mlle. Moriaz. She sought an explanation thereof;
the search occupied part of her days, and troubled her sleep. She had
too much character not to conceal her trouble and anxiety. Those about
her had not the least suspicion that she asked herself a hundred times
in the twenty-four hours: “Why does he not come? will he never come
again? is it a fixed resolution? Does he blame us for drawing out, by
our questions, the secret of his life? or does he suspect that I have
discovered him to be the writer of the anonymous letter? Will he leave
Engadine without bidding us good-bye? Perhaps he has already gone,
and we shall never see him again.” This thought caused Mlle. Moriaz a
heart-burn that she had never before experienced. Her day had come; her
heart was no longer free: the bird had allowed itself to be caught.

Mlle. Moiseney said to her one evening: “It seems certain to me that we
never shall see Count Larinski again.”

She replied in an almost indifferent tone, “No doubt he has found people
at Cellarina, or elsewhere, who are more entertaining than we.”

“You mean to say,” said Mlle. Moiseney, “that M. Moriaz and the
_bezique_ has frightened him away. I would not for worlds speak ill of
your father; he has all the good qualities imaginable, except a certain
delicacy of sentiment, which is not to be learned in dealing with acids.
Think of condemning a Count Larinski to play _bezique_! There are some
things that your father does not and never will understand.”

M. Moriaz had entered meanwhile. “Please oblige me by explaining what it
is that I do not understand,” said he to Mlle. Moiseney.

She replied with some embarrassment, “You do not understand, monsieur,
that certain visits were a charming diversion to us, and that now we
miss them.”

“And do you think that I do not miss them? It has been four days since
I have had a game of cards. But how can it be helped? Poles are
fickle--more fools they who trust them.”

“It may be simply that M. Larinski has been ill,” interrupted
Antoinette, with perfect tranquility. “I think, father, that it would be
right for us to make inquiries.”

The following day M. Moriaz went to Cellarina. He brought back word that
M. Larinski had gone on a walking-excursion through the mountains;
that he had started out with the intention of climbing to the summit of
Piz-Morteratsch, and of attempting the still more difficult ascent of
Piz-Roseg. Mlle. Moriaz found it hard to decide whether this news was
good or bad news. All depended on what point of view was taken, and she
changed hers every hour.

Since his mishap, M. Moriaz had become less rash than formerly.
Experience had taught him that there are treacherous rocks that can
be climbed without much difficulty, but from which it is impossible to
descend--rocks exposing one to the danger of ending one’s days in their
midst, if there is no Pole near at hand. Certain truths stamp themselves
indelibly on the mind; so M. Moriaz never ventured again on the
mountains without being attended by a guide, who received orders from
Antoinette not to leave him, and not to let him expose himself. One day
he came in later than usual, and his daughter reproached him, with some
vivacity, for the continual anxiety he caused her. “The glaciers and
precipices will end by giving me the nightmare,” she said to him.

“Pray on whose account, my dear?” he playfully rejoined. “I assure you
the ascent that I have just made was neither more difficult nor more
dangerous than that of Montmartre, nor of the Sannois Hill, and as to
glaciers, I have firmly resolved to keep shy of them. I have passed
the age of prowess. My guide has been making me tremble by relating the
dangers to which he was exposed in 1864 on Morteratsch, where he had
accompanied Professor Tyndall and another English tourist. They were all
swept away by an avalanche. Attached to the same rope, they went down
with the snow. A fall of three hundred metres! They would have been
lost, if, through the presence of mind of one of the guides, they
had not succeeded in stopping themselves two feet from a frightful
precipice, which was about to swallow them up. I am a father, and I
do not despise life. Let him ascend Morteratsch who likes! I wish our
friend Larinski had made the descent safe and sound. If he has met an
avalanche on the way, he will invent no more guns.”

Antoinette was no longer mistress of her nerves: during the entire
evening she was so preoccupied that M. Moriaz could not fail to notice
it; but he had no suspicion of the cause. He was profoundly versed in
qualitative and quantitative analysis, but less skilled in the analysis
of his daughter’s heart. “How pale you are!” he said to her. “Are you
not well? You are cold.--Pray, Mlle. Moiseney, make yourself useful and
prepare her a mulled egg; you know I do not permit her to be sick.”

It was not the mulled egg that restored Mlle. Moriaz’s color. The next
morning as she was giving a drawing lesson to her _protegee_, Count Abel
was announced. She trembled; the blood rose in her cheeks, and she could
not conceal her agitation from the penetrating gaze of the audacious
charmer. It might easily be seen that he had just descended from where
the eagles themselves seldom ascend. His face was weather-beaten by the
ice and snow. He had successfully accomplished the double ascent,
of which he was compelled to give an account. In descending from
Morteratsch he had been overtaken by a storm, and had come very near
never again seeing the valley or Mlle. Moriaz. He owed his life to the
presence of mind and courage of his guide, on whom he could not bestow
sufficient praise.

While he modestly narrated his exploits, Antoinette had dismissed her
pupil. He seemed embarrassed by the _tete-a-tete_ which, nevertheless,
he had sought. He rose, saying: “I regret not being able to see M.
Moriaz; I came to bid him farewell. I leave this evening.”

She summoned courage and replied: “You did well to come; you left a
volume of Shakespeare--here it is.” Then drawing from her notebook a
paper--“I have still another restitution to make to you. I have had the
misfortune to discover that it was you who wrote this letter.”

With these words she handed him the anonymous note. He changed
countenance, and it was now his turn to grow red. “Who can prove to
you,” he demanded, “that I am the author of this offence, or rather
crime?”

“Every bad case may be denied, but do not you deny.”

After a moment’s silence, he replied: “I will not lie, I am not capable
of lying. Yes, I am the guilty one; I confess it with sorrow, because
you are offended by my audacity.”

“I never liked madrigals, either in prose or verse, signed or
anonymous,” she returned, rather dryly.

He exclaimed, “You took this letter for a madrigal?” Then, having reread
it, he deliberately tore it up, throwing the pieces into the fireplace,
and added, smiling: “It certainly lacked common-sense; he who wrote it
is a fool, and I have nothing to say in his defence.”

Crossing her hands on her breast, and uplifting to him her brown eyes,
that were as proud as gentle, she softly murmured, “What more?”

“I came to Chur,” he replied, “I entered a church, I there saw a fair
unknown, and I forgot myself in gazing at her. That evening I saw her
again; she was walking in a garden where there was music, and this music
of harps and violins was grateful to me. I said within myself: ‘What a
thing is the heart of man! The woman who has passed me by without seeing
me does not know me, will never know of my existence; I am ignorant
of even her name, and I wish to remain so, but I am conscious that she
exists, and I am glad, content, almost happy. She will be for me the
fair unknown; she cannot prevent me from remembering her. I will think
sometimes of the fair unknown of Chur.’”

“Very good,” said she, “but this does not explain the letter.”

“We are coming to that,” he continued. “I was seated in a copse, by the
roadside. I had the blues--was profoundly weary; there are times when
life weighs on me like a torturing burden. I thought of disappointed
expectations, of dissipated illusions, of the bitterness of my youth and
of my future. You passed by on the road, and I said to myself, ‘There
is good in life, because of such encounters, in which we catch renewed
glimpses of what was once pleasant for us to see.’”

“And the note?” she asked again, in a dreamy tone.

He went on: “I never was a philosopher; wisdom consists in performing
only useful actions, and I was born with a taste for the useless. That
evening I saw you climb a hill, in order to gather some flowers; the
hill was steep and you could not reach the flowers. I gathered them for
you, and, in sending my bouquet, I could not resist the temptation of
adding a word. ‘Before doing penance,’ I said to myself, ‘let me commit
this one folly; it shall be the last.’ We always flatter ourselves that
each folly will be our last. The unfortunate note had scarcely gone,
when I regretted having sent it; I would have given much to have had it
back; I felt all its impropriety; I have dealt justly by it in tearing
it to pieces. My only excuse was my firm resolution not to meet you, not
to make your acquaintance. Chance ordered otherwise: I was presented to
you, you know by whom, and how; I ended by coming here every evening,
but I rebelled against my own weakness, I condemned myself to absence
for a few days, so as to break a dangerous habit, and, thank God! I have
broken my chain.”

She lightly tapped the floor with the tip of her foot, and demanded with
the air of a queen recalling a subject to his allegiance, “Are you to be
believed?”

He had spoken in a half-serious, half-jesting tone, tinged with the
playful melancholy that was natural to him. He changed countenance, his
face flushed, and he cried out abruptly, “I regained my strength
and will on the summit of Morteratsch, and I only return to bid you
farewell, and to give you the assurance that I never will see you
again.”

“It is a strange case,” she replied; “but I pardon you, on condition
that you do not execute your threat. You are resolved to be wise; the
wise avoid extremes. You will remember that you have friends in Paris.
My father has many connections; if we can be of service to you in any
way--”

He did not permit her to finish, and responded proudly: “I thank you,
with all my heart. I have sworn to be under obligations to none but
myself.”

“Very well,” she replied, “you will visit us for our pleasure. In a
month we shall be at Cormeilles.”

He shook his head in sign of refusal. She looked fixedly at him, and
said, “It must be so.”

This look, these words, sent to Count Abel’s brain such a thrill of joy
and of hope that for a moment he thought he had betrayed himself. He
nearly fell on his knees before Mlle. Moriaz, but, speedily mastering
his emotions, he bowed gravely, casting down his eyes. She herself
immediately resumed her usual voice and manner, and questioned him on
his journey. He told her, in reply, that he proposed to go by the route
of Soleure, and to stay there a day in order to visit in Gurzelengasse
the house where Kosciuszko, the greatest of Poles, had died. He had
thought of this pilgrimage for a long time. He added: “Still another
useless action. Ah! when shall I improve?”

“Don’t improve too much,” she said, smiling. And then he went away.

M. Moriaz returned to the hotel about noon: his guide being engaged
elsewhere, he had taken only a short ramble. After breakfast his
daughter proposed to him that he should go down with her to the banks
of the lake. They made the descent, which is not difficult. This
pretty piece of water, that has been falsely accused of resembling a
shaving-dish, is said to be not less than a mile in length. When the
father and daughter reached the entrance of the woods that pedestrians
pass through in going to Pontresina, they seated themselves on the
grass at the foot of a larch. They remained some time silent. Antoinette
watched the cows grazing, and stroked the smooth, glossy leaves of a
yellow gentian with the end of her parasol. M. Moriaz busied himself
with neither the cows nor the yellow gentian--he thought of M. Camille
Langis, and felt more than a little guilty in that quarter; he had not
written to him, having nothing satisfactory to tell him. He could
see the young man waiting in vain, at the Hotel Steinbock. To pass
a fortnight at Chur is a torture that the most robust constitution
scarcely can endure, and it is an increased torture to watch every
evening and every morning for a letter that never comes. M. Moriaz
resolved to open hostilities, to begin a new assault on the impregnable
place. He was seeking in his mind for a beginning for his first phrase.
He had just found it, when suddenly Antoinette said to him, in a low,
agitated, but distinct voice: “I have a question for you. What would you
think if I should some day marry M. Abel Larinski?”

M. Moriaz started up, and his cane, slipping from his hand, rolled to
the bottom of the declivity. He looked at his daughter, and said to
her: “I beg of you to repeat what you just said to me. I fear I have
misunderstood you.”

She answered in a firmer voice, “I am curious to know what you would
think if I should marry, some day or other, Count Larinski.”

He was startled, thunderstruck. He never had foreseen that such a
catastrophe could occur, nor had the least suspicion that anything had
passed between his daughter and M. Larinski. Of all the ideas that had
suggested themselves to him, this seemed the least admissible, the most
improbable and ridiculous. After a long silence, he said to Antoinette,
“You want to frighten me--this is not serious.”

“Do you dislike M. Larinski?” she asked.

“Certainly not; I by no means dislike him. He has good manners, he
speaks well, and I must acknowledge that he had a very graceful way of
taking me from off my rock, where I should still be had it not been
for him. I am grateful to him for it; but, from that to giving him my
daughter, there is a wide margin. If he wanted me to give him a medal he
should have it.”

“Let us talk seriously,” said she. “What objections have you to make?”

“First, M. Larinski is a stranger, and I mistrust strangers. Then,
I know him but slightly. I naturally demand additional information.
Finally, I own that the state of his affairs--”

“Ah! that is the main point,” she interrupted. “He is poor; that is his
crime, which he has not disguised. How differently we think! I have some
fortune; its only advantage that I can see is that it makes me free to
marry the man I esteem, though he be poor.”

“And perhaps a little because of that very reason,” interrupted M.
Moriaz, in his turn. “Come, I entreat you, let me explain the anxieties
arising from my miserable good sense. M. Larinski has related his
history to us. Frankly, do you not think that it is rather that--what
shall I say--of an adventurer? The word shocks you--I take it back--but
you must admit that this Pole belongs to the--ambulatory family.”

“Or family of heroes,” she replied.

“That is it, of wandering heroes. I wish all manner of good to heroes,
although I never have clearly discovered their use. At all events, I
am not sure that they are the best qualified men in the world to make a
wife happy, and I intend that my daughter shall be happy.”

“You are not convinced as I am that M. Larinski has a superior mind, and
a heart of gold?”

“A heart of gold! I should be glad to believe it. I have no reason to
doubt it; but many very skilful persons are deceived by false jewellery.
Ah! my dear, if you were better versed in chemistry, you would know
how easy it is to manufacture a false trinket. Formerly, after having
cleaned the piece to be gilded, a gold amalgam was applied. Now, the
brass or copper trinket is steeped in a solution of perchloride of
gold and bicarbonate of potash, and in less than a minute the thing
is accomplished. It is called gilding by immersion. There is another
process in which galvanism--But let us admit that M. Larinski’s heart is
real gold. In the purest gold there is usually some alloy, to dispense
with which resort must be had to the cupel. Do you not know what a cupel
is? It is a small capsule or cup of a porous substance, used in the
refining process, and possessing the property of absorbing the fused
oxides and retaining the refined metal. What is the proportion of lead
or of gold ore in M. Larinski’s heart? Neither you nor I know.”

She was no longer listening; her chin in her hand, her glances wandered
over the glade. He touched her arm gently to rouse her, and said: “It is
all over? You love him?”

“Why will you make me say so?” she replied, blushing.

“And he has declared himself? He has dared----”

“He has dared nothing. Ah! how little you know him! If you were to offer
me to him, his pride would say no, and I would have to go down on my
knees to get the better of his refusal.”

“We will say, at once, that he is unique, that he is a marvel, that
there is not a second Pole like him; the mould has been broken. And yet
are you sure that he loves you?”

She replied by a motion of the head.

“I should confess,” he resumed, “that the passion that is called the
grand passion is for me a sealed letter, the mystery of mysteries. I
am completely ignorant of it. Yet that did not prevent my marrying,
and making a choice that brought me great happiness. Your method is
different, and I must believe that you have yielded to an irresistible
force. It seems to me, however, that resistance can always be made. You
have will, character--”

She interrupted him, murmuring, “It is either he or no one.”

“Oh! if it comes to that,” he continued, “you are of age, and mistress
of your actions; there is nothing for me but to submit. Still, it will
be painful to you, I like to believe, to marry in opposition to my
wishes.”

“Do you doubt it? I am willing not to marry.”

“Bad solution! It is worse than the other. Let us come to terms. The
positive has its place only in science. It is absolutely true that borax
is a salt composed of boracic acid and soda. Beyond such facts all is
uncertain. Does this happy man surmise the sentiments he has inspired?”

“I tell you that you do not know him? Do you take him for a coxcomb?
When he came this morning to announce his departure, his serious
intention was to bid us an eternal farewell, and never to see me again.”

“A most excellent idea that,” sighed M. Moriaz. “Unfortunately, you
represented to him that it took but two hours to go from Paris to
Cormeilles.”

“I had trouble to persuade him of it.”

“Well, since the matter stands thus, nothing is yet lost. You know, my
dear, that my physician advised me to beware of abrupt transitions, and
not to change too suddenly from the keen air of Engadine to the heavy
atmosphere of the plains. On leaving Saint Moritz, we will descend
five hundred metres lower, and remain three weeks at Churwalden;
consequently, we will not be in Paris for a month. You will employ this
month in somewhat calming your imagination. It is very easy for it to
become excited in these mountain-holes, without taking into account the
wearisomeness of hotel-life. From the very day after our arrival you
took a dislike to the paper in our little _salon_, and its squares, I
confess, are very ugly. In every square, a thrush stretching out
its neck to peck a currant. Two hundred thrushes and two hundred
currants--it was enough to weary you to death. Suddenly there appears a
Pole--”

“The thrushes had nothing to do with it,” she replied, smiling. “A month
hence I shall say as I do to-day. ‘It is either he or no one.’ And you
shall choose.”

“Do not repeat that formula, I beg. Fixed resolves are the prison-house
of the will. Promise me to reflect; reflection is an excellent thing.
One thing more--grant me in advance what I am going to ask you.”

“It is granted.”

“You have a godmother--”

“Ah! now we are coming to the point,” she added.

“You cannot deny that Mme. De Lorcy is a woman of the world, a woman
of good sense, a woman of experience, who is deeply interested in your
welfare--”

“And who has decided from time immemorial, that I can only be happy on
condition that I marry her nephew, M. Camille Langis.”

“Well, I admit that she is partial. That is no reason why we should not
send her our Pole. She will inspect him, she will tell us her opinion;
it will be a new element in the argument.”

“Ah! I know her opinion without asking it. This woman of experience
and good sense is incapable of recognising merit in a man who is
sufficiently impertinent to make Mlle. Moriaz love him, without having
at least fifty thousand livres a year to offer her.”

“What does that matter? We will let her speak--we need not question her,
an oracle; but she knows false jewellery. If she discover--”

“I would require proofs,” she interrupted, quickly.

“And if she furnish them?”

She was silent an instant, then she said: “Let it be so; do as you
please.”

With these words they ended the conversation; then arose, and retook
the road to Saint Moritz. M. Moriaz scarcely had reached there, when
he entered a carriage to drive to Cellarina, provided with a portfolio
given him by Antoinette. He found M. Larinski busy strapping his trunks,
and waiting for the mail-coach that made the journey between Samaden and
Chur by the Col du Julier.

M. Moriaz expressed his regret at having missed his visit, and asked if
he would consent to charge himself with a commission for his daughter,
who desired to send to her godmother, Mme. De Lorcy, a sketch of Saint
Moritz.

“Cheerfully,” coldly replied Count Abel, and he promised, so soon as he
reached Paris, to send the portfolio to Maisons Lafitte.

“Do better than that,” rejoined M. Moriaz, “and carry your good-nature
so far as to take it yourself to its address. Mme. de Lorcy is an
amiable woman, who will be charmed to make your acquaintance, and hear
from you of us.”

The count bowed with a submissive air. There was so little ardour in
this submission that M. Moriaz queried if his daughter had not been
dreaming, if M. Larinski was as much in love with her as she fancied.
He had not read the anonymous letter; Antoinette had refrained from even
mentioning it to him.

He was returning to Saint Moritz, when he met midway a pedestrian, who,
lost in thought, neither looked at him nor recognised him. M. Moriaz
ordered the coachman to stop, sprang out of the carriage, went up to the
traveller whom he seized by both shoulders, exclaiming:

“What, you! you again! I can go nowhere in Grisons without meeting you.
I ask as I did at Chur, ‘Where do you come from?’”

“Did you think I would stay there forever?” rejoined M. Camille Langis,
reproachfully. “You have not kept your word, you have forgotten me; you
did not write to me. I am tired of waiting, so here I am.”

“And where are you going?”

“To the Hotel Badrutt, to plead my own cause, because my advocate has
failed me.”

“Ah! you have chosen an excellent time,” cried M. Moriaz; “you have
a real genius for arriving in season. Go, hurry, plead, moan, weep,
entreat; you will be well received; you can come and tell me all about
it.”

“What do you mean?” asked Camille; “is it all over? Have you spoken, and
did she silence you?”

“Not at all; she listened to me, without enthusiasm, it is true, but
with attention and deference, when suddenly--Ah! my poor friend, how can
it be helped? This sad world is full of accidents and Poles.”

M. Langis looked at him in amazement, as if to ask for an explanation.
M. Moriaz continued: “Do yourself justice. You are the most honest
fellow upon earth, I grant; you are a charming man, and an engineer of
the highest merit. But, unfortunately, there is no mystery of blood
and tears in your existence; you are perfectly unpretending, frank,
unaffected, and as transparent as crystal; in short, you are not a
stranger. Had you a delicate, blond, and romantic mother, and do you
wear her portrait on your heart? have you unfathomable green eyes? have
you adventures to relate? have you visited California? have you swept
the streets of San Francisco? have you exchanged bullets with the
Cossacks? have you been killed in three combats and in ten skirmishes?
I fear you have not even thought of dying once. Have you tried all
professions, without succeeding in one? have you invented a gun which
burst? and, above all, are you as poor as a church-mouse? What! is it
possible that you possess none of these fine advantages, and yet are
audacious enough to ask me for my daughter’s hand?”

M. Moriaz ended this harangue as the Samaden mail-coach passed. Count
Abel, seated on the outside, bowed and waved his hand to them.

“Look well at that man,” said M. Moriaz to Camille, “for he is the
enemy.”

And then, instead of giving him the remaining information that the youth
desired, he said:

“Go away and forget; it is the best thing that you can do.”

“You do not know me yet,” replied Camille. “I am obstinate, I fire to
the last cartridge. I will follow your steps. Oh! don’t be afraid, I
will lie--deceive Antoinette; let her think that I have relinquished my
claims. I shall pay her only a friendly visit; but my eyes hunger to see
her, and I will see her.”

The morning of the following day the enemy arrived at Chur, whence he
proceeded to Berne. Deponent saith not why he failed to turn aside at
Soleure, as he had expressed his intention of doing in order to pay
tribute there to the memory of the great Kosciuszko. The facts of
the case are, that from Berne he went direct to Lausanne, and that
immediately on reaching there he hastened to the Saxon Casino. When he
seated himself at the gaming-table, he experienced a violent palpitation
of the heart. His ears tingled, his brain was on fire, and the cold
sweat started out on his forehead. He cast fierce glances right and
left; he seemed to see in his partner’s eyes his past, his future, and
Mlle. Moriaz life-size. Fortune made amends for the harshness she had
shown him at Milan. After a night of anguish and many vicissitudes, at
daybreak Count Abel had twenty thousand francs in his pocket. It was
sufficient to pay his debts, which he was anxious to do, and to enable
him to await without too much impatience the moment for executing his
projects.

He left the casino, his face flushed and radiant; he was so joyful that
he became tender and affectionate, and, had M. Guldenthal himself come
in his way, he could have embraced him.



CHAPTER IV

Although he had said nothing about it to Mlle. Moriaz in narrating to
her his voyages and Odysseys, Count Abel was already acquainted
with Paris, having made several long sojourns there. This may seem
improbable. Gone in his early youth to America, he had not recrossed the
ocean until he returned to fight in Poland; since then he had lived in
Roumania and Vienna. Where, then, had he found time to visit France?
Certain it is, however, that he was at home on the boulevard, and that
he knew well the streets that led to the places where Paris amuses
itself; but he had no thoughts now for amusements. Notwithstanding the
fact that his purse was full, he proposed to live a retired and austere
life. He found suitable apartments in one of the lodging-houses of Rue
Mont-Thabor. These apartments, on the fifth floor, were pleasant but
modest; they consisted of two rooms having a view of the chestnut-trees
in the garden of the Tuileries. The portress was a nice woman, whose
good-will Count Abel gained on the very first day. He considered
it useful, in the affairs of this world, to be at peace with both
conscience and portress.

After getting installed in his garret his first care was to write to M.
Moses Guldenthal. He informed him that he was ready to refund interest
and capital, and he commissioned him to pay off some trifling debts that
he had left in Vienna; he also desired him to send him the bracelet,
which he hoped to make use of. He felt a genuine relief in the
thought that he owed no man anything, that his condition was clear and
transparent. When a man is proud he likes to be out of debt, and when he
is clever he foresees all possible contingencies. His second care was to
go to the Passage de l’Opera and buy a bouquet for sixty francs, which
he carried to No. 27 Rue Mouffetard. He had one of those memories that
retain everything and let nothing escape them. This bouquet--the most
beautiful Mlle. Galet ever had received--caused her great astonishment.
She did not know to whom to attribute it, the modest donor having
escaped from the effusions of her gratitude by not making himself known.
She supposed that Mlle. Moriaz had sent it to her, and, as she had taste
for composition, she wrote to her a four page letter of thanks.

Count Abel had not forgotten that he was the bearer of a commission from
Mlle Moriaz. A few days after his arrival, he decided to go to Maisons,
but to take the longest route there; he wanted to see Cormeilles in
passing, and a certain villa in which he was particularly interested.
He went in the Argenteuil cars, got out at Sannois, climbed that pretty
hill that commands the loveliest of views, and stopped at the inn
of Trouillet mills in order to breakfast there. The morning was
charming--it was in the middle of August--and the approach of autumn
was already felt, which enhances the beauty of all things. The sky was
flecked with small gray clouds; a light, silvery mist hung on the
brow of the hills; in two places the Seine appeared glittering in the
sunshine. Abel breakfasted in the open air; while eating he gazed on the
sky and on the great garden-plain extending at his feet, covered with
vegetables, grape-vines, and asparagus, interspersed with fruit-trees.
The wooded hills bordering it formed an admirable frame. In his present
mood Count Larinski was charmed with the landscape, which was at once
grand and smiling. Then he questioned himself as to how much a bed of
asparagus would yield at the gates of Paris, and, having finished his
calculation, he surveyed with the eye of a poet the heather and broom
that surrounded him. He decided that the Sannois Hill is more beautiful
than Koseg; and indeed it is not necessary to be in love with Mlle.
Moriaz to hold that opinion.

After having had a good breakfast, he again set out, following the crest
of the hill and going through the woods. As he approached Cormeilles, he
saw in the distance, beyond a grove of oaks, the white walls of a pretty
villa. His heart beat faster, and by a sort of divination he said within
himself, “That must be it.” He inquired; he had made no mistake. Five
minutes later he stood before a railing, through which he saw a green
lawn. At the entrance of the porter’s lodge a woman sat knitting.

“Can you tell me where M. Moriaz lives?” asked Count Larinski.

“Here, monsieur,” she replied; “but M. Moriaz is absent; he will not
return for a month. If you come from a distance, monsieur,” she added,
graciously, “perhaps you would like to rest awhile on the terrace. The
view is beautiful.”

This hospitable reception seemed a good omen, for, sensible as he was,
he believed in presentiments and prognostics. He entered without waiting
to be urged. When he had crossed the lawn he stood facing two detached
buildings, separated by a mass of verdure: to the right, an old
summer-house, used from time immemorial for M. Moriaz’s collections,
laboratory, and library; to the left, a new two-story house, part stone,
part brick, built in an elegant but unobtrusive style, without ornament
or pretension, and flanked by a turret covered with ivy and clematis,
which served for a dove-cote. The house was not a palace, but there was
an air about it of well-being, comfort, and happiness. In looking at
it you felt like saying, “The inmates here ought to be happy!” This was
about what Count Abel said to himself; in fact, he could hardly refrain
from exclaiming, “Dieu! how happy I shall be here!” The situation, the
terrace, the garden, everything pleased him infinitely. It seemed to him
that the air here was fresher, more delightful than elsewhere, that it
was exhilarating in the extreme; it seemed to him that the grass on
the lawn was greener than any grass he ever had seen before, that the
flowers in the carefully tended borders exhaled an unusually delicious
perfume. He espied an open window on the ground-floor. He drew near it;
the room into which he gazed, full of _bric-a-brac_ of exquisite choice,
was Mlle. Moriaz’s study. There was in the appearance of this little
sanctuary, hung with white silken drapery, and as elegant as the
divinity whose favourite tarrying-place it was, something of purity,
chastity, and maidenliness. It opened its windows to the fresh breezes
and to the perfume of the flowers; but it seemed as if nothing could
penetrate there that was coarse or suspicious; that the entrance was
forbidden to all doubtful or malignant beings who might have a secret
crime to hide, to all pilgrims through life who had travelled its
highways and had brought hence dust and mud on the soles of their
shoes. Strange to say, Count Abel experienced an attack of timidity and
embarrassment. He felt that he was indiscreet; he averted his eyes and
went away.

This impression was soon dispelled. He regained his assurance, and
walked around the terrace twice, treading the gravel with the step of a
conqueror, making it feel the full weight of his foot. He finally seated
himself on a bench; he had the nonchalant attitude of a man who is at
home. Five or six doves were billing and cooing on the ledge of the
roof; he could readily understand that they were talking of him, and
that they were saying, “Here he is--we have been waiting for him.” A
beautiful Angora cat, white as snow, with delicate nose and silky hair,
came, arching her back and waving her bushy tail, from out a grove,
and advanced towards him. She examined him curiously an instant, rubbed
herself against the bench, and then sat coquettishly at the feet of the
intruder. He caressed her, saying: “You are as white and graceful as
your mistress; you are an intelligent animal; you understand, my dear,
that I come from her. Shall I tell you a secret? She loves Count Abel
Larinski.”

With these words he rose and left, after thanking the portress,
who would have been extremely astonished had she been aware of the
reflections that had just been occupying his mind. He went a short
distance on the highway, then finding, to the right, a road that led to
Cormeilles, he took it, but soon struck into a path that wound through
the woods. He was sorry to leave a spot that spoke vividly to his heart,
and even more so to his imagination. He seated himself on the turf, in
the midst of a grove of oaks; around him stretched a blooming heath.
Through an opening in the grove, he could see Saint-Germain, its
forests, and the Seine glittering in the sunshine, with the two bridges
of Maisons Lafitte spanning it with their arches. Through another
opening he caught a glimpse, to his left, of the proud bastions of
Mont-Valerien, and, in the distance, Paris, the Arc de l’Etoile, the
gilt dome of the Invalides, and the smoke of the factories rising slowly
in the air, then by turns remaining stiff and motionless, or being swept
away by the wind.

The place was retired, solitary, very still. No sound was to be heard
save the singing of a lark, and at intervals the melancholy cry of a
peacock. Abel Larinski was overcome by a mysterious emotion; he felt a
voluptuous languor steal through his veins. He watched the smoke over
Paris, and he saw floating in it an ethereal form whose face was partly
concealed by a red hood. It smiled on him, and he read in this smile a
promise of all the joys of the land of Canaan.

He turned away his eyes, partially closing them, and there appeared
another form to him--in truth, very different from the first. It was
that of a man whom he had known intimately, of a man whom he had deeply
loved. In vain the lark sang aloud, in vain the peacock wailed--Abel
Larinski no longer heard them. He was thinking of a certain Samuel
Brohl; he was reviewing in his mind all the history of this Samuel, a
man who never had had a secret from him. This history was quite as sad a
one as that of Abel Larinski, but much less brilliant, much less heroic.
Samuel Brohl prided himself neither on being a patriot nor a paladin;
his mother had not been a noble woman with the smile of an angel, and
the thought never had occurred to him of fighting for any cause or any
person. He was not a Pole, although born in a Polish province of
the Austrian Empire. His father was a Jew, of German extraction, as
indicated by his name, which signifies a place where one sinks in the
mire, a bog, swamp, or something of that nature; and he kept a tavern
in a wretched little market-town near the eastern frontier of Galicia--a
forlorn tavern, a forlorn tavern-keeper. Although always on the alert to
sell adulterated brandy to his neighbour, and to seize the opportunity
to lend him money on usury, he did not thrive: he was a coward of whose
timidity every one took advantage to make him disgorge his ill-gotten
gains. His creed consisted in three doctrines: he firmly believed that
the arts of lying well, of stealing well, and of receiving a blow in the
face without apparently noticing it, were the most useful arts to human
life; but, of the three, the last was the only one that he practised
successfully. His intentions were good, but his intellect deficient.
This arrant rogue was only a petty knave that any one could dupe.

Abel Larinski transported himself, in thought, to the tavern in which
Samuel Brohl had spent his first youth, and which was as familiar to him
as though he had lived there himself. The smoky hovel rose before him:
he could smell the odour of garlic and tallow; he could see the drunken
guests--some seated round the long table, others lying under it--the
damp and dripping walls, and the rough, dirty ceiling. He remembered a
panel in the wainscoting against which a bottle had been broken, in the
heat of some dispute; it had left a great stain of wine that resembled
a human face. He remembered, too, the tavern-keeper, a little man with a
dirty, red beard, whose demeanour was at once timid and impudent. He saw
him as he went and came, then saw him suddenly turn, lift the end of his
caftan and wipe his cheek on it. What had happened? An insolvent
debtor had spit in his face; he bore it smilingly. This smile was more
repulsive to Count Abel than the great stain that resembled a human
face.

“Children should be permitted to choose their fathers,” he thought. And
yet this poor Samuel Brohl came very near living as happy and contented
in the paternal mire as a fish in water. Habit and practice reconcile
one even to dirt; and there are people who eat and digest it. What made
Samuel Brohl think of reading Shakespeare? Poets are corrupters.

The way it happened was this. Samuel had picked up, somewhere, a volume
which had dropped from a traveller’s pocket. It was a German translation
of _The Merchant of Venice_. He read it, and did not understand it; he
reread it, and ended by understanding it. It produced a wild confusion
of ideas in his mind; he thought that he was becoming insane. Little by
little, the chaos became less tumultuous; order began to reign, light to
dawn. Samuel Brohl felt that he had had a film over his eyes, and that
it was now removed. He saw things that he never had seen before, and
he felt joy mingled with terror. He learned _The Merchant of Venice_
by heart. He shut himself up in the barn, so that he might cry out with
Shylock: “Hath not a Jew eyes? hath not a Jew hands, organs, dimensions,
senses, affections, passions? If you prick us, do we not bleed? If you
tickle us, do we not laugh? if you poison us, do we not die? and if you
wrong us, shall we not revenge?” He repeated, too, with Lorenzo:

     “Sit, Jessica. Look how the floor of heaven
     Is thick inlaid with patines of bright gold.
     There’s not the smallest orb which thou behold’st
     But in his motion like an angel sings,
     Still quiring to the young-eyed cherubins:
     Such harmony is in immortal souls;
     But whilst this muddy vesture of decay
     Doth grossly close it in, we cannot hear it.”

Samuel sometimes rose at night to watch the heavens, and he fancied he
heard the voices of the “young-eyed cherubins.” He dreamed of a world
where Jessicas and Portias were to be met, of a world where Jews were
as proud as Shylock, as vindictive as Shylock, and, as Shylock, ate the
hearts of their enemies for revenge. He also dreamed, poor fool, that
there was in Samuel Brohl’s mind or bosom an immortal soul, and that
in this soul there was music, but that he could not hear it because the
muddy vesture of decay too grossly closed it in. Then he experienced a
feeling of disgust for Galicia, for the tavern, for the tavern-keeper,
and for Samuel Brohl himself. An old schoolmaster, who owned a
harpsichord, taught him to play on it, and, believing he was doing
good, lent him books. One day, Samuel modestly expressed to his father
a desire to go to the gymnasium at Lemberg to learn various things
that seemed good to him to know. It was then that he received from the
paternal hand a great blow, which made him see all the stars of heaven
in broad daylight. Old Jeremiah Brohl had taken a dislike to his son
Samuel Brohl, because he thought he saw something in his eyes that
seemed to say that Samuel despised his father.

“Poor devil!” murmured Count Abel, picking up a pebble and tossing it
into the air. “Fate owes him compensation, it has dealt so roughly with
him thus far. He fell from the frying-pan into the fire; he exchanged
his servitude for a still worse slavery. When he left the land of Egypt,
he fancied he saw the palms of the promised land. Alas! it was not long
before he regretted Egypt and Pharaoh! Why was not this woman Portia?
why was she neither young nor beautiful?” And he added: “Ah! old fairy,
you made him suffer!”

It seemed to Count Larinski that this woman, this ugly fairy who had
made Samuel Brohl suffer so much, stood there, before him, and that she
scanned him from head to foot, as a fairy, whether old or young, might
scan a worm. She had an imperious, contemptuous smile on her lips, the
smile of a czarina; so Catharine II smiled, when she was dissatisfied
with Potemkin, and said to herself, “I made him what he is, and
to-morrow I can ruin him.” “Yes, it was she, it was surely she,” thought
Count Larinski. “I cannot mistake. I saw her five weeks ago, in the
Vallee du Diable; she made me tremble!”

This woman who had taken Samuel Brohl from out of the land of Egypt, and
had showered attentions upon him, was a Russian princess. She owned an
estate of Podolia, and chance would have it that one day, in passing,
she stopped at the tavern where young Samuel was growing up in the
shadow of the tabernacle. He was then sixteen. In spite of his squalid
rags, she was struck by his figure. She was a woman of intelligence, and
had no prejudices. “When he is well washed and cared for,” she thought,
“when he is divested of his native impurities, when he has seen the
world and had communication with honest people, he certainly will be a
noble fellow.” She made him talk, and found him intelligent; she liked
intelligent men. She made him sing, assured herself that he had a voice;
she adored music. She questioned him; he told her all his misery, and
while he talked she said to herself: “No, I do not mistake; he has a
future before him; in two or three years he will be superb. Three years
is not long: the gardener who grafts a young tree is often condemned to
wait longer than that.” When he had ended his narrative, she told him
that she was in want of a secretary, that she had had several, but that
she had soon tired of them, on account of their not having the desired
qualifications; she asked him if he would like to accept the position.
He replied only by pointing his finger to his father, who was smoking
his pipe on the door-step. A moment later she was closeted with Jeremiah
Brohl.

She at once proposed to him to buy his son; he dropped his arms in
astonishment, then felt delighted and charmed. He declared, at first,
that his son was not for sale; and then he insinuated that if ever he
did sell him he would sell him dear; he was, according to his opinion,
merchandise of the best quality, a rich and rare article. He raised his
demands ridiculously; she exclaimed; he affirmed he could not put them
lower, that he had his terms, and that he always sold at a fixed price.
They disputed a long time; she was about to give up; he yielded, and
they ended by making the transaction. She sent for Samuel and said to
him: “My boy, you belong to me--I have bought you for cash. You are
satisfied with the bargain, are you not?”

He was stupefied to learn that he had a commercial value; he never had
suspected it. He wanted very much to know what he was worth; but the
princess was discreet upon the subject, and desired that he should
believe that he had cost her a fabulous sum. After reflection, he made
his conditions; he stipulated that he should belong to himself for three
years, which time he would employ in study and in satisfying a multitude
of curious longings.

She readily consented, as that had been her own intention: it would take
fully three years before the fruit was ripe and ready to be served at
the princely table. She gave him instructions and advice, all bearing
the stamp of a superior mind; she understood the world, the state of
public affairs, and physiology, all that can be learned, and all that
cannot be learned. Thus Samuel Brohl set out, his pocket well
filled, for the University of Prague, which he soon left to settle at
Heidelberg, whence he went to Bonn, then to Berlin, then to Paris. He
was restless, he did not know what he wanted, but wherever he went he
studied semiquavers, naturals, and flats; it was part of the conditions.

The princess was herself a great traveller; two or three times a year
Samuel Brohl received a visit from her. She questioned him, examined
him, felt him, as we feel a peach to be certain it is ripe. Samuel was
very happy; he was free, he enjoyed his life, he did as he pleased.
One single thing spoiled his happiness; when he looked in the glass, he
would sometimes say within himself: “These are the features of a man who
is sold, and the woman who bought him is neither young nor beautiful.”
 Several times he determined to learn a trade, so that he might be in a
position to refund the debt and break the bargain. But he never did. He
was both ambitious and idle. He wanted to fly at once; he had a horror
of beginnings of apprenticeships. His early education had been so
neglected that in order to recover lost time he would have been
compelled to study hard--all the more so because, although he was
quick-witted, and had a marvellous facility for entering into the
thoughts of others, his own stock was poor; he had no ideas of his own,
nor individuality of mind. He possessed a collection of half-talents;
even in music, he was incapable of originating; when he attempted to
compose, his inspirations proved mere reminiscences. He did himself
justice; he felt that, strive as he might, his half-talents never would
aid him to secure the first position, and he disdained the second. In
fact, what he most needed was will, which, after all, makes the man. He
tried to fling himself from his horse, which carried him where he did
not desire to go; but he felt that his feet held firm in the stirrup; he
had not strength to disengage them, and he remained in the saddle. Not
being able to be a great man, he abandoned himself to his fate, which
condemned him to be only a knave. At the expiration of his term of
freedom, he declared himself solvent, and the princess took possession
of her merchandise.

“Yes, poets are corrupters,” thought Count Abel Larinski. “If Samuel
Brohl never had read _The Merchant of Venice_, or _Egmont_, a tragedy in
five acts, or Schiller’s ballads, he would have been resigned to his new
position; he would have seen its good sides, and would have eaten
and drunk his shame in peace, without experiencing any uncomfortable
sensations; but he had read the poets, and he grew disgusted, nauseated.
He was dying with desire to get away, and the princess suspected it. She
kept him always in sight, she held him close, she paid him quarterly,
shilling by shilling, his meagre allowance. She said to herself: ‘So
long as he has nothing, he cannot escape.’ She mistook; he did escape,
and he was so afraid of being retaken that for some time he hid like a
criminal, pursued by the police. He fancied that this woman was always
on his track. It was then, for the first time, that he felt hunger, for
they eat in the land of Egypt. He lived by all sorts of expedients,
and cursed the poets. One day he learned that his father was dead; he
hastened to the old tavern in order to succeed to the inheritance. He
was not aware that for two years old Jeremiah Brohl had been in his
dotage, and that his debtors mocked him while devouring his substance. A
fine inheritance! it was diminished to two or three rickety chairs,
four cracked walls that scarcely could stand upright, and some jewellery
concealed in a hiding-place that Samuel knew of. Old Jeremiah never had
been able to dispose of it for the price he required, and he preferred
to keep it rather than lower his charge. He had principles, which was
well for Samuel, as the jewellery was useful to him. He sold a necklace,
and set out for Bucharest, some one having told him that he certainly
would make his fortune there. He gave music-lessons; this wearisome
profession did not suit him, he could not endure the constraint and the
regular hours. The boys plagued him--he would willingly have wrung their
necks; the girls treated him like a dog--they never thought of his being
handsome, because they suspected him of being a Jew. Why had he gone
to Bucharest--a city where all Germans are Jews, and where Jews are
not considered men? Although he had earned a little money, he grew
melancholy, and he began to think seriously of killing himself.”

Count Abel Larinski leaned forward, plucked a spray of heather, tickled
his lips with it, and began to laugh; then, striking his breast, he
said, in an undertone, “Thank God, Samuel Brohl is not dead, for he is
here!”

He spoke the truth: Samuel Brohl was not dead, and life was of value to
him, since he had met Mlle. Antoinette Moriaz in the cathedral in Chur.
It was Samuel Brohl who had come to Cormeilles, and who was seated, at
this moment, in the midst of a grove of oaks. Perhaps the lark that he
had heard singing a quarter of an hour before had recognised him, for it
had ceased singing. The peacock continued its screaming, and its doleful
cries sounded like a warning. Yes, the man seated among the heather,
employed in narrating his own history to himself, was indeed Samuel
Brohl, and the proof of this was that he had laughed, while Count Abel
Larinski never laughed; moreover, for four years the latter had been out
of the world. The second reason is, perhaps, the better.

He whom, with or without his consent, we shall call henceforth Samuel
Brohl, reproached himself for this access of levity, as he would have
reproached himself for a false note that had escaped him in executing a
Mozart sonata. He resumed his grave, dignified air, in order to salute
with a wave of his hand the phantom that had just appeared before him.
It was the same that he had summoned one evening at the Hotel Steinbock,
and treated there as an addle-brain, as a visionary, and even as an
imbecile; but this time he gave him a more indulgent and gracious
reception. He bore him no ill-will, he wished him well, he was under
essential obligations to him, and Samuel Brohl was no ingrate.

“Ah! well, my poor friend, I am here,” he said, in that mute language
that phantoms understand. “I have taken your place, and almost your
form; I play your part in the great fair of this world, and, although
your noble body has rested for four years, six feet underground, thanks
to me you still live. I always have had a most sincere admiration for
you. I considered you a phenomenon, a prodigy. You were courageous,
devoted, generosity itself; you esteemed honour above all the gold
deposits in California; you detested all coarse thoughts and doubtful
actions; your mother had nourished you in all sublime follies. You
were a true chevalier, a true Pole, the last Don Quixote in this age of
sceptics, plunderers, and interlopers. Blessed be the chance that made
us acquainted! You lived retired, solitary, unknown, in a miserable
hovel just outside of Bucharest. So goes the world! You were in
hiding--you who had nothing to hide from either God or man--you who
deserved a crown. Alas! the Russian Government had the poor taste not to
appreciate your exploits, and you feared that it would claim and obtain
your extradition. At our first meeting I pleased you, and you took me
into your friendship; I spoke Polish, and you loved music. I became your
intimate friend, your sole companion, your confidant. You must grant
that you owe to me the last happy moments of your short existence. I
soon knew your origin, the history of your youth, of your enterprises,
and of your misfortunes. You initiated me into the secret of the great
invention that you had just made; you explained to me in detail the
mechanism of your famous gun. I was intelligent; I understood, or
thought I understood. This gun, you said, would one day make my
fortune, for, on your own account, you had renounced all hope; you had
heart-disease, and you knew that you were condemned to a speedy end. My
imagination was kindled. Through my entreaty you decided to leave with
me for Vienna. This expedition was fatal to you, but I swear to you I
did not foresee it.”

Samuel crossed his hands on his knee; then he continued: “May my tongue
cleave to the roof of my mouth, may my blood cease to flow in my veins,
may the marrow dry up in my bones, if ever I forget to be grateful for
what I owe to you, Abel Larinski, or cease to remember the forlorn hovel
in which we passed the first night of our journey! You were attacked by
suffocation. You had only time to call and wake me. I hastened to you.
You gave me, in a dying voice, your last instructions. You delivered
into my hands your last fifty florins, which were as acceptable as an
orange would have been to the shipwrecked passengers of the Medusa. Then
you pointed with your finger to a box, in which were inclosed family
relics, letters, your journal, and papers. You said: ‘Destroy all that;
Poland is dead, let no one remember that I have lived!’ After that you
breathed your last. Well! I confess that I did not fulfil your orders.
I kept your mother’s portrait, the papers, all; and, in announcing your
decease to the police, I made them believe that the man who was dead was
named Samuel Brohl, and that Count Larinski still lived. What would you
have me do? The temptation was too great. Samuel Brohl had disgraceful
antecedents, he was base-born, he had been sold; there was a stain
on his past that never could be wiped away, and, as he had had the
misfortune to read the poets, it had come about that he often despised
himself. It was, indeed, time that he should be thrown into the shade,
and my joy was extreme to know that he was dead, and to feel that I was
alive. As soon as I succeeded in persuading myself that I was indeed
Count Abel Larinski, I was as happy as a child whose parents have
dressed him in new clothes, and who struts about to show them. With
your name I acquired a noble past; in thought, I roamed through it with
delight; I visited its every nook and corner, as a poor devil would make
the circuit of a park that he has just come to inherit. You bequeathed
me your relations, your adventures, your exploits. When you fought
for your country, I was there; when you received a gun-shot-wound near
Dubrod, it was into my flesh that the bullet penetrated. Of what do you
complain? Between friends is not everything in common? I left my own
skin, I entered yours; I was satisfied there, and desired to remain.
To-day I resemble you in everything; I assure you that if we were seen
together it would be difficult to tell us apart. I have assumed your
habits, your manners, your language, the poise of your head, your
playful melancholy, your pride, your opinions, all, even to the colour
of your hair and your handwriting. Abel Larinski, I have become you: I
mistake, I am more Pole, more Larinski, than you were yourself.”

At this moment Samuel Brohl had a singular expression of countenance;
his gaze was fixed. He was no longer of this world--he conversed with a
spirit; but he was neither terrified nor awed, as was Hamlet in talking
to the shade of his father. He treated familiarly the shade of the
true Abel Larinski; it was precisely as we treat a partner that has
transacted business with us in the same firm.

“It is very true, my dear Abel,” he continued, “that the principle of
partnership accomplishes wonders; one man alone is a small affair. But,
of all partnerships, the most useful and convenient is the one that
we have made together. The living and the dead can render each other
important services, and they never quarrel. You should be satisfied; you
play a fine role; you are the signature of the house. We will not speak
of your gun; that was a poor speculation, for which I scarcely can
pardon you. It was the fault of your disordered brain that we wandered
off on that bypath, but, thanks be to Heaven! we have at last gained
the highway. Five weeks ago we met a woman, and what a woman! She has
velvety-brown eyes, whence glances well forth like fresh and living
waters. To praise her grace properly, I must borrow the language of the
‘Song of Solomon’: ‘Thy lips, O my spouse! drop as the honey-comb; honey
and milk are under thy tongue; and the smell of thy garments is like the
smell of Lebanon. This thy stature is like to a palm-tree. Thou art all
fair, my love; there is no spot in thee. A garden inclosed is my sister,
my spouse: a spring shut up--a fountain sealed.’ Some day she will cry
out, with the Shulamite, ‘Let my beloved come into his garden, and
eat his pleasant fruits.’ She belongs to us, my dear Larinski--my dear
partner; she had yielded, and you and I share the honour of the victory.
I presented myself before her, and my presence did not displease her. I
related to her your history, as you would have related it yourself,
with delicacy and simplicity, neither adding nor omitting. Her heart was
touched; her heart was taken captive. You will wed her--she will bear
your name; but you will marry her by proxy, and I shall be your proctor.
I promise to consider myself your mandatory, or, to express it better,
you will own the property and I will have the usufruct. Never fear that
I shall forget what I owe to you, or the modesty proper to my estate.”

At these words, he made a grand gesture, as if to banish the phantom
that he had conjured up, and that fled away trembling with sorrow,
shame, and indignation. The peacock cried anew a mournful shriek.
“Stupid bird!” thought Samuel Brohl, quaking with sudden dread.

He looked at his watch, and reflected that the hour was advancing--that
he was losing time with the spirits. He rose hastily, and wended his way
toward Cormeilles; thence he wished to come upon a sunny path that led
to the banks of the Seine, and Sartrouville, the belfry of which was
plainly visible. When he reached the foot of the declivity, he turned
his head and saw, on the summit of the hill, through the space left
by the crooked branches of two plantains, a white wall, that seemed
to laugh amid the verdure, and a little higher the pointed roof of the
dove-cote, where Mlle. Moriaz’s doves had their nests. He did not need
to look long at this roof to recognise it. He threw a burning kiss
in the air--a kiss that was sent to the doves as well as to the
dove-cote--to the house as well as to the woman--to the woman as well as
the house. For the first time in his life, Samuel Brohl was in love;
but Samuel Brohl’s love differed from Abel Larinski’s. When they adore a
woman, be she as beautiful as a picture, the frame, if it is a rich one,
pleases them as much as the painting; and they propose to possess their
mistress with all her appendages and appurtenances.



CHAPTER V

Mme. de Lorcy was a woman of about fifty years of age, who still
possessed remains of beauty. She had been a widow for long years, and
never had thought of marrying again. Although her wedded life had been
a happy one, she considered that liberty is to be prized above all
else; she employed hers in a most irreproachable manner. She was
self-possessed, even better acquainted with numbers than with dress, and
managed her property herself, which was by no means a trifling thing to
do. Liking to make good use of her time, she thought to do it by busying
herself in the affairs of others. She had a real vocation for the
profession of a consulting lawyer. Usually her advice was sensible and
judicious--nothing better could be done than to follow it; only her
clients complained that she pronounced her sentences with too little
tenderness, without granting any appeal. She was good, charitable, but
lacked unction, and she had no sympathy with the illusions of others. A
German poet, in making his New-Year offerings, wishes that the rich may
be kind-hearted, that the poor may have bread, that the ladies may have
pretty dresses, that the men may have patience, that the foolish may get
a little reason, and that sensible people may grow poetic. Mme. de Lorcy
was kind-hearted, she had pretty dresses and a great deal of reason;
but her reason was wanting in poetry, and poetic people to whom she gave
advice required a good deal of patience to listen to the end. Those who
permitted themselves to despise her counsel, and who were happy after
their own fashion, incurred her lasting displeasure. She obstinately
asserted to them that their seeming happiness was all a deceit; that
they had fastened a stone about their necks; and that, without appearing
to do so, at the bottom of their hearts they bitterly repented. She
added, “It is not my fault; I told you, but you would not believe me.”

Mme. de Lorcy had an almost maternal affection for her nephew, M.
Camille Langis. Confident that he could not be otherwise than successful
in a love-affair, she promised him that he should marry Mlle. Moriaz. To
be sure, he was rather young; but she had decided that the question of
age made no difference, and that in all else there was a perfect fitness
between the parties. M. Langis hesitated a long time about declaring
himself. He said to Mme. de Lorcy: “If she refuse me, I shall no
longer be able to see her; and so long as I can see her, I am only
half-wretched.” It was Mme. de Lorcy who forced him to draw his sword
and open the campaign, in which she was to act as second. This campaign
had not been a successful one. Deeply wounded at the refusal, which she
had in vain attempted to prevent, she was ready to force Mlle. Moriaz
into compliance. They made her believe, to pacify her, that the sentence
was not definite, or at least that a period of grace would be granted to
the condemned. M. Langis set out for Hungary, and he had now returned.
In the mean time, Antoinette had refused two offers. Mme. de Lorcy had
inferred this to be a favourable omen for her projects. Thus she felt
annoyance mingled with anger on receiving the following letter from M.
Moriaz:

“DEAR MADAME:

“You will be charmed to learn that I am extremely well. My cheeks are
full, my complexion florid, my legs as nimble as a chamois, my appetite
like that of an ogre. If ever you become anemic, which God forbid, you
should set out forthwith for Saint Moritz, and I shall soon have good
news from you. Saint Moritz is a place where you find what you want, but
you find, besides, what you do not want. I do not speak of bears; I have
not seen any, and should I meet one, I am strong enough to strangle it.
Besides, bears are taciturn animals, they never relate their histories,
and the only animals I fear are those that have the gift of narrating,
and that one is not allowed to strangle. I will say no more. Have I made
myself intelligible? You are so intelligent.

“Apropos, Antoinette sends you a sketch or a painting, I do not know
which, that will be handed to you by Count Abel Larinski. He is a Pole,
of that there can be no doubt; you will perceive it at once. I wish him
well; he was obliging enough to extricate me from a breakneck position
into which I had foolishly thrust myself. That I have a pair of legs to
walk on, and a hand to write with, I owe to him. I recommend him to your
kind reception, and I beg you to get him to relate his history. He is
one of those who narrate, not every day, it is true, but when you
touch the right spring, he starts, and cannot be stopped. Seriously, M.
Larinski is no ordinary man; you will find pleasure in his acquaintance.
I have discovered that he is in rather embarrassed circumstances. He is
the son of an emigrant, whose property has been confiscated. His father
was a half fool, who made great attempts to cut a channel through
the Isthmus of Panama, and never succeeded in cutting his way through
anything. He was himself beginning to earn money in San Francisco, when,
in 1863, he gave everything up to go and fight against the Russians.
This enthusiastic patriot has since adopted the calling of an inventor,
in which he has been unsuccessful; he is now in search of a livelihood.
Do not think he will ask for anything; he is an hidalgo; he wraps
himself proudly in his poverty, as a Castilian does in his cloak. I am
interested in him; I want to assist him, give him a lift; but, first, I
wish to feel sure that he is worthy of my sympathy. Examine him closely,
sift him well; I trust your eyes rather than my own; I have the greatest
faith in your skill in this kind of valuation.

“Antoinette sends you her most affectionate greetings. She adores Saint
Moritz; you would think that she had found something here which has
wrought a charm over her. For my own part, I am delighted to have
recovered my appetite, my sleep, and all the rest, and yet I regret
having come; can you reconcile that? Let me know as soon as possible
what you think of my Pole; but, pray do not condemn him unheard. No
hasty decision, I entreat; an expert is bound not to be influenced by
his prejudices, but to weigh his judgments as his words. Adieu, dear
madame; pity me in spite of my full cheeks.”

Madame de Lorcy replied in these words, by return mail:

“You are indeed innocent, my dear professor, and your finesse is but too
apparent; I could not help understanding. Is she, indeed so foolish. I
did not think her overwise; but here she astonishes me more than I would
have believed. You can tell her, for me--or rather don’t say anything to
her; I will only speak to you, I am too angry to reason with her. I will
see your Pole, I await him resolutely; but, in truth, I have seen him
already. I am well acquainted with him, I know him by heart; I have no
doubt that he is some impostor. I will examine him without prejudice,
with religious impartiality. You are so good as to remind me that an
expert suspends his judgment. I will hold my police force in reserve,
and I will let you know before long what I think of your adventurer.
Ah! yes, I do pity you, poor man. After all, however, you alone are to
blame; is it my fault that you did not know how to act? God bless you!”

At the time when Samuel Brohl, seated amid the heather, in an oak-grove,
was conversing with phantoms, Mme. de Lorcy, alone in her _salon_, was
occupied with her needlework, and her thoughts, which revolved in a
circle, like a horse in a riding-school. She had for several days been
expecting Count Abel Larinski’s visit; she wondered at his want of
promptness, and suspected that he was afraid of her. This suspicion
pleased her. Several times she fancied she heard a man’s step in the
antechamber, at which she started nervously, and the rose-coloured
strings of her cap fluttered on her shoulders.

Suddenly, while she was counting her stitches, with head bent down, some
one entered without her perceiving it, seized her hand, and, devoutly
kissing it, threw his hat on the table, and then dropped into a chair,
where he remained motionless, with his legs stretched out, and his eyes
riveted on the floor.

“Oh! It is you, Camille,” exclaimed Mme. de Lorcy. “You come apropos.
Well?”

“Well! yes, madame, that is it,” replied M. Langis; “and you see before
you the most unhappy of men. Why is your pond dry? I want to fling
myself into it head foremost.”

Mme. de Lorcy laid down her embroidery, and crossed her arms. “So you
have returned?” said she.

“Would to God I never had gone there! It is a land where poison is sold,
and I have drunk of it.”

“Don’t abuse metaphors. You have seen her? What did you say to her?”

“Nothing, madame--nothing of what is in my heart. I made her believe
that I had reflected, and changed my views; that I was entirely cured
of my foolish passion for her; that I was simply making her a friendly
visit. Yes, madame, I remained half a day with her, and during the half
day I never once betrayed myself. I convinced her that the mask was a
face. Tell me, conscientiously, have you ever read of a more heroic act
in Plutarch’s _Lives of Great Men_?”

“She herself, what did she say to you?”

“She was so enchanted, so delighted with the change, that she was dying
to embrace me.”

“She shall pay for it. And he, did you see him?”

“Just caught a glimpse of him, looked up to him as was befitting the
humility of my position. This fortunate man, this glorious mortal, was
enthroned on the top of the mail-coach.”

“Is he really so fascinating?”

“He has, I assure you, a certain look of deep profundity, and he bears
his exploits inscribed on his brow. What am I, to contend against him!
You must allow that I have the appearance of a school-boy. And yet, if
I were to boast. This road in Transylvania for which I had the contract
was by no means easy to construct. We had to cut through the solid
rock, working in the air, suspended by ropes. This perilous labour so
disheartened our workmen that some of them left us; to encourage the
rest, I was slung up like them, and like them handled the pickaxe. One
day, in the explosion of a charge a piece of stone struck the rope of
one of my men with such violence that it cut it as clean in two as the
edge of a razor would have done. The man fell--I believed him to be
lost; by a miracle, his clothes caught in some brushwood, to which he
succeeded in clinging. It was I who went to his assistance, and I swear
to you that in this rescue I proved the strength of my muscles, and ran
the risk twenty times of breaking my neck. The workmen had mistrusted me
on account of my youth; from that day, I can assure you, they held me in
respect.”

“Did you relate this incident to Antoinette?”

“What would have been the use? With women it does not suffice to be a
great man; you must have the look of one too.” And Camille Langis cried
out, clinching his hands: “Ah! madame, I entreat you, do you know where
I can procure a Polish head, a Polish mustache, a Polish smile? Pray,
where are these articles to be had, and what is their market price? I
will not haggle! O women! what a set you are--plague on you!”

“And are aunts the same?” gravely asked Mme. de Lorcy.

He answered more calmly: “No, madame, you are a woman without an equal,
and I name you every day in my prayers. You are my only resource, my
consolation, my counsel. Do not refuse me your precious instructions!
What ought I to do?”

Mme. de Lorcy gazed up at the ceiling for an instant, and then said:
“Love elsewhere, my dear; abandon this foolish girl to her fate and her
Pole.”

He started and replied: “You demand what is impossible. I am no longer
my own master; she has taken possession of me--she holds me. Love
elsewhere? Can you think of it? I detest her--I curse her--but I adore
her!”

She rejoined: “You should not use hyperbole any more than metaphors.
Both are unsolid food. When you decide not to love, you will love no
more.”

“That supposes that I have several hearts to choose from. I never
had but one, and that no longer belongs to me. So you refuse me your
advice?”

“What advice would you have me give you before having seen M.
Larinski--before having taken the measure of this hero?”

“What! you expect to see him?”

“I am waiting for him to call, and I am sorry he keeps me waiting.”

“Seriously, will you receive this man?”

“I have been asked to examine him.”

“I am lost, if you feel the need of hearing before condemning him. Our
most sacred duty is to be resolutely unjust towards the enemies of our
friends.”

“Nonsense! I shall not be indulgent towards him.”

“Do as you like; I have my plan.”

“What is it?”

“I shall seek some groundless quarrel with this contraband, this
poacher, and I will blow his brains out.”

“A fine scheme, my dear Camille! And afterward, when you have killed
him, you will have gained a great deal. Have you confidence in me? I
have already begun to work for you. The Abbe Miollens, as you know, is
well acquainted in the society of Polish emigrants; I have sent to
him for information. I have also written to Vienna for intelligence
concerning him. Antoinette is foolish in forming such an acquaintance,
it must be admitted; but, in matters of honour, she is as delicate as
an ermine in tending the whiteness of her robe; if there be in M.
Larinski’s past a stain no larger than a ten-sou piece, she will forever
discard him. Let me act; be wise, do not blow out any one’s brains.
_Grand Dieu!_ what would become of us, if the only way to get rid of
people was by killing them?”

As she pronounced these words a servant entered, bearing a card on a
silver salver. She took the card and exclaimed: “When you speak of the
wolf--Here is our man!” She begged M. Langis to retire; he implored
permission to remain, promising to be a model of discretion. She was
insisting on his leaving when Count Abel Larinski appeared.

Samuel Brohl had scarcely taken three steps in Mme. de Lorcy’s _salon_
before he conjectured why M. Moriaz had asked him to go there, and
what was the significance of the commission with which he was charged.
Notwithstanding the _salon_ had a southern exposure, and that it was
then the middle of the month of August, it seemed to him to be cold
there. He thought that he felt a draught of chilly air, an icy wind,
which pierced him through and through, and caused him an unpleasant
shiver. He did not need to look very attentively at Mme. de Lorcy to be
convinced that he was before his judge, and that this judge was not a
friendly one; and, as soon as his gaze met that of M. Camille Langis,
something warned him that this young man was his enemy. Samuel Brohl had
the gift of observation.

He delivered his message, and handed Mme. de Lorcy the little portfolio
that contained Mlle. Moriaz’s painting, expressing his regret that
business had prevented his coming sooner. Mme. de Lorcy thanked him for
his kindness, with rather a cool politeness, and asked him for news of
her goddaughter. He did not expatiate on this topic.

“The valley of Saint Moritz is a dreary country,” she next said.

“Rather say, madame, that it is a dreary country possessing a great
charm for those who love it.”

“It appears that Mlle. Moriaz is almost wearied to death there. I should
think she would die of ennui.”

“Do you think her capable of yielding to ennui in any place?”

“Certainly, do not doubt it; but she has recourse to her imagination
to dispel the tedium. She has a marvellous talent for procuring herself
diversion and for varying her pleasures. Hers is an imagination having
many relays: no sooner is one horse exhausted than there is another to
take its place.”

“That is a precious gift,” he replied, briefly. “I assure you, however,
that you calumniate the Engadine. The trees there are not so well grown
as those in your park; but the Alpine fir and pine have their beauty.”

“You went to this hole for your health, monsieur?”

“Yes, and no, madame. I was not ill, but any physician contended that
I should be still better if I breathed the air of the Alps for three
weeks. It was taking a cure as a preventive.”

“M. Larinski made the ascent of the Morteratsch,” said Camille, who,
seated on a divan with his arms extended on his knees, never had ceased
to look at Samuel Brohl with a hard and hostile glance. “That is an
exploit that can be performed only by well people.”

“It is no exploit,” replied Samuel; “it is a work of patience, easy for
those who are not subject to vertigo.”

“You are too modest,” rejoined the young man. “Had I done as much, I
would sound a trumpet.”

“Have you attempted the ascent?” asked Samuel.

“Not at all. I do not care about having feats of prowess to relate,” he
replied, in an almost challenging tone.

Mme. de Lorcy hastened to interrupt the conversation by saying, “Is this
the first time you have been in Paris, monsieur?”

“Yes, madame,” replied Samuel, who withdrew more and more into his
shell.

“And does Paris please you as much as a pine-grove?”

“Much more, madame.”

“Have you any acquaintances?”

“None; and the truth is, I have no desire to make any.”

“Why?”

“Shall I tell you my reason? I am not fond of breaking ice, and
Poles complain that there is nothing in the world so icy as Parisian
coldness.”

“That explains itself,” cried Camille. “Paris, that is Paris proper, is
a small city of a hundred thousand souls, and this small city is invaded
more and more, by strangers who come here to seek pleasure or fortune.
It is but natural that Paris should protect itself.”

“Parisians pride themselves on their penetration,” replied Samuel.
“It does not require much of it to distinguish an honest man from an
adventurer.”

“Ah! permit me,” returned M. Langis, “that depends a good deal on
practice. The most skillful are deceived.”

Samuel Brohl rose and made a movement to leave. Mme. de Lorcy insisted
on his sitting down again. She saw that she had made a bad beginning in
the fulfilment of her office of examining magistrate, and of gaining the
prisoner’s confidence. Fearing that Camille, in spite of his promise,
would spoil everything by some insult, she found a pretext to send him
away; she begged that he would go and examine a pair of horses that were
a recent acquisition.

As soon as he was gone, she changed her manner; she grew amiable, she
endeavoured to remove the ill impression of her first welcome; she put
Count Abel at his ease, who felt that the air lost its chilliness
about him. Without appearing to do so, she made him undergo an
examination--she asked him many questions; he replied promptly. Visitors
came in; it was an hour before he took leave, after having promised Mme.
de Lorcy to dine with her the next day.

She did not wait until then to write to M. Moriaz. Her letter was thus
conceived:


“August 16, 1875.

“You recommend me to be impartial, my dear friend. Why should I not be?
It is true that I have dreamed of a certain marriage: one of the parties
would not listen to my propositions, and the other had abandoned the
idea. My project has come to nothing. Camille has enjoined me never
to speak of it to him again. You see I am no longer interested in the
question, or, rather, I have in the matter no other interest than that
which I feel for Antoinette, whose happiness is as dear to me as it is
to you. Apropos, do not give her my letters; read to her the passages
that you judge suitable to communicate to her--I leave that to your
discretion.

“First of all, let me unfold to you my humble opinions. I am charged
with having prejudices; it is a shocking calumny. I will make you a
profession of faith, and you shall judge. I am at war with more than one
point of our French morals; I deplore the habit that we have formed of
considering marriage as a business transaction, of esteeming it as a
financial or commercial partnership, and making everything subordinate
to the equality of the personal estates. This principle is revolting
to me, my dear friend. We are accused in foreign countries of being an
immoral people. Heavens! it seems to me that we understand and practise
virtue quite as much as the English or Germans, and, to speak the whole
truth, I am not afraid to advance the opinion that this, of all the
countries of the universe, is the one where there is the most virtue.
It is not at that point that we sin. Our misfortune is, that we are too
rational in our habits of life, too circumspect, too prudent; we lack
boldness in our undertakings; we wish, as it is said, to have one foot
on firm land and the other not far off. We must have security; we do not
like risk; doubtful affairs do not please us; we are too prone to look
ahead, and to look ahead is to fear. That is one reason why we send out
no colonies, and that is the reason we have no more children. Are you
satisfied with me?

“Napoleon I was in the habit of saying that, in fighting a battle, he
so ordered matters as to have seventy chances out of a hundred in his
favour; he left the rest to Fate. Ah! brave people, life is a battle,
but the French of to-day will not risk anything. They are the most
honest, the least romantic of men, and I regret it. Read Antoinette this
passage of my letter. Our young people think that they have a right to
the paternal fortune; they consider that their father is wanting in his
duty if he does not leave them a settled position, a certain future.
Their second preconceived notion is that they must find a wife who will
bring them as much at least as they have to offer her. I have so much,
you have so much--we are evidently created for each other; let us marry.
All this is deplorable. I like better to hear of the young American who
only expects from his parents the education necessary for a man to make
his way; he has his tools given to him and the method of using them,
but not a sou. You have learned to swim, my friend--swim. After that he
marries, most frequently a woman who has nothing, and who loves to spend
money. May the God Dollar protect him! he will gaily make an opening
for himself in life, and his wife will give him ten children, who will
follow the same course as their father. Where it is customary for hunger
to marry thirst, there are happy marriages, and a hardy race of people.
In all conscience, am I not romantic enough?

“Let me consider another case. Take a man who has fortune: he profits
thereby to consult his heart only, and offer his name and revenues to
the woman he loves and who has no dower. I clap my hands, I think it the
best of examples, and I regret that it is so seldom practised among
us. In France princes never are seen marrying shepherdesses; on
the contrary, one too often sees penniless sons-in-law carrying off
heiresses, and that is precisely the most objectionable case. In a
romance, or at the theatre, the poor young man who marries a million is
a very noble person; in life it is different. Not if the poor young
man had a profession or a trade, if he could procure by his own work
a sufficient income to render him independent of his wife; but if he
submit to be dependent on her, if he expect from her his daily bread, to
roll in her carriage, to ask her for the expenses of his toilet, for his
pocket-money, and perhaps for sundry questionable outlays--frankly, this
young man lacks pride; and what is a man who has no pride? Besides, what
surety is there that in marrying it is, indeed, the woman he is in love
with and not the dower? Who assures me that Count Abel Larinski?--I
name no one, personalities are odious, and I own there are exceptions.
_Dieu_, how rare they are! If I were Antoinette, I would love the poor,
but in their own interest. I would not marry them. The interest of the
whole human race is at stake. Beggars are inventive; let them have
their own way to make, and they will be sure to invent some means of
livelihood; give them the key of a cash-box, and they will cease to
strive, you have destroyed their genius. My dear professor, in fifteen
years I have brought about a great many marriages. Three times I have
married hunger to thirst, and, thank God, I once decided a millionaire
to marry a poor girl who had not a sou, but I never aided a beggar
to marry a rich girl. Now you have my principles and ideas--Are you
listening to me still? You fall asleep sometimes while listening to a
sermon. Good! you open your eyes--I proceed:

“I have seen your man. Well, sincerely, he only half pleases me. I
do not deny that he has a handsome head; a sculptor might use it as a
model. I will add that his eyes are very interesting, by turns grave,
gentle, gay, or melancholy. I have nothing to say against his manners or
his language; his address is excellent, and he is no booby--far from it.
With all this there is something about him that shocks me--I scarcely
know what--a mingling of two natures that I cannot explain. He might be
said to resemble, according to circumstances, a lion or a fox; I believe
that the fox-nature predominates, that the lion is supplementary. I
simply give you my impressions, which I am perfectly willing to be
induced to change. I am inclined to fancy that M. Larinski passed his
first youth amid vulgar surroundings, that later he came into contact
with good society, and being intelligent soon shook off the force of
early influences; but there still remain some traces of these. While he
was in my _salon_ his eyes twice took an inventory of its contents,
and that with a rapidity which would have done credit to a practised
appraiser. It was then, especially, that he had the air of a fox.

“Nor is this all. I read the other day the story of a princess who was
travelling over the world, and asked hospitality, one evening, at the
door of a palace. Was she a real princess or an adventuress? The queen
who received her judged it well to ascertain. For this purpose she
prepared for her, with her own hands, a soft bed, composed of two
mattresses, on which she piled five feather-beds; between the two
mattresses she slipped three peas. The next day the traveller was asked
how she had slept. ‘Very badly,’ she replied. ‘I do not know what was in
my bed, but my whole body is bruised; I am black and blue, and I never
closed my eyes until dawn!’ ‘She is a true princess,’ cried the queen.
Is M. Larinski a true prince? I made him undergo the test of the three
peas. I allowed myself to question him with indiscreet, urgent, improper
curiosity; he did not appear to feel the indiscretion. He replied
promptly and submissively; he endeavoured to satisfy me, and I was not
satisfied. I shall see him again to-morrow--he comes to dine at Maisons.
I only wish to be able to prove to myself that he is a true prince.

“My dear professor, you are the most imprudent of men, and, whatever
happens, you have only yourself to blame. People do not open their
doors so easily to strangers. You tell me that, thanks to M. Larinski’s
kindness, you did not break your leg. Mercy on me! a father would better
break his leg in three places than expose his daughter to the risk of
marrying an adventurer; his leg could be easily set. There is nothing so
frightful in that.

“_Postscriptum_.--I open my letter. I want to prove to you how much I
desire to be just, and how far my impartiality goes. You know that
my neighbour, Abbe Miollens, lived a long time in Poland, and has
correspondents there. I begged him to get me information concerning the
count--of course, without explaining anything to him. He reports that
Count Abel Larinski is a true count. His father, the confiscation of the
property, the emigration to America, the Isthmus of Panama--all is true;
the history is authentic. Countess Larinski was a saint. Concerning the
son, nothing is known; he must have been three or four years old when he
landed in New York. No one ever saw him; no one seems to know anything
about his taking part in the insurrection of 1863. Having spoken the
truth about his parents, it is to be presumed that he told the truth
about himself. Very well, but one can fight for one’s country, and have
a saint for one’s mother, and yet possess none of the qualities that go
towards making a happy household. I take back the word adventurer, but I
still hold to all I have said about him. Why did he take an inventory of
my furniture with his eyes? Why did he sleep so soundly in a bed where
there were three peas? This requires an explanation.

“Kiss Antoinette for me. Give my regards to Mlle. Moiseney, without
telling her that I think her a simpleton; it is a conviction in which I
shall die. Was it, indeed, very difficult to descend from that terrible
rock of yours?”

Three days later, Mme. de Lorcy wrote a second letter:


“August 19th.

“I have received this very moment, my dear monsieur, the reply from
Vienna that I have been expecting, and which I hasten to share with you.
I had applied to our friend Baron B---, first secretary of the embassy
from France to Vienna, in order to try to learn what reputation Count
Larinski had left there. He is esteemed there as a most worthy man; as
an inventor who was more daring than wise; as a devoted patriot; as one
of those Poles whose only thought is of Poland and of their Utopia, and
who would set fire to the four corners of the earth without wincing, for
the sole purpose of procuring embers at which to roast their chestnuts.
I will not return to the subject of the gun; you know all about it. It
seems that there was some good in this explosive gun, and that he who
invented it united a sort of genius with ingenuousness, inexperience,
and ignorance enough to make one weep. Nothing can be said against the
private character of the man. He had a few debts, and his tradespeople
felt considerable anxiety when he left Vienna one morning on foot. He
had no sooner reached Switzerland than he sent back money to settle
everything. Here we have an admirable trait. However, his tastes were
simple, and he led a steady life; it was the gun that brought his
finances into disorder. I will add that M. Larinski visited in Vienna
at several of the most distinguished houses, where he is remembered
most kindly. He was sought everywhere on account of his talents as
a musician, which were far more to be relied on than his talent as a
gunsmith. He plays the piano to perfection, and has a very beautiful
voice. Had he employed these talents, he could have made his way to
the opera, but his dignity held him back. Now you know what has been
communicated to me by Baron B---. On the faith of an honest woman, I
have neither added nor omitted anything.

“I am going to astonish you. Would you believe that I am beginning to
be reconciled to Count Larinski? What shocked me in him is explained and
excused by his long residence in America. He is a mixed breed of Yankee
and Pole. Far from having prejudices against him, I now have them in
his favour. Do you know, I am by no means sure that he cherishes in
his heart any serious sentiment for your daughter? As a man of taste he
admires her. I should like to know who would not admire her! I suspect
Antoinette of allowing her imagination to become excited about nothing.
He talks of her on all occasions in as free and tranquil a fashion as he
would talk of a work of art. I find it impossible to believe that he
is in love. I have in vain watched his green eyes. I never have seen a
suspicious look.

“As I announced to you, he came to Maisons yesterday to dine. I had
invited Abbe Miollens, and Camille had invited himself, promising that
he would act like a philosopher; he only half kept his promise: for
I must inform you that my nephew has conceived, I do not know why,
an insurmountable antipathy to M. Larinski; he is subject to taking
dislikes to people. During dinner, Abbe Miollens, who is a great
linguist and a great traveller, and who has at the ends of his fingers
everything concerning Poland and the Poles, led the conversation to the
insurrection of 1863. M. Larinski, at first, refrained from discussing
this sad subject; little by little the flood-gates were opened: he
related his adventures or campaigns without boasting, praising others
rather than himself; when suddenly his voice grew husky and his eyes
dim, he interrupted himself, and begged we would speak of other things.
Fortunately, at this moment, he did not see Camille, whose lips were a
sinister smile. Young Frenchmen have become such sceptics! I made eyes
at the bad boy, and on leaving the table I sent him to smoke a cigar in
the park.

“I should confess to you that M. Larinski has made a conquest of Abbe
Miollens, who of all men is the most difficult to please, and who
disputes with Providence the privilege of fathoming the depths of the
human heart. You are aware that the abbe is a remarkable violinist: he
sent for his instrument; M. Larinski seated himself at the piano, and
the two gentlemen played a concert by Mozart--divine music performed by
two angels of the first class. The conversation that followed charmed me
more than the concerto. I do not know by what fatality we came to speak
of marriage. I did not miss the opportunity to disclose with a most
innocent air, my little theories, with which you are acquainted. Would
you believe that the count concurred, more than concurred, with my
views? He is more royalist than the king; he does not admit that a good
rule allows of any exception. According to him, a poor man who marries a
rich woman forfeits his honour, debases himself, sells himself; he is a
man in bondage. He developed this theme with sombre eloquence. I assure
you that the lion no longer bore resemblance to the fox.

“After the departure of this fine musician and great orator, Abbe
Miollens, remaining alone with me, told me how much he was charmed with
his conversation and manners; he could not cease to sing his praises. I
think he went a little too far. However, I joined with him in regretting
that a man of his merit should be reduced to live by expedients.
The abbe’s arm reaches a long way; he promised me that he would busy
himself, at the expense of all other business, to find some employment
for M. Larinski. He remembered that there was some talk of establishing
in London an international school for the living languages. One of
the founders of this institute had applied to him to learn if he could
recommend some professor of the Slavonian languages. It would be exactly
the thing, and I should be delighted to procure for your _protégé_ an
occupation that would insure all the happiness that it is possible
to enjoy on the other side of the Channel. After this, will you still
accuse me of being prejudiced against him?

“Adieu, my dear monsieur. Give my tender love to my amiable goddaughter.
I rely on you to read my letters to her with care and discretion. Little
girls should have only a part of the truth.”

Eight days afterward Mme. de Lorcy wrote a third letter, which was thus
expressed:


“August 27th.

“I am more and more content with M. Larinski. I blame myself for
the suspicions with which he inspired me. The Viennese were right to
consider him a worthy man, and Abbe Miollens has not valued him too
highly. You write, on your part, my dear friend, that you are not
dissatisfied with Antoinette. She is gay, tranquil; she walks, paints,
never speaks of Count Abel Larinski, and, when you speak to her of him,
she smiles and does not reply. You claim that she has reflected; that
time and absence have wrought their effect. ‘Out of sight, out of mind,’
you say. Take care! I am more mistrustful than you. Are you very sure
that Antoinette may not be a slyboots?

“What is certain is, that I received a charming epistle from her, in
which there is no more mention of M. Larinski than if Poland and the
Pole did not exist. She praises Engadine; she pretends that she would
ask for nothing better than to end her days in a pine-forest. I can read
between the lines that it would be a pine-forest after her own heart,
where there would be reunions, balls, guests to dinner, small parties,
a conservatory of music, and the opera. The last paragraph of her letter
is devoted to the insurrection in Herzegovina, and it is hardly worth
while to say that all her sympathies are with the insurgents. ‘If I were
a man,’ she writes, ‘I would go and fight for them.’ That is very well;
she always took the part of thieves against the police. I remember
long ago--she was ten years old--I told her the story of an unfortunate
traveller besieged in a forest by an army of wolves. He made a barricade
about himself, and around it he lighted great fires. The wolves fell
into the flames, where they roasted, one after the other. Antoinette
began to weep bitterly, and I imagined that she was lamenting the terror
of the unfortunate man. ‘Not at all,’ she cried: ‘the poor beasts!’ She
was made so; we cannot remake her. She will always side with the wolves,
especially with the lean ones who scarcely can make two ends meet.

“I told you that Count Larinski was a worthy man. He came to see me the
day before yesterday. We have become very good friends. I asked him if
Paris still pleased him, and he replied, with the most gracious smile,
‘What I like best in Paris is Maisons Lafitte.’ Thereupon he said
some exceedingly pretty things, which I will not repeat. We walked
_tete-a-tete_ around the park. Heaven be praised that I returned
heart-whole! We talked politics; he bears the reputation of being
hot-headed, but he is not wanting in good sense. I wished to know if he
was in favour of the Turks or of the Bosnians. He replied:

“‘As a Christian, as a Catholic, I am interested in the Christians of
the East, and I am for the Cross against the Crescent.’ He pronounced
these words, Christian, Catholic, and cross, in a tone full of unction.
I surmise that he is a devotee. He added, ‘As a Pole, I am for Turkey.’

“‘I believed,’ said I, ‘that the Poles had sympathy with all the
oppressed.’

“‘Poles,’ he replied, ‘cannot like those who like their oppressors, and
they cannot forget that the Osmanlis are their natural allies, and, on
occasions, their refuge.’

“I gave him Antoinette’s letter to read. I was very glad, at any hazard,
to prove to him that she could write four pages without asking about
him. He read it with extreme attention: but when he came to the famous
passage--‘If I were a man, I would go and fight for them!’--he smiled,
and returned me the letter, saying, in a disdainful and rather a dry
tone:

“‘Write for me to Mlle. Moriaz that I believe I am a man, yet that
I will not fight for the Bosnians, and that the Turks are my greatest
friends.’

“‘She is foolish,’ I said. ‘Fortunately, she changes her folly with
every new moon!’

“‘What would you have?’ he replied; ‘in order not to be insipid, it is
well to be a little foolish. My poor mother used often to say: “My
son, youth should be employed in laying by a great store of extravagant
enthusiasm; otherwise, at the end of life’s journey the heart will be
void, for much is left on the road.”’

“Calm, _seigneur_, your excited fears, no one has designs on your
daughter; we evidently find her charming, but are by no means in love
with her. With much precaution and circumlocution I gently proceeded
to question Count Larinski on the state of his affairs, about which
he never has opened his mouth. He frowned. I did not lose courage. I
offered him this place of professor of the Slavonian languages of which
the abbe had again spoken. I saw in an instant that his sensitive pride
had taken alarm. However, upon reflection, he softened, thanked me,
declined my kind offer, and announced--guess what! How much is my news
worth? what will you give for it? He announced, I tell you, that in two
weeks--you understand me--he will return to Vienna, where he has been
promised a post in the archives of the Minister of War. I did not dare
to ask what was the salary; after all, if he is satisfied, it is not for
us to be harder to please than he. When I affirm that Count Larinski is
a good, worthy man!--In two weeks! you understand me perfectly.

“My dear friend, I am enchanted to know that the water of Saint Moritz
and the air of the Engadine have entirely re-established your health;
but do not be imprudent. Half-cures are fatal. Be careful not to leave
Churwalden too soon, for the descent into the heavy atmosphere of the
plains. Your physician, whom I have just seen, declares that, if you
hasten your return he will not answer for the consequences. Antoinette,
I am sure, will join her entreaties to ours. Do not let us see you
before the end of three weeks! Follow my orders, my dear professor,
and all will go well. Camille is about to leave; he has become
insupportable. He had the audacity to assert to me that I was a good
woman, but very credulous, which in my estimation is not very polite. He
no longer acts as a nephew, and respect is dead.”

Ten days later M. Moriaz received at Churwalden a fourth and last
letter:


“September 6th.

“Decidedly my dear friend, Count Larinski is a delightful man, and I
never will pardon myself for having judged ill of him. The day before
yesterday I did not know the extent of his merit and of his virtues.
His beautiful soul is like a country where one passes from one pleasing
discovery to another, and at each step a new scene is revealed. Between
ourselves, Antoinette is a dreamer: where has she got the idea that this
man is in love with her? These Counts Larinski have artists’ enthusiasm,
tender and sensitive hearts, and poetic imaginations; they love
everything, and they love nothing; they admire a pretty woman as they
admire a beautiful flower, a humming-bird, a picture of Titian’s. Did
I tell you that the other day, as I was showing him through my park, he
almost fainted before my purple beech--which assuredly is a marvel? He
was in ecstasy; I truly believe there were tears in his eyes. I might
have supposed he was in love with my beech; yet he has not asked my
permission to marry it.

“Moreover, if he were up to his eyes in love with your daughter, have
no fear; he will not marry her, and this is the reason--Wait a little, I
must go further back.

“Abbe Miollens came to see me yesterday afternoon; he was distressed
that M. Larinski had not approved of his proposition.

“‘The evil is not so great,’ I said; ‘let him go back to Vienna, where
all his acquaintances are; he will be happier there.’

“‘The evil that I see in it,’ he replied, ‘is that he will be lost to
us forever. Vienna is so far away! Professor in London, only ten hours’
journey from Paris, he could cross the Channel sometimes, and we could
have our music together.’

“You can understand that this reasoning did not touch me in the least;
whatever it cost me I will bear it, and resign myself to lose M.
Larinski forever; but the abbe is obstinate.

“‘I fear,’ he said, ‘that the Austrians pay their archivists badly; the
English manage matters better, and Lord C--- gave me _carte blanche_.’

“‘Oh! but that,’ rejoined I, ‘is a delicate point to touch. As soon
as you approach the bread-and-butter question, our man assumes a rigid,
formal manner, as if an attack had been made on his dignity.’

“‘I truly believe,’ he replied, ‘that there is a fundamental basis of
incomparable nobility of sentiment in his character; he is not proud, he
is pride itself.’

“The abbe is passionately fond of Horace; he assets that it is to this
great poet that he owes that profound knowledge of men for which he
is distinguished. He quoted a Latin verse that he was kind enough
to translate for me, and that signified something equivalent to the
statement that certain horses rear and kick when you touch the sensitive
spot. ‘That is like the Poles,’ he said.

“Meanwhile, M. Larinski entered, and I retained the two gentlemen to
dinner. In the evening they again gave me a concert. Why was Antoinette
not there? I fancied I was at the Conservatoire. Then we conversed, and
the abbe, who never can let go his idea, said, without any reserve, to
the count:

“‘My dear count, have you reflected? If you go to London, we could hope
to see you often; and, besides, the salary--well, as this terrible
word has been spoken, listen to me; I will do all in my power to obtain
conditions for you in every way worthy of your merit, your learning,
your character, your position.’

“He was not permitted to finish the list; the count reared like the
horse in Horace, exclaiming, ‘O Mozart! what a horrid subject of
conversation!’ Then he added, gravely: ‘M. l’Abbe, you are a thousand
times too good, but the place offered to me in Vienna seems to me
better adapted to my kind of ability; I would make, I fear, a detestable
professor, and the salary, were it double, would in my opinion have but
little weight.’

“The abbe still insisted. ‘In our century,’ said he, ‘less than any
other, can one live on air.’

“‘I have lived on it sometimes,’ replied the count, gaily, ‘and I did
not find it bad. My health is proof against accidents. Ah! where money
is concerned, you have no idea how far my indifference goes. It is not
a virtue with me, it is an infirmity; it is because of my nationality,
because I am my father’s son. I feel myself incapable of thinking of the
future, of practising thoroughly French habits of economy. If my
purse is full, I soon empty it; after which I condemn myself to
privations--no, that does not express it--I enjoy them. According to me,
there is no true happiness into which a little suffering does not enter.
Besides, I have a taste for contrasts. At times I believe myself a
millionaire, I have the pretensions of a nabob; I give full scope to my
fancies; the next day, my bed is hard and I live on bread-and-water,
and am perfectly happy. In short, I am a fool once in the year, and a
philosopher the rest of the time.’

“‘The trouble is,’ returned the abbe, ‘that one day of folly will
sometimes suffice to compromise forever the future of a philosopher.’

“‘Oh, reassure yourself,’ replied he; ‘my extravagances never are very
dangerous. There was method in Hamlet’s madness, and there is always a
little reason in mine.’

“While making this declaration of principles, he had seated himself at
the piano, and idly began running his fingers over the keys. Suddenly he
began to sing a German song, which I got Abbe Miollens to translate
for me, and which is not long. The hero of the song is an amorous pine,
standing on the summit of a barren mountain of the north. He is alone;
he is weary; the snow and ice wrap him in a white mantle, and he spends
his dreary hours of leisure in dreaming of a palm, which in days of yore
he met, it seems, in his travels.

“M. Larinski sang this little melody with so much pathos that the good
abbe was touched, and I became anxious. Anxiety, once felt, is apt to
be constantly returning. I asked myself if he had met his palm in the
Engadine, and added aloud, rather dryly: ‘Is the day of your departure
definitely fixed? will you not do us the favour of granting us a
reprieve?’

“He executed the most pearly chromatic scale, and replied: ‘Alas!
madame, I am only deferring my departure on account of a letter that
cannot be much longer delayed; in less than a week, I shall have the
distress of bidding you farewell.’

“‘You shall not leave,’ said Abbe Miollens, ‘without letting us hear
once again the poem of the pine. You sang it with so much soul that it
seemed to me you must be relating an episode of your own history. My
dear count, did you ever chance to dream of a palm?’

“He answered: ‘I have no longer the right to dream; I am no longer
free.’

“The abbe started and cried out, in his simple-hearted way, ‘Ah! what,
are you married?’

“‘I thought I had told you so,’ replied he with a melancholy smile, and
he hastened to speak of a ballet that he had seen the evening before at
the opera, and with which he was only half pleased.

“You can readily believe that when he pronounced the words, ‘I thought
I had told you so,’ I was on the point of falling on his neck; I was so
happy, that I was afraid he would read in my eyes my joy, astonishment,
and profound gratitude. I think that he is very keen, and that he has
conjectured for some time the mistrust with which he inspired me. If
he wanted to mock me a little, I will pardon him; a good man unjustly
suspected has a perfect right to revenge himself by a little irony.
I ordered the horses to be put to my carriage to take him over to the
railroad, and the abbe and I accompanied him as far as the station.
There cannot be too much regard shown to honest people who have been
abused by fortune.

“Well! what do you say, my dear friend? Was I wrong in claiming that M.
Larinski is a delightful man? He will leave before the end of a
week, and he is married, unhappily married, I fear, for his smile
was melancholy. You see he may have married out of gratitude some
_grisette_, some little working-woman, who nursed him through illness,
one of those women who are not presentable; that would be thoroughly in
character. Happily, in law there are no good or bad marriages; this one
I hold to be unimpeachable.

“The reaction was violent: I am so rejoiced that I feel tempted to
illuminate Cormeilles and Maisons Lafitte. In what way will your
undeceive our dreamer? In your place I would use some precautions. Be
prudent; go bridle in hand; and in the future, believe me, climb no more
among the rocks; you see what it may lead to.

“Once more, do not hasten your departure. We have had for some days
stifling heat; we literally suffocate. You need to spend a fortnight
longer amid the shade of the pine-trees, and four thousand feet above
the level of the sea.

“Adieu, my dear professor! I am interrupted in my writing by the
incredulous, the sceptical, the suspicious, the absurd, the ridiculous
Camille, who respectfully recommends himself to your indulgent
friendship.”



CHAPTER VI

In reading the fourth letter of Mme. de Lorcy, M. Moriaz experienced a
feeling of satisfaction and deliverance, over which he was not master.
His daughter had gone to pay a visit in the neighbourhood, and he was
alone with Mlle. Moiseney, who said to him, “You have received good
news, monsieur?”

“It is excellent,” he replied; then, promptly correcting himself, he
added: “Excellent, or to be regretted, or vexatious; I leave that to our
powers of discernment.”

When he had finished reading the letter, and replaced it in the
envelope, he remained thoughtful for some moments; he was wondering how
he should proceed to announce the excellent news. For three weeks his
daughter had been a mystery to him. She never once had pronounced the
name of Count Larinski. Churwalden pleased her as much as Saint Moritz;
apparently, she was gay, tranquil, perfectly happy. Had her delusion
passed away? Had she changed her mind? M. Moriaz did not know; but he
surmised that still waters should be mistrusted, and that a young girl’s
imagination is like an abyss. One thoroughly good warning is worth two
indifferent ones; henceforth, he feared everything. “If I speak to her,”
 thought he, “I shall not be able to dissimulate my joy, and perhaps she
will go into hysterics.” He had a horror of hysterics; he resolved to
have recourse to Mlle. Moiseney, and he said to her, abruptly:

“I suppose, mademoiselle, that you are acquainted with all that has
passed, and that Antoinette has given you her confidence?”

She opened her eyes wide, and was on the point of answering that she
knew nothing; but she restrained herself, and setting her little pointed
head erect on her thin shoulders, she said, proudly, “Can you imagine
that Antoinette would keep any secrets from me?”

“Heaven forbid!” replied he. “And do you approve, do you encourage her
sentiments for M. Larinski?”

Mlle. Moiseney started; she had been far from suspecting that Count
Larinski had specially impressed Mlle. Moriaz, and, as on certain
occasions her mind worked rapidly, she understood immediately all the
consequences of this prodigious event. There was a cloud before her
eyes, and in this cloud she beheld all manner of things, both pleasing
and displeasing to her; her mouth open, she strove to clear her ideas.
She said to herself: “It is an imprudent act; not only that, it cannot
be;” but she also said: “Mlle. Antoinette can no more make a mistake
than the Queen of England can; because she wishes it, she is right in
wishing it.” Mlle. Moiseney ended by regaining her self-possession; her
lips formed the most pleasant smile, as she exclaimed:

“He has no fortune, but he has a beautiful name. Mme. la Comtesse
Larinski! it sounds well to the ear.”

“Like music; I grant, it is perfect,” rejoined M. Moriaz.
“Unfortunately, music is not everything in the affairs of this world.”

She was not listening to him. Full of her own idea, without taking time
to breathe: “You jest, monsieur,” she continued, with extraordinary
volubility. “Believe me or not, I have foreseen this marriage for some
time. I have presentiments that never deceive me. I was sure that it
would be thus. What a handsome couple! Fancy them driving in an open
carriage through the park, or entering a proscenium-box at the opera!
They will make a sensation. And truly, without boasting, I think I may
call your attention to the fact that I have been of some account in the
affair. The first time I saw Count Larinski, you know, at the _table
d’hote_ in Bergun, I recognised at once that he was beyond comparison--”

“By-the-way, he ate trout?” interrupted M. Moriaz; “it does honour to
your discernment.”

“You had better ask Antoinette,” replied she, “if that very evening I
did not praise the handsome stranger. She maintained that he stooped,
and that his head was badly poised; would you believe it?--his head
badly poised! Ah! I was sure it would end so. Do you wish to prove my
discernment? Shall I tell you where your letter comes from that contains
such excellent news? The count wrote it; he has at last proposed. I
guessed it at once. Ah! monsieur, I sympathize in your joy. He is,
indeed, the son-in-law that I have dreamed of for you. A superior man,
so open-hearted, so unaffected and frank!”

“Do you really think so?” asked M. Moriaz, fanning himself with the
letter.

“He related to us his whole life,” rejoined she, in a pedantic tone.
“How many people could do as much?”

“A delightful narration. I only regret that he was silent concerning one
detail which was of a nature to interest us.”

“An unpleasant detail?” she asked, raising her gooseberry-coloured eyes
to him.

“On the contrary, a circumstance that does him honour, and for which I
am obliged to him. Believe me, my dear demoiselle, I should be charmed
to receive a son-in-law from your hands, and to give my daughter to a
man whose genius and noble sentiments you divined from merely seeing him
eat. Unfortunately, I fear this marriage will not come about; there is
one little difficulty.”

“What?”

“Count Larinski forgot to apprise us that he was already married.”

Mlle. Moiseney sent forth a doleful cry. M. Moriaz handed her Mme.
de Lorcy’s letter; after reading it, she remained in a state of deep
dejection; a pitiless finger had burst the iris bubble that she had just
blown, and that she saw resplendent at the end of her pipe.

“Do not give way to your despair,” said M. Moriaz; “take courage, follow
the example I set you, imitate my resignation. But tell me, how do you
think Antoinette will take the matter?”

“It will be a terrible blow to her,” replied Mlle. Moiseney; “she loves
him so much!”

“How do you know, since she has not judged it best to tell you?”

“I know from circumstances. Poor dear Antoinette! The greatest
consideration must be used in announcing to her this intelligence; and I
alone, I believe--”

“I agree with you,” M. Moriaz hastened to interpose; “you alone are
capable of operating on our patient without causing her suffering. You
are so skilful! your hand is so light! Make the best of the situation,
mademoiselle--I leave it to you.”

With these words he took up his hat and cane, and hastened to get away,
rather anxious about what had passed, yet feeling too happy, too much
rejoiced, to be a good consoler.

It was not long before Mlle. Moriaz returned from her walk. She came
humming a ballad; she was joyous, her complexion brilliant, her eyes
sparkling, and she carried an armful of heather and ferns. Mlle.
Moiseney went to meet her, her face mournful, her head bent down, her
glance tearful.

“Why! what is the matter, my dear Joan?” she said; “you look like a
funeral.”

“Alas!” sighed Mlle. Moiseney, “I have sad news to communicate.”

“What! have they written to you from Cormeilles that your parrot is
dead?”

“Ah, my dear child, be reasonable, be strong; summon up all your
courage.”

“For the love of God, what is the matter?”

“Ah! would that I could spare you this trouble! Your father has just
received a letter from Mme. de Lorcy.”

Antoinette grew more attentive, her breath came quickly. “And what was
there in this letter that is so terrible, so heart-rending?” she asked,
forcing a smile.

“Fortunately, I am here,” replied Mlle. Moiseney. “You know that your
joys and your sorrows are mine. All the consolation that I can lavish
upon you, the tenderest sympathy--”

“My dear Joan, in the name of Heaven, explain first, and then console!”

“You told me nothing, my child--I have a right to complain; but I have
divined all. I can read your heart. I am sure that you love him.”

“Of whom do you speak?” replied Antoinette, whose colour rose in her
cheeks.

“Of a most charming man, who, either through inconceivable stupidity,
or through most criminal calculation, neglected to tell us that he was
married.”

And with these words, Mlle. Moiseney extended both arms, that she
might receive into them Mlle. Moriaz, whom she believed to be already
swooning.

Mlle. Moriaz did not swoon. She flushed crimson, then grew very pale;
but she remained standing, her head proudly erect, and she said, in a
tone of well-feigned indifference: “Oh! M. Larinski is married? My very
sincere compliments to the Countess Larinski.”

After which she busied herself arranging in a vase the heather and ferns
she had brought back with her. Mlle. Moiseney stood lost in astonishment
at her calm; she gazed in a stupor at her, and suddenly exclaimed:
“Thank God! you do not love him! Your father has mistaken, he often
mistakes; he sometimes gets the strangest ideas into his mind; he was
persuaded that this would be a death-blow to you; he does not know you
at all. Ah! unquestionably, M. Larinski is far from being disagreeable;
I do not dispute his having some merit; but I always thought that there
was something suspicious about him; his manners were a little equivocal;
I suspected him of hiding something from us. As it appears, he has made
a _mesalliance_ that he did not care to acknowledge. It is deplorable
that a man of such excellent address should have low tastes and
doubtful morality. His duty was to tell us all; he was neither loyal nor
delicate.”

“You dream, my dear,” replied Antoinette. “What law, human or divine,
obliged M. Larinski to tell us everything? Did you expect him to render
an account of his deeds and misdeeds to us as to a tribunal of penance?”

In speaking thus, she took off her hat and mantilla, seated herself in
the embrasure of a window, and opened a book which she began to read
with great attention.

“God be praised! she does not love him,” thought Mlle. Moiseney, who
was not aware that Mlle. Moriaz was turning two or three pages at a time
with perceiving it.

Deeply absorbed as she was, she still recognised her father’s step as he
came upstairs to his room. She hurried out to meet him. He noticed with
pleasure that her face was not wan, nor were her eyes red. He was less
satisfied when she said, in a calm, clear voice:

“Please show me the letter that you have received from Mme. de Lorcy.”

“What is the use?” he rejoined. “I know it by heart. I am ready to
recite it to you.”

“Is it a letter that cannot be shown?”

“No, indeed; but as I tell you that I am ready to give you an account of
it--”

“I would prefer to read it with my own eyes.”

“After all, you have a right. There! take it. But I beg of you do not be
offended by unfortunate expressions.”

“Mme. de Lorcy always knows how to choose the proper word to express her
thought,” she responded.

When she had run her eye rapidly over Mme. de Lorcy’s eight closely
written pages, she looked at her father and smiled.

“You must own that you found a very useful and a very zealous ally in
Mme. de Lorcy; do her this justice, she has worked hard, and you owe
her many thanks for having busied herself so actively in ridding you of
‘this worthy man, this good man, this delightful man’; those are her own
words, if you remember.”

M. Moriaz exclaimed: “I hope you do not imagine that it was a matter
arranged between us. Do you really suspect me of having some dark plot
with Mme. de Lorcy! Do you believe me capable of being implicated in an
act of perfidy?”

“God forbid! I only accuse you of being too joyous, and of not knowing
how to conceal it.”

“Is that a crime?”

“Perhaps it is an indiscretion.”

“I swear to you, my dear child, that I only consider your happiness,
and Mme. de Lorcy herself--Since M. Langis no longer thinks of you, what
reason could she have--”

“I do not know,” interrupted Antoinette; “but her prejudice would take
the place of reason.”

“So you will not believe that Count Larinski is married?”

“I believe it, without being certain, and I wish to be assured of it.
Have I not acted in good faith through all this matter? was I not ready
to comply with your conditions? I consented to refer to the judgment of
Mme. de Lorcy. She has deigned to be gracious to the accused. She
has admitted that M. Larinski is a perfectly honourable and even a
delightful man; but she has discovered, at intervals of several days,
first, that he does not love me, and then, that he has deceived me by
letting me believe that he was still free. I wish to satisfy my own
mind, and convince myself that I am not being played with.”

“And you have concluded----”

“I have concluded that, with your permission, we shall leave to-morrow
morning for Cormeilles.”

This conclusion was by no means agreeable to M. Moriaz, whose face grew
sensibly longer.

“Of what are you afraid? You know that I have character, and you ought
to know, no matter what Mme. de Lorcy says, that I am not wanting in
good sense. When it is proved to me that I have deceived myself, I will
make the sign of the cross over my romance; it will be dead and buried,
and I promise you not to wear mourning for it.”

“So be it,” said he; “I believe in your good sense, I have faith in your
reason: we shall leave to-morrow for Cormeilles.”

Four days later, Mme. de Lorcy was walking in an alley in her park.
She was joined there by M. Langis, to whom she said, in a good-humoured
tone: “Always grave and melancholy, my dear Camille! When will you
cease your drooping airs? I cannot understand you. I do my best to be
agreeable to you, to settle matters satisfactorily. Nothing seems to
cheer you. You make me think of the hare in La Fontaine:

“‘Cet animal est triste, et la Crainte le ronge.’”

“Fear and hate, madame,” replied he. “I hate this man; he is
insupportable to me. I will give up coming to Maisons if I always must
meet him here. Has he paid you his adieux for the last time?”

“Not yet; a little patience--we shall not count the minutes. Besides,
what harm can this man do you? The lion has lost his claws--what do I
say?--he has carried his good-nature to the point of muzzling himself.
It is not generous to pursue with hate a disarmed enemy.”

“Very well, madame, if he is not gone in three days, I return to my
first idea; it was the best.”

“You will cut his throat?”

“With all my heart.”

“For the love of art?”

“I am not a very bloodthirsty individual, but I would take a singular
delight in slashing at the skin of this gloomy personage.”

Mme. de Lorcy shrugged her shoulders. “What makes you think him gloomy,
my dear? You are perfectly reasonable. You ought to adore M. Larinski;
you are under the greatest obligations to him. He has been the first to
succeed in touching the heart of our dear, hitherto insensible girl; he
has broken the charm. She was the Sleeping Beauty; he has awakened her,
and, through the favour of Heaven, he cannot marry her. I can see her in
Churwalden, a prey to the gloomiest ennui, weeping over her illusions,
furious at having been deceived. Do you not divine all the advantage
that can be derived from a woman’s anger?”

“You know that I love her, and yet I do not wish to owe anything to her
spite.”

“You are a child: be guided. The moment is come for you to propose. In
a few days you will start for Churwalden, and you will say to this angry
woman, ‘I have lied--I love you.’ In short, you will talk to her of your
amorous flame; and you may, freely, under these circumstances, exhaust
all your treasure-store of hyperbole. She will listen to you, I can
promise you, and she will say to herself, ‘I seek vengeance--here it
is.’”

“I would like to believe you, madame,” he replied, “but are you very
certain that Mlle. Moriaz is still at Churwalden?”

And, pointing with his finger, he showed her at the end of the avenue a
figure coming towards them clad in a pretty nut-brown dress with a long
train sweeping the gravel.

“Truly, I believe that it is she,” cried Mme. de Lorcy. “M. Moriaz is
the most unskilful person; but, after all, not much harm is done.”

Mlle. Moriaz had arrived the evening previous at Cormeilles. After
resting somewhat from the fatigues of the journey, she had nothing more
urgent to do than to order the horses put to her coupe and to come and
pay her respects to her godmother, who could not fail to be touched by
this attention.

Mme. de Lorcy ran to Antoinette and embraced her several times, saying:
“You are here at last! How charmed I am to see you again! You made
us wait long enough; I began to fear that you had taken root in the
Grisons. Is it indeed an enchanted land? I rather believe that your
father is a cruel egotist, that he shamefully sacrificed you to his own
convenience in prolonging his cure; but here you are--I will pardon
him. Your poor, your _proteges_, are clamorous for you. Who do you think
asked after you, the other day? Mlle. Galet, whom, according to your
orders, I supplied with her quarter’s allowance. How you spoil her! I
found on her table a bouquet fit for a duchess; she insisted that you
had sent it to her from where you were, and I had all the trouble in
the world to make her understand that double camellias are not gathered
among the glaciers of Roseg. Strew with flowers, if you will, Mlle.
Galet’s existence and garret; but do not fling at her head a bushel
of double camellias, streaked with white; it is madness. I seriously
propose to have you put under restraint. Never mind, I am very happy
to see you again. You are looking very well.--Don’t you think, Camille,
that she appears extremely well?”

Mlle. Moriaz coldly received Mme. de Lorcy’s embraces; but she smiled
graciously on M. Langis, and pressed his hand affectionately. Mme.
de Lorcy led them into her _salon_, where they talked on indifferent
subjects. Antoinette was waiting for M. Langis’s departure to broach the
subject that she had at heart. At the end of twenty minutes, he rose,
but immediately reseated himself. A door had just opened, giving
admittance to Count Abel Larinski.

At the unexpected apparition of Samuel Brohl, the two women changed
colour; the one flushed from the effort that she made to dissimulate her
vexation, the other turned pale from emotion. Samuel Brohl crossed the
_salon_ with deliberate step, without appearing to recognise the person
who was with Mme. de Lorcy. Suddenly he trembled, as if he had been
touched by a torpedo, and, profoundly agitated, almost lost countenance.
Was he as much astonished as he seemed? For some time the Sannois Hill
had become his favourite promenade, and he never went there without
going as far as a certain spot whence he could see the front of a
certain house, the window-shutters of which had remained during two
months as though hermetically sealed. It might be that the evening
before he had found them open. Induction is a scientific process with
which Samuel Brohls are familiar.

He had abundant will and self-control. He was not long in recovering
himself; he raised his head like one who feels himself strong enough to
defy all dangers. After greeting Mme. de Lorcy, he drew near Antoinette,
and asked how she was, in a grave, almost ceremonious tone.

“Your visit distresses me, my dear count,” said Mme. de Lorcy to him; “I
fear it is the last. Have you come to bid us farewell?”

“Alas! yes, madame,” he replied. “The letter for which I have been
waiting has not yet arrived; but this delay will not alter my plans: in
three days I shall leave Paris.”

“Without a desire to return, without regret?” she asked.

“I shall only regret Maisons, and the kind reception I have received
there. Paris is too large; little people like myself feel their
smallness more here than elsewhere; it does not require an excess of
pride for one to dislike being reduced to the state of an atom. Residing
in Vienna suits me better; I breathe freer there; it is a city better
adapted to my size and taste. Birds do wrong to change their nests.”

Thereupon, he began to describe and warmly extol the Prater and its fine
walks, Schonbrunn, its botanical gardens and the Gloriette, the church
of St. Stephen’s, and the limpid waters of the Danube; sometimes
addressing himself to Antoinette, who listened without a word, and
sometimes to Mme. de Lorcy, whose eyes were turned at intervals towards
M. Langis, seeming to say to him: “Was I not right? Confess that your
apprehensions lacked common-sense. Do you hear him? he has only half
an hour to spend with her, and he describes the Prater. Are you still
thinking of cutting his throat? Please say one polite and civil word
to him. It is not he, it is you who are gloomy. Throw off your sinister
air. How long will this taciturn reverie last in which you are sunk?
You make yourself a laughing-stock--you act like a fool. You resemble
a sphinx of the desert engaged in meditating upon a serpent, and who
mistakes an innocent adder for a viper.” M. Langis understood what she
wished to say to him, but he did not throw off his sinister air.

After praising Vienna and its environs, Samuel Brohl eulogized the easy,
careless character of the Viennese. He told, in a sprightly way, several
anecdotes. His gaiety was rather feverish--somewhat forced studied, and
abrupt; but, nevertheless, it was gaiety. Mme. de Lorcy responded to
him, Mlle. Moriaz continued silent; she crumpled between her fingers
the guipure lace of her Marie-Antoinette fichu, and, with fixed eye, she
seemed to be counting the stitches. Samuel Brohl interrupted himself
in the midst of a sentence, and rose suddenly. He turned towards
Antoinette; in a hollow voice he begged her to tell M. Moriaz how much
he regretted that his early departure would deprive him of the honour
and pleasure of visiting him at Cormeilles; then he bowed to Mme. de
Lorcy, thanked her for the happy moments that he had spent with her, and
charged her to commend him to the kind remembrance of Abbe Miollens.

“We shall meet again, my dear count,” she said to him, in a clear voice,
emphasizing her words; “and I hope that, before long, we shall make the
acquaintance of the Countess Larinski.”

He looked at her in astonishment, and murmured, “I lost my mother ten
years ago.”

Immediately, without giving Mme. de Lorcy time to explain herself, he
directed his steps hastily towards the door, followed by three glances,
all three of which spoke, although they did not all say the same thing.
The room was large; during the thirty seconds that it took him to cross
it, the angel of silence hovered in the air.

He was about passing through the door, when, as fatality ordained, there
occurred to him an unfortunate and disastrous thought. He could not
resist the desire to see Mlle. Moriaz once more, to impress forever
on his memory her adored image. He turned, and their eyes met. He paid
dearly for this weakness of the will. Apparently the violent restraint
that he had exercised over himself for an hour had exhausted his
strength. It seemed to him that his heart ceased to beat; he felt his
legs stiffen, and refuse to serve him; his teeth clinched, his pupils
dilated, consciousness forsook him. Suddenly, heavily as a mass of
lead, he fell prone upon the floor, where he remained in a senseless
condition.

Mlle. Moriaz could not suppress a cry, and seemed for a moment on the
point of fainting herself. Mme. de Lorcy drew her arm around her waist,
and hurried her into the next room, throwing to M. Langis a bottle of
salts as she did so, and saying, “Take care of Count Larinski.”

The first thing that M. Langis did was to set the bottle on the
table, after which he went close up to Samuel Brohl, who, fainting
and inanimate, bore almost the appearance of death. He examined him
an instant, bent over him, then, folding his arms and shrugging his
shoulders, he said to him, “Monsieur, Mlle. Moriaz is no longer here.”

Samuel Brohl did not stir. “You did not hear me,” continued Camille.
“You are superb, M. le Comte; you are very handsome; your attitude is
irreproachable, and you might well be taken for a dead person. You
fell admirably; I swear I never saw at the theatre a more successful
fainting-fit; but spare yourself further trouble for the performance. I
repeat, Mlle. Moriaz is no longer here.”

Samuel Brohl remained inert and rigid.

“Perhaps you want to try the strength of my wrists,” continued Camille.
“Very well, I will give you that satisfaction.”

And, with these words, he seized him round his waist, summoned all his
strength in order to lift him, and deposited him at full length on the
sofa.

He examined him again, and said: “Will this tragi-comedy last much
longer? Shall I not find a secret to resuscitate you? Listen to me,
monsieur. I love with all my soul the woman that you pretend to love.
Does that not suffice? Monsieur, you are a Polish adventurer, and I have
as much admiration for your social talents as I have little esteem for
yourself. Does that not suffice yet? I would not, however, lift my hand
to you. I entreat you to consider the affront received.”

It seemed as if the dead man trembled slightly, and Camille exclaimed:
“Thank God! this time you have given sign of life, and the insult found
the way to your heart. I would be charmed to restore you to your senses.
I await your commands. The day, the place, and the weapons, I leave to
your choice. And, stay! You can count on my absolute discretion. No one,
I give you my word, shall learn from me that your fainting-fit had ears,
and resented insults. Here is my address, monsieur.”

And, drawing from his pocket a visiting-card, he tried to slip it into
the cold, listless, pendent hand, which let it fall to the ground.

“What obstinacy!” he said. “As you will, M. le Comte; I am at the end of
my eloquence.”

He turned his back, seated himself in a chair, and taking a paper, he
unfolded it. Meanwhile the door opened, and Mme. de Lorcy appeared.

“What are you doing here, Camille?” she exclaimed.

“You see, madame,” he answered, “I am waiting until this great comedian
has finished playing his piece.”

He was not aware that Mlle. Moriaz also had just entered the _salon_.
She cast him an angry, indignant, threatening glance, in which he read
his condemnation. He tried to find some word of excuse or explanation to
disarm her anger, but his voice failed him. He bowed low, took his hat,
and went away.

Mme. de Lorcy, very much agitated, opened a window; then she threw water
into Samuel Brohl’s face, rubbed his temples with a vivacity that was
not altogether exempt from roughness, and made him smell English salts.

“Ah, my dear! pray go away,” she said to Antoinette; “this is no place
for you.”

Antoinette did not go away; her face contracted, her lips trembling, she
seated herself aside at some distance from the sofa.

Mme. de Lorcy’s energetic exertions at last produced their effect.
Samuel Brohl was not dead; a quiver ran through his frame, his limbs
relaxed, and at the end of a few instants he reopened his eyes, then his
mouth; he sat up, and stammered: “Where am I? What has happened? Ah, my
God! it was but a moment ago that she was here!”

Mme. de Lorcy laid her hand on his mouth, and, bending over his ears,
she said, in a severe, imperious tone, “She is here still!”

She did not succeed in making herself understood. One only recovers by
degrees from such a fainting-fit. Samuel Brohl was again overcome by
weakness; his eyes closed once more, and he let his head sink between
his hands. After a silence of a few moments he said, in a choked voice:
“Ah! pardon me, madame. I am ashamed of myself. My courage failed me; my
strength betrayed me. I love her madly, and I had sworn never to see her
again. It was in order to fly from her that I was going away.”

He raised his head; he saw Antoinette; he looked wildly at her, as
though he did not recognise her.

He recognised her at last, made a gesture of alarm, rose precipitately,
and fled.

Mlle. Moriaz drew near Mme. de Lorcy, and said to her, “Well, what do
you think of it?”

“I think, my dear,” she replied, “that Mme. de Lorcy is a fool, and that
Count Larinski is a powerful man.”

Antoinette looked at her with a bitter smile, and touched her arm
lightly. “Admit, madame,” she said, “that if he had a hundred thousand
livres’ income, you would not think of doubting his sincerity.”

Mme. de Lorcy did not reply; she could not say “No,” and she was enraged
to feel that she was both right and wrong. It is an accident that
happens sometimes to women of the world.



CHAPTER VII

On her entering her coupe to return to Cormeilles, Mlle. Moriaz was the
prey of an agitation that did not calm down during the entire drive. Her
whole soul was stirred by a tender, passionate sentiment for the man who
had swooned away in taking farewell of her; she was filled with anger
against the foolish prejudices and the petty finesse of the people of
the world; filled with joy at having baffled a monstrous conspiracy
against her happiness; filled with pride because she had seen clearly,
because she had not mistaken in her choice, and because the man whom she
loved was worthy of being loved. During several days she had suffered
cruelly from anxiety, from actual agony of mind, and over and over
again she had said to herself, “Perhaps they are right.” A woman’s heart
believes itself to be at the mercy of error, and it is torture to it
to be obliged to doubt itself and its own clairvoyance. When it is
unmistakably demonstrated to it that its god is only an idol of wood
or of stone, that what was once adored must henceforth be despised, it
feels ready to die, and imagines that some spring must give way in the
vast machine of the universe, that the sky must fall, the earth crumble
away; and yet a woman’s error of judgment is not a matter of such very
grave import. The sun continues to shine, the earth to revolve upon its
axis, as though it had not occurred. The machine of the universe would
be subject to quite too many accidents should it become unsettled every
time a woman made a mistake.

“It was I who was right; they were incapable of comprehending him,”
 though Mlle. Moriaz, as she crossed the Seine, and she contemplated with
a delighted eye the lovely blue sky, the tranquil waters, the verdant
banks of the river, with their long range of poplar-trees. It seemed
to her that all was going well, that order reigned everywhere, that the
Great Mechanician was at his post, that the world was in good hands, and
that travellers therein had no cause to fear untoward mischance.

When she arrived at Cormeilles, M. Moriaz was shut up in his laboratory,
which he had been overjoyed to find just as he had left it. A velvet
skull-cap perched on one side of his head, his sleeves turned up, a
brown holland apron tied round his neck and his waist, a feather brush
in his hand, he had proceeded at once to examine his precious stock in
detail--his furnaces, his long-necked, big-bellied matrasses, the curved
necks and the tubulures of his retorts, his cucurbits, and his alembics.
Balloons, tubes, pipettes, pneumatic vats, receivers, cupels, lamps,
bell-glasses, blow-pipes, and mortars, he passed in review to assure
himself that during his absence nothing had been damaged. He carefully
dusted his jars, examined the labels, made sure that none of his
treasures were cracked, that his gauges were not out of order. He was as
happy as a king who has his troops pass in review before him, and feels
convinced that they bear themselves well; that they will stand fire and
do honour to their master.

Agreeable as was the occupation to which for two hours he had devoted
himself, M. Moriaz had not forgotten the existence of his daughter and
of M. Larinski. He knew that Antoinette had repaired to Maisons Lafitte
to have an explanation with Mme. de Lorcy, and this thought cast a
shadow over his felicity. He hoped, however, that this interview might
turn out according to his wishes; that the Pole star, which had caused
him so much disquietude, might disappear forever from his horizon.

Some one knocked at the door of his laboratory. “Come in!” he cried, and
turning he saw Antoinette standing upon the threshold. He gazed at
her fixedly. Her eye was so animated, her countenance so beaming, so
luminous, that involuntarily he dropped his arms and let fall, as he did
so, a little vial he held in his hands.

“Naughty girl, to cause such havoc in her father’s laboratory!” she
cried, gaily.

“The harm done is not very great,” he replied; and he began diligently
brushing up the fragments of the vial. It was his way of gaining time,
but he did it so awkwardly that she snatched the brush from his hands:
“This is the way to sweep,” said she.

He watched her, saying to himself: “This is the reverse of the scene at
Churwalden. It is now I who wear a long face, and she cannot dissemble
her joy. Just requital of things here below.”

So soon as she had finished her brushing she looked around and remarked:
“Well, here you are once more in your paradise--this enchanted spot,
where you taste such ineffable delights.”

“Oh, yes, I am happy here--happy enough that is,” he replied, with
modesty.

“Fastidious creature! It is altogether charming in your laboratory.”

“Yes, it is suitable. Nevertheless, I often reflect that there is
something wanting. Do you know what my dream is? I should like to
have over in yonder corner a transparent _chapelle_. You, perhaps, are
unacquainted with a _chapelle_. It is a framework or basket-funnel above
a chimney, for facilitating the release of volatiles and pernicious
vapours, and having one side of glass. It enables the chemist to watch
the process taking place within. German chemists have nearly always
transparent _chapelles_ in their laboratories.”

“How can any one accuse you of lack of imagination?” she exclaimed. “You
are a very romantic man, and your romance is a transparent _chapelle_.
Now I know why you are so indulgent to the romances of others.”

Then carelessly drawing the brush in her hand over an arm-chair, she
seated herself in it, placed another seat facing her, and said: “Come,
sit down here near me on this stool; I will put a cushion on it to make
you more comfortable. Come, I must talk with you.”

He drew near, seated himself, and put his ear towards her. “Must I take
off my apron?” he asked.

“Why so?”

“I foresee that our conversation will revolve about matters pertaining
to the height of romance. I wish to make a suitable appearance.”

“Nonsense! your apron is very becoming. All that I desire and stipulate
is, that you will accord me most religious attention.”

She then proceeded to recount to him, point by point, all that had
occurred at Mme. de Lorcy’s. She began her recital in a tranquil tone;
she grew animated; she warmed up by degrees; her eyes sparkled. He
listened to her with deep chagrin; but he gazed on her with pride as he
did so, thinking, “_Mon Dieu_, how beautiful she is, and what a lucky
rascal is this Pole!”

When she had ended, there was a moment’s pause, during which she left
him to his reflections. As he maintained an ominous silence, she grew
impatient. “Speak,” she exclaimed. “I wish to know your innermost
thoughts.”

“I think you are adorable.”

“Oh! please, do for once be serious.”

“Seriously,” he rejoined, “I am not certain that you are wrong, nor has
it been proved to me that you are right; there remain some doubts.”

She cried out eagerly: “According to this, the sole realities of this
world are things that can be seen, touched, felt--a retort and its
contents. Beyond this all is null and void, a lie, a cheat. Ah! your
wretched retorts and crucibles! If I followed out this thought, I should
be ready to break every one of them.”

She cast about her as she spoke so ferocious and threatening a
look, that M. Moriaz trembled for his laboratory, “I beg of you,” he
protested, “have mercy on my poor crucibles, my honest retorts, my
innocent jars! They have nothing to do with this affair. Is it their
fault that the stories you narrate to me so disturb my usual train of
thoughts that I find it wholly impossible to make adroit replies?”

“You do not, then, believe in the extraordinary?”

“The extraordinary! Every time I encounter it, I salute it,” replied he,
drawing off his cap and bowing low; “but at the same time I demand its
papers.”

“Ah! there we are. I really imagined that the investigation had been
made.”

“It was not conclusive, since it failed to convince Mme. de Lorcy.”

“Ah! who could convince Mme. de Lorcy? Do you forget how people of the
world are constituted, and how they detest all that astonishes, all
that exceeds their limits, all that they cannot weight with their small
balances, measure with their tiny compasses?”

“_Peste!_ you are severe on the world; I always fancied that you were
fond of it.”

“I do not know whether I am fond of it or not; it is certain that
I scarcely should know how to live without it; but I surely may be
permitted to pass an opinion on it, and I often tell myself that
if Christ should reappear among us with his train of publicans and
fisherman--are you listening?--that if the meek and the lowly Jesus
should come to preach his Sermon on the Mount in the Boulevard des
Italiens--”

“To make a show of probability,” he interrupted, “suppose you were
to place the scene at Montmartre. Frankly, I cannot see what possible
connection there can be between the Christ and your Count Larinski; and,
pray, do not let us enter into a theological discussion; you know it is
wholly out of my line. Religion seems to me an excellent thing, a most
useful thing, and I freely accept Christianity, minus the romantic side,
with which I have no time to occupy myself. You will at least grant
me that, if there are true miracles, there are also false ones. How
distinguish them?”

“It is the heart that must decide,” said she.

“Oh! the infallibility of the heart!” exclaimed he. “There never was
council yet that voted that.”

There was a pause, after which M. Moriaz resumed: “And so, my dear, you
are persuaded that M. Larinski is still free, and that Mme. de Lorcy
lied?”

“Not at all; if she had lied, she would not have betrayed herself so
naively just now. I accuse her of deceiving herself, or rather of having
wished to deceive herself. Do you know what you are going to do--I mean
this evening--after dinner? You are going to order up the carriage, and
you are going--”

“To Paris, Rue Mont-Thabor!” he exclaimed, bounding up in his seat.
“Very good, I will put on a dress-coat, and I will say to Count
Larinski: ‘My dear monsieur, I come to demand your hand for my daughter,
who adores you. Certain malicious tongues assert that you are no longer
free; I do not believe them; besides, this would be a mere bagatelle.’
On the whole, I believe you would do better to put it down in writing
for me; left to myself I never will get through with it; out of my
professor’s chair I have considerable difficulty in finding words!”

“Dear me, how hasty you are! Who suggests such a thing? Abbe Miollens is
our friend; he is a worthy man, whose testimony would be reliable.”

“Now this is something like! I see what you mean. At this rate you will
not need to prepare my harangue. Here we have an acceptable idea, a
possible interview. This evening, after my dinner, I shall go see Abbe
Miollens; but it is clearly understood, I presume, that if he confirms
the sentence--”

“I shall not ask for its repeal, and I promise you that I will be
courageous beyond anything that you can imagine; you shall not so much
as suspect that I even regret my chimera. But, as a fair exchange, you
on your side must make me a promise. If Abbe Miollens--”

“You know as well as I that you are of age.”

“I know as well as you that I never will be content without your
consent. Here once more as in the Engadine, I say, ‘Either he or no
one.’”

“Did I not warn you that when once a formula has been pronounced, one is
apt to keep on repeating it forever?”

“Either he or no one: that is my last word. Would you not rather that it
should be he? Are you willing to accept him?”

“I will submit.”

“With a good grace?”

“With resignation.”

“With cheerful resignation?”

“I shall certainly do my best to acquire it; or, rather, if he makes
you happy, I shall welcome him all the days of my life; in the contrary
case, I will repeat, morning and evening, like Mme. de Lorcy: ‘You would
not listen to me; you ought to have believed me.’”

“It is agreed; you are a good father, and now we are in perfect
harmony,” she replied, impulsively seizing his two hands, and pressing
them in her own.

He watched her a moment between his half-closed eyes, and then he cried,
half resentfully:

“But, _mon Dieu_ why do you love this man?”

She replied, in a low voice: “Because I love him; this is my sole
reason; but I find it good.”

“Certainly most decisive. But, come, let us go quickly,” he replied,
rising. “I fear that my retorts and crucibles, if they listen to
you much longer, will fall into a syncope as prolonged as that of M.
Larinski. Was ever such a debate heard of in a chemical laboratory?”

As soon as dinner was over, M. Moriaz made ready to repair to Maisons,
where Abbe Miollens passed the summer in the vicinity of Mme. de Lorcy.
Mlle. Moiseney followed him to the carriage, and said:

“You have a remarkable daughter, monsieur! With what courage she has
assumed her role! With what resolution she has renounced an impossible
happiness! Did you observe her during dinner? How tranquil she was! how
attentive! Is she not astonishing?”

“As astonishing as you are sagacious,” he replied.

“Ah! undoubtedly; I never thought that she loved him so much as you
imagine I did: but he pleased her; she admired him. Did she ever utter a
word of complaint, or a sigh, on learning the cruel truth? what strength
of mind! what equability of temperament! what nobility of sentiment! You
do not admire her enough, monsieur; you are not proud enough of having
such a daughter. As to me, I glory in having been of some value in her
education. I always made a point of developing her judgment, and putting
her on her guard against all erratic tendencies. Yes, I can safely say
that I took great pains to cultivate and fortify her reason.”

“I thank you with all my heart,” rejoined M. Moriaz, leaning back in
one corner of the carriage; “you can most assuredly boast of having
accomplished a marvellous work; but I beg of you, mademoiselle, when you
have finished your discourse, will you kindly say to the coachman that I
am ready to start?”

During the drive, M. Moriaz gave himself up to the most melancholy
reflections; he even tormented himself with sundry reproaches. “We have
acted contrary to good sense,” he thought. “Her imagination has been
taken by storm; in time it would have calmed down. We should have left
her to herself, to her natural defence--her own good judgment, for she
has a large stock of it. I fell on the unlucky idea of calling Mme.
de Lorcy to my aid, and she has spoiled everything by her boasted
_finesse_. As soon as Antoinette had reason to suspect that her choice
was condemned by us, and that we were plotting the enemy’s destruction,
the sympathy, mingled with admiration, which she accorded to M.
Larinski, became transformed into love; the fire smouldering beneath
ashes leaped up into flames. We neglected to count on that passion which
is innate in women, and which phrenologists call combativeness. With her
there is now a cause to be gained, and, when love unites its interests
with cards or with war, it becomes irresistible. Truly our campaign is
greatly jeopardized, unless Heaven or M. Larinski interfere.”

Thus reasoned M. Moriaz, whom paternal misadventures and recent
experiences had rendered a better psychologist than he ever had been.
While busied with his reflections the carriage drove rapidly onward, and
thirty-five minutes sufficed to reach the little _maison de campagne_
occupied by Abbe Miollens. He found him in his cabinet, installed in a
cushioned arm-chair embroidered by Mme. de Lorcy, slowly sipping a cup
of excellent tea brought him by the missionaries from China. On his left
was his violin-box, on his right his beloved Horace, Orelli’s edition,
Zurich, 1844.

Conversation began. As soon as M. Moriaz had pronounced the name of
Count Larinski, the abbe assumed the charmed and contented countenance
of a dog lying in wait for its favourite game.

He exclaimed, “A most truly admirable man!”

“Mercy upon us!” thought M. Moriaz. “Here we have an exordium strangely
similar to that of Mlle. Moiseney. Do they think to condemn me to a
state of perpetual admiration of their prodigy? I fear there must
be some kinship of spirit between our friend the abbe and that
crack-brained woman; that he is cousin-german to her at least.”

“How grateful I am to you, my dear monsieur,” continued Abbe Miollens,
lying back in his chair, “for having given us the pleasure of the
acquaintance of this rare man! It is you who sent him to us; to you
belongs the merit of having discovered him, or invented him, if you
choose.”

“Oh! I beg of you not to exaggerate,” humbly rejoined M. Moriaz. “He
invented himself, I assure you.”

“At all events it was you who patronized him, who made him known to us;
without you the world never would have suspected the existence of this
superb genius, this noble character, who was hidden from sight like the
violet in the grass.”

“He is unquestionably her cousin-german,” thought M. Moriaz.

“Only think,” continued the abbe, “I have found M. Larinski all over
again in Horace! Yes, Horace has represented him, trait for trait, in
the person of Lollius. You know Marcus Lollius, to whom he addressed Ode
ix. of book iv., and who was consul in the year 733 after the foundation
of Rome. The resemblance is striking; pay attention!”

Depositing his cup on the table he took the book in his right hand, and
placing the forefinger of his left by turns on his lips or complacently
following with it the lines of especial beauty in the text, he
exclaimed: “Now what do you say to this? ‘Thy soul is wise,’ wrote
Horace to Lollius, ‘and resists with the same constancy the temptations
of happiness as those of adversity--_est animus tibi et secundis
temporibus dubusque rectus_.’ Is not this Count Larinski? Listen
further: ‘Lollius detested fraud and cupidity; he despised money which
seduces most men--_abstinens ducentis ad se cuncta pecuniae_.’ This
trait is very striking; I find even, between ourselves, that our dear
count despises money entirely too much, he turns from it in horror, its
very name is odious to him; he is an Epictetus, he is a Diogenes, he is
an anchorite of ancient times who would live happily in a Thebaid. He
told us himself that it made little difference to him whether he dined
on a piece of bread and a glass of water, or in luxury at the Café
Anglais. But I have not finished. ‘Happy be those,’ exclaimed Horace,
‘who know how to suffer uncomplainingly the hardships of poverty--_qui
duram que callet pauperiem pati_!’ Of whom does he speak--of Lollius,
or of our friend, who not only endures his poverty but who loves it,
cherishes it as a lover adores his mistress? And the final trait,
what to you think of it? Lollius was always ready to die for his
country--‘_non ille pro patria timidus perire_.’ In good faith, is it
not curious? Does it not seem as though Horace had known Count Larinski
at Rome or at Tibur?”

“I do not doubt it for an instant,” replied M. Moriaz, taking the book
from the hands of Abbe Miollens and placing it respectfully on the
table. “Luckily, our friend Larinski, as you call him, fell upon the
excellent idea of resuscitating himself some thirty years ago, which
procured for us the great joy of meeting him at Saint Moritz; and while
we are on the subject--My dear abbe, have you a free, impartial mind?
Can you listen to me? I have a question to propound, an elucidation to
demand. It is not only the friend to whom I address myself, it is the
confessor, the director of consciences, the man of the whole universe in
whose discretion I place most reliance.”

“I am all ears,” responded the abbe, crossing the shapely legs in which
he took no little pride.

M. Moriaz entered at once into the subject that troubled him. It was
some moments before Abbe Miollens divined whither he was tending.
As soon as he had grasped a ray of light, his face contracted, and
uncrossing his limbs, he cried: “Ah, what a misfortune! You will have
to renounce your delightful dream, my dear Monsieur, and, believe me,
no one can be more grieved than I. I fully comprehend with what joy you
would have seen your charming daughter consecrate, I will not say her
fortune, for you know as well as I how little Count Larinski would care
for that, but consecrate, I say, her graces, her beauty, and all the
qualities of her angelic character to the happiness of a man of rare
merit who has been cruelly scourged by Providence. She loves him, she
is loved by him; Heaven would have blest their union. Ah, what a
misfortune! I must repeat it, this marriage is impossible; our friend is
already married.”

“You are sure of it?” cried M. Moriaz, in a burst of enthusiasm that the
good abbe mistook for an access of despair.

“I scarcely can pardon myself for causing you this pain. You ask if I am
sure of it! I have it from our friend himself. One evening, apropos of I
scarcely remember what, it occurred to me to ask if he were married,
and he replied, briefly: ‘I thought I had told you so.’ Ah! my dear
professor, it were needless to discuss whether such a marriage would be
a happy one, for it never can take place.”

“Well, now we have something positive,” M. Moriaz hastened to observe,
“and there is nothing to do but yield to evidence.”

“Alas! yes,” rejoined the abbe; and, then, after a pause, during which
he wore a reflective air, he added, “However--”

“There is no ‘however,’ M. l’Abbe. Believe me, your word suffices.”

“But I might possibly have misunderstood.”

“I have entire confidence in your ears--they are excellent.”

“But pray allow me to observe that it is never worth while to despair
too soon. Do you know what? Count Larinski came recently to see me
without finding me at home. I owe him a farewell visit. To-morrow
morning, I promise you, I will call on him.”

“For what purpose?” interrupted M. Moriaz. “I thank you a thousand
times for your kindly intentions, but God forbid that I should uselessly
interfere with your daily pursuits; your time is too precious! I declare
myself completely edified. I consider the proof firmly established;
there is no further doubt.”

As Madame de Lorcy had remarked, Abbe Miollens was not one to easily
relax his hold upon an idea he had once deemed good. In vain M. Moriaz
combated his proposition, bestowing secret maledictions on his excess
of zeal; the abbe would not give up, and M. Moriaz was forced to be
resigned. It was agreed that the next day the worthy man should call on
Count Larinski, and that from Paris he should repair to Cormeilles, in
order to communicate to the proper person the result of his mission.
M. Moriaz perceived the advantage of having Antoinette learn from the
abbe’s own lips the fatal truth; and he did not leave without impressing
upon him to be very circumspect, as prudent as a serpent, as discreet
as a father confessor. He started for home with quite a contented mind,
seeing the future lie smoothly and pleasantly before him, and it really
seemed to him that the drive from Maisons to Cormeilles was a much
shorter and more agreeable one than that from Cormeilles to Maisons.

Samuel Brohl was seated before an empty trunk, which he was apparently
about to pack, when he heard some one knock at his door. He went to open
it and found himself face to face with Abbe Miollens. From the moment of
their first meeting, Samuel Brohl had conceived for the abbe that warm
sympathy, that strong liking, with which he was always inspired by
people in whom he believed he recognised useful animals who might be
of advantage to him, whom he considered destined to render him some
essential service. He seldom mistook; he was a admirable diagnostician;
he recognised at first sight the divine impress of predestination. He
gave the most cordial reception to his reverend friend, and ushered him
into his modest quarters with all the more _empressement_, because he
detected at once the mysterious, rather agitated air he wore. “Does he
come in the quality of a diplomatic agent, charged with some mission
extraordinary?” he asked himself. On his side the abbe studied Samuel
Brohl without seeming to do so. He was struck with his physiognomy,
which expressed at this moment a manly yet sorrowful pride. His eyes
betrayed at intervals the secret of some heroic grief that he had sworn
to repress before men, and to confess to God alone.

He sat down with his guest, and they began to talk; but the abbe
directed the conversation into topics of the greatest indifference.
Samuel Brohl listened to him and replied with a melancholy grace. Lively
as was his curiosity he well knew how to hold it in check. Samuel Brohl
never had been in a hurry; during the month that had elapsed he had
proved that he knew how to wait--a faculty lacking in more diplomates
than one.

Abbe Miollens’s call had lasted during the usual time allotted to a
polite visit, and the worthy man seemed about to depart, when, pointing
with his forefinger to the open valise, he remarked: “I see here
preparations that grieve me. I did dream, my dear count, of inviting
you to Maisons. I have a spare chamber there which I might offer to you.
_Hoc erat in votis_, I should indeed have been happy to have had you for
a guest. We should have chatted and made music to our hearts’ content,
close by a window opening on a garden. ‘Hae latebrae dulces, etiam, si
credis, amoenae.’ But, alas! you are going to leave us; you do not
care for the friendship accorded you here. Has Vienna such superior
attractions for you? But I remember, you will doubtless be restored
there to a pleasant home, a charming wife, children perhaps who----”

Samuel looked at him with an astonished, confused air, as he had
viewed Mme. de Lorcy when she undertook to speak to him of the Countess
Larinski. “What do you mean?” he finally asked.

“Why, did you not confide to me yourself that you were married?”

Samuel opened wide his eyes; during some moments he seemed to be in
a dream; then, suddenly putting his hand to his brow and beginning to
smile, he said: “Ah! I see--I see. Did you take me literally? I thought
you understood what I said. No, my dear abbe, I am not married, and I
never shall marry; but there are free unions as sacred, as indissoluble
as marriage.”

The abbe knit his brows, his countenance assumed an expression of
chagrin and disapproval. He was about delivering to his dear count a
sermon on the immorality and positive danger of free unions, but
Samuel Brohl gave him no time. “I am not going to Vienna to rejoin
my mistress,” he interposed. “She never leaves me, she accompanies me
everywhere; she is here.”

Abbe Miollens cast about him a startled, bewildered gaze, expecting to
see a woman start out of some closet or come forward from behind some
curtain.

“I tell you that she is here,” repeated Samuel Brohl, pointing to an
alabaster statuette, posed on a _piedouche_. The statuette represented a
woman bound tightly, on whom two Cossacks were inflicting the knout; the
socle bore the inscription, “Polonia vincta et flagellata.”

The abbe’s countenance became transformed in the twinkling of an eye,
the wrinkles smoothed away from his brow, his mouth relaxed, a joyous
light shone in his eyes. “How well it is that I came!” thought he. “And
under what obligations M. Moriaz will be to me!”

Turning towards Samuel he exclaimed:

“I am simply a fool; I imagined--Ah! I comprehend, your mistress is
Poland; this is delightful, and it is truly a union that is as sacred
as marriage. It has, besides, this advantage--that it interferes with
nothing else. Poland is not jealous, and if, peradventure, you should
meet a woman worthy of you whom you would like to marry, your mistress
would have nothing to say against it. To speak accurately, however,
she is not your mistress; one’s country is one’s mother, and reasonable
mothers never prevent their sons from marrying.”

It was now Samuel’s turn to assume a stern and sombre countenance. His
eye fixed upon the statuette, he replied:

“You deceive yourself, M. l’Abbe, I belong to her, I have no longer the
right to dispose of either my heart, or my soul, or my life; she will
have my every thought and my last drop of blood. I am bound to her by my
vows quite as much, I think, as is the monk by his.”

“Excuse me, my dear count,” said the abbe; “this is fanaticism, or
I greatly mistake. Since when have patriots come to take the vow of
celibacy? Their first duty is to become the fathers of children who will
become good citizens. The day when there will cease to be Poles, there
will cease also to be a Poland.”

Samuel Brohl interrupted him, pressing his arm earnestly, and saying:

“Look at me well; have I not the appearance of an adventurer?” The abbe
recoiled. “This word shocks you?” continued Samuel. “Yes, I am a man of
adventures, born to be always on my feet, and ready to start off at a
moment’s warning. Marriage was not instituted for those whose lives are
liable at any time to be in jeopardy.” With a tragic accent, he added:
“You know what occurred in Bosnia. How do we know that war may not very
shortly be proclaimed, and who can foresee the consequences? I must hold
myself in readiness for the great day. Perhaps an inscrutable Providence
may ere long offer me a new occasion to risk my life for my country;
perhaps Poland will call me, crying, ‘Come, I have need of thee!’ If I
should respond: ‘I belong no more to myself, I have given my heart to
a woman who holds me in chains; I have henceforth a roof, a family, a
hearthstone, dear ties that I dare not break!’ I ask you, M. l’Abbe,
would not Poland have a right to say to me, ‘Thou hast violated thy vow;
thou hast denied me; upon thy head rest forever my maledictions?’”

Abbe Miollens had just taken a pinch of snuff, and he hearkened to this
harangue, tapping his fingers impatiently on the lid of his handsome
gold snuff-box, which had been presented to him by the most amiable of
his penitents.

“If this be the way you view it,” replied he, “is your conscience quite
tranquil, my dear friend? for you will permit me, I trust, to call you
so. Ay, is it sure that from your standpoint your conscience has no
accusations to make you? Is it certain that your heart has not been
unfaithful to its mistress? If I may believe a certain rumour that has
reached my ear, there took place a most singular scene yesterday at the
house of Mme. de Lorcy.”

Samuel Brohl trembled violently; he changed colour; he buried his face
in his hands, doubtless to hide from the abbe the blushes remorse had
caused to mantle his cheeks. In a faint voice he murmured:

“Not a word more! you know not how deep a wound you have probed.”

“It is, then, true that you love Mlle. Antoinette Moriaz?” asked the
abbe.

“I have sworn that she never shall know it,” replied Samuel, in accents
of the most humble contrition. “Yesterday I had the unworthy weakness to
betray myself. _Mon Dieu!_ what must she have thought of me?”

As he spoke thus, his face buried in his hands, he slightly moved apart
his fingers, and fixed upon the abbe two glittering eyes that, like
cats’ eyes, were capable of seeing clearly in the dark.

“What she thinks of you!” echoed the abbe, taking a fresh pinch of
snuff. “Bah! my dear count, women never are angry when a man swoons
away because of their bright eyes, especially when this man is a noble
chevalier, a true knight of the Round Table. I have reason to believe
that Mlle. Moriaz did not take your accident unkindly. Shall I tell
you my whole thought? I should not be surprised if you had touched her
heart, and that, if you take the pains, you may flatter yourself with
the hope of one day being loved by her.”

At this moment the voice of his worthy friend appeared to Samuel Brohl
the most harmonious of all music. He felt a delicious thrill quiver
through his frame. The abbe was telling him nothing he had not known
before; but there are things of which we are certain, things that we
have told ourselves a hundred times, and yet that seem new when told us
for the first time by another.

“You are not misleading me?” ejaculated Samuel Brohl, overwhelmed with
joy, transported beyond himself. “Can it really be true!--One day I may
flatter myself--one day she may judge me worthy--Ah! what a glorious
vision you cause to pass before my eyes! How good and cruel together you
are to me! What bitterness is intermingled with the ineffable sweetness
of your words! No, I never could have believed that there could be so
much joy in anguish, so much anguish in joy.”

“What would you imply, my dear count?” interposed Abbe Miollens. “Have
you need of a negotiator? I can boast of having had some experience in
that line. I am wholly at your service.”

These words calmed Samuel Brohl. Quickly recovering himself, he coldly
rejoined:

“A negotiator? What occasion would I have for a negotiator? Do not
delude me with a chimera, and above all do not tempt me to sacrifice
my honour to it. This height of felicity that you offer to me I must
renounce forever; I have told you why.”

Abbe Miollens was at first inclined to be indignant; he even took the
liberty to rebuke, to expostulate with his noble friend. He endeavoured
to prove to him that his principles were too rigorous, that such a thing
is possible as exaggeration in virtue, too great refinement in delicacy
of conscience. He represented to him that noble souls should beware of
exaltation of sentiment. He cited the Gospels, he cited Bossuet, he
also cited his well-beloved Horace, who censored all that was ultra
or excessive, and recommended the sage to flee all extremities. His
reasoning was weak against the unwavering resolution of Samuel, who
resisted, with the firmness of a rock, all his remonstrances, and
finally ended these with the words:

“Peace, I implore you! Respect my folly, which is surely wisdom in the
eyes of God. I repeat it to you, I am no longer free, and, even if I
were, do you not know that there is between Mlle. Moriaz and myself an
insurmountable barrier?”

“And pray, what is that?” demanded the abbe.

“Her fortune and my pride,” said Samuel. “She is rich, I am poor; this
adorable being is not made for me. I told Mme. de Lorcy one day what
I thought of this kind of alliances, or, to speak more clearly, of
bargains. Yes, my revered friend, I love Mlle. Moriaz with an ardour of
passion with which I reproach myself as though it were a crime. Nothing
remains to me but to avoid seeing her, and I never will see her again.
Let me follow to its end my solitary and rugged path. One consolation
will accompany me: I can say that happiness has not been denied to me:
that it is my conscience, admonished from on high, which has refused to
accept it, and there is a divine sweetness in great trials religiously
accepted. Believe me, it is God who speaks to me, as he spoke to me of
old in San Francisco, to enjoin me to forsake everything and give my
blood for my country. I recognise his voice, which to-day bids my heart
be silent and immolate itself on the altar of its chosen cause. God and
Poland! Beyond this, my watch-word, I have no longer the right to yield
to anything.”

And, turning towards the statuette, he exclaimed: “It is at her feet
that I lay down my dolorous offering; she it is who will cure my bruised
and broken heart.”

Samuel Brohl spoke in a voice thrilling with emotion; the breath of the
Divine Spirit seemed to play through his hair, and make his eyes grow
humid. The eyes of the good abbe also grew moist: he was profoundly
moved; he gazed with veneration upon this hero; he was filled with
respect for this antique character, for this truly celestial soul. He
never had seen anything like it, either in the odes or in the epistles
of Horace. Lollius himself was surpassed. Transported with admiration,
he opened wide his arms to Samuel Brohl, spreading them out their full
length, as though otherwise they might fail to accomplish their object,
and, clasping him to his bosom, he cried:

“Ah! my dear count, how grand you are! You are immense as the world!”



CHAPTER VIII

Abbe Miollens hastened to repair to Cormeilles, where he gave a faithful
circumstantial account of his conference with Count Larinski. He was
still warm from the interview, and he gave free vent to the effusions of
his enthusiasm. He struck up a Canticle of Zion in honour of the antique
soul, the celestial soul, which had just been revealing to him all its
hidden treasures. M. Moriaz, both astonished and scandalized, observed,
dryly:

“You are right, this Pole is a prodigy; he should either be canonized or
hanged, I do not know which.”

Antoinette said not a word; she kept her reflections to herself. She
retired to her chamber, where she paced to and fro for some time,
uncertain regarding what she was about to do, or, rather more restless
than uncertain. Several times she approached her writing-table, and
gazed earnestly at her inkstand; then, seized with a sudden scruple, she
would move away. At last she formed a resolute decision, seized her pen,
and wrote the following lines:

“MONSIEUR: Before setting out for Vienna, will you be so good as to come
and pass some moments at Cormeilles? I desire to have a conversation
with you in the presence of my father.

“Accept, monsieur, I beg of you, the expression of my most profound
esteem.

“ANTOINETTE MORIAZ.”

The next morning she received by the first mail the response she
awaited, and which was thus fashioned:

“This test would be more than my courage could endure. I never shall see
you again, for, should I do so, I would be a lost man.”

This short response caused Mlle. Moriaz a disappointment full of
bitterness, and blended with no little wrath. She held in her hand a
pencil, which she deliberately snapped in two, apparently to console
herself for not having broken the proud and obstinate will of Count
Abel Larinski. And yet can one break iron or a diamond? The carrier
had brought her at the same time another letter, which she opened
mechanically, merely to satisfy her conscience. She ran through the
first lines without succeeding in comprehending a single word that she
read. Suddenly her attention became riveted, her face brightened up,
her eyes kindled. This letter, which a kind Providence had sent her as a
supreme resource in her distress, was from the hand of Mlle. Galet, and
here was what this retired florist of the Rue Mouffetard wrote:

“MA CHERE DEMOISELLE: I learn that you have returned. What happiness for
me! and how I long to see you! You are my good angel, whom I should
like to see every day of my life, and the time has seemed so long to me
without you. When you enter the garret of the poor, infirm old woman,
it seems to her as though there were three suns in the heavens; when you
abandon her, the blackness of midnight surrounds her. Mme. de Lorcy has
been very good to me. As my angel requested her, she came a fortnight
since to pay me the quarter due of my pension. She is a very charitable
lady, and she dresses beautifully; but she is a little hard on poor
people. She asks a great many questions; she wants to know everything.
She reproached me with spending too much, being too fond of luxury, and
you know how that is. She forgets that everything is higher priced than
it used to be, that meat and vegetables are exorbitant, and that just
now eggs cost one franc and fifty centimes a dozen. Besides, a poor
creature, deprived of the use of her limbs, as I am, cannot go to market
herself, and it is quite possible that my _femme de menage_ does not
purchase as wisely as she might. I know I have great scenes with her
sometimes for bringing me early vegetables; _le bon Dieu_ can, at least,
bear me witness that I am no glutton.

“The good Mme. de Lorcy scolded me about a bouquet of camellias she saw
on my table, just like those for which I have been grateful to my angel.
I don’t know what notions she got into her head about them. Ah!
well, _ma chere demoiselle_, I have learned since that these double
camellias--they are variegated, red and white--came to me from a man,
for, at present, as it would appear, men have taken to give me bouquets
and making me visits; it is rather late in the day. The particular man
to whom I refer presented himself one fine morning, and, telling me that
you had spoken to him of me, said that he wished to assure himself
that I was well and wanted nothing. He returned several times, always
pampering me with some attention or other. But the best of all was when
he came to tell me that my angel had returned. What a man he is! he has
surely dropped right down from the skies! One evening when I was sick he
gave me my medicine himself, and would have sat up with me all night
if I had been willing to let him. You must tell me who he is, for
it puzzles me greatly. He has the head of some grand lion; he is as
generous as he is handsome, but very sad. He must have some great sorrow
on his heart. The misfortune, so far as I am concerned, is that he
cannot spoil me much longer--it is almost over now. He expects to leave
here in two days; and he has announced to me that he will come to make
his adieus, to-morrow afternoon.

“You will come soon, won’t you, _ma chere demoiselle_? I burn with
impatience to embrace you, since you permit me to embrace you. You are
my angel and my sunshine, and I am your very humble and devoted servant,

“LOUISE GALET.”

This letter of Mlle. Louise Galet continued nothing definite, beyond,
perhaps, the passage relative to the early vegetables, and the
supposed scenes with her _chambriere_. Whatever may have been the good
demoiselle’s past record, she certainly was not void of principles, and
she prided herself on her truthfulness; only she did not always see
the necessity of telling everything she knew; in her narratives she
frequently omitted certain details. She had written at the instigation
of Samuel Brohl, who had not explained to her his motives. To be sure,
she had partially divined these, being shrewd and sly. He had commended
himself to her discretion, for which he had paid liberally. Mlle. Galet
had at first refused the round sum he had offered her; she had ended by
accepting it with tender gratitude. These little pampering attentions
make good friends.

An audacious idea suddenly came to Mlle. Moriaz; there was no time to
recoil from it. She ordered up her coupe. M. Moriaz had just gone out
to make a call in the neighbourhood. She determined to profit by his
absence, and besought Mlle. Moiseney to make ready in haste to accompany
her to Paris, where she had to confer with her dressmaker. Ten minutes
later she stepped into her carriage, having ordered her coachman to
drive like the wind.

Her dressmaker did not detain her long; from the Rue de la Paix she
ordered to be driven to No. 27 Rue Mouffetard. She never was in the
habit of permitting Mlle. Moiseney, who was very short of breath, to
climb with her to the fifth story, where Mlle. Galet lodged; upon this
occasion she indicated to her an express order to remain peaceably below
in the coupe to await her return.

She slowly mounted the stairs; on her way up she encountered a servant,
who informed her that Mlle. Galet was lying down taking a nap, being
somewhat indisposed, but that the key was in the door. The apartment of
which Mlle. Moriaz was in quest was composed of three rooms, a vestibule
serving as a kitchen, a tiny _salon_, and a bed-chamber. She paused a
few moments in the vestibule to regain her breath, to gather together
all her courage, to compose her mind; she had at once divined that there
was some one in the _salon_. She entered; Mlle. Galet was not there, but
he was there, the man whom she had come to seek. Apparently, he awaited
the awakening of the mistress of the place. In perceiving the woman whom
he had sworn never to see again, he trembled violently, and his eyes
sought some loophole of escape; there was none. Standing upon the
threshold, Antoinette barred the passage. She looked fixedly at him and
felt certain of her victory; he had the air of one vanquished, and his
defeat resembled a complete routing.

She crossed her arms, she smiled, and, in a firm, half-mocking tone,
said:

“So this is the way you rob me of my poor people! They flourish under
it, I am well aware. Confess now that there is a little hypocrisy in
your virtue. Mlle. Galet never for a moment doubted that these famous
camellias were given for my sake. Bouquets costing sixty francs!
absolute folly! How you despise money! Why, then, do you not despise
mine? You are afraid of it, you fear to burn your fingers by touching
it. You will not aid me to throw it out of the windows? Your poor and
mine will surely pick it up. Say, will you not? My fortune is not such a
great affair; but it is certain that I alone do not suffice to spend it
properly; there is plenty for two--for two would really only be one. You
cannot consent to share it with me? You are too proud--that is it. The
day before yesterday you were playing comedy; you do not love me. It
costs little to owe something to those we love.”

He made a gesture of despair and cried:

“I implore you, let me go!”

“Presently; I propose telling you first all that is in my mind. I do
not place much reliance on your boasted nobility of spirit; it is pride,
egotistical pride. Yes, your pride is your god--a pitiful sort of a god!
And as to Poland--” He winced at this word. After a pause, Antoinette
continued: “It is she herself who will give, or rather lend, you to me.
I solemnly promise that if ever she has need of you I will say to her,
‘Here he is, take him’; and to you, yourself, I will say, ‘She calls
you--go.’ But speak to me and look at me; you will not die of so doing.
Are you so very much afraid of me? Come, have courage to repeat to me
what you have said to others?”

He fell back into a chair, where he remained, his arms hanging
helplessly at his sides, his head drooping on his breast, and he
murmured:

“I knew well that if I saw you again I should be lost.”

“Say, rather, saved. Your mind was sick; I have cured you. I work
miracles; you once took the pains to write me so. Will you touch my
hand? That will not bind you to anything; you can return it to me if you
choose.”

He took the hand she extended to him; he did not carry it to his lips,
but he held it within his own.

“Listen to me,” she resumed. “To-day, this very hour, you will set out
for Cormeilles, and you will say to my father: ‘She has given me her
hand; it has seemed good to me to keep it; allow me to do so?’ Is it
agreed upon? Will you obey me?”

He exclaimed: “You are here, you speak to me, the world has disappeared;
henceforth I believe only in you!”

“Well done! You see when two people frankly discuss matters they soon
come to an understanding; but the main essential is to see each other.
Since you are so wise when you see me, I naturally desire to have
you see me always. There--take that!” And she handed him a medallion
containing her portrait; then she moved towards the door. On the
threshold she turned. “Please tell Mlle. Galet,” said she, “that I
respect her nap, and will return to-morrow. Mlle. Moiseney awaits me,
and must be growing impatient. I have your word of honour? Adieu, then,
until this evening. I must hasten away.”

And she did hasten, or, rather, she flew away.

Returning from as well as driving into Paris, the coachman put his
horses to full speed, and Cormeilles was reached before the soup was
cold. Nevertheless, M. Moriaz had had abundant time for anxiety. He did
not take his seat at table without first questioning Mlle. Moiseney;
knowing nothing, she could give him no information; but she responded
indefinitely to his queries with that air of mystery beneath which
it was her wont to disguise her ignorance. He resolved to question
Antoinette after dinner. She anticipated him, taking him aside and
recounting to him what had occurred.

“I presume,” said she, “that henceforth you will believe in his pride
and his disinterestedness. Did I not foretell you that I should have to
put myself on my knees to compel him to marry me?”

He could not repress a movement of indignation.

“Oh, reassure yourself!” she resumed; “that is only my way of speaking.
He was at my feet and I was standing.”

M. Moriaz opened his lips and closed them again three times without
speaking. He finally contented himself with a gesture, which signified,
“The die is cast, let come what must.”

Samuel Brohl religiously kept his word. After having made a most
faultless toilet, he repaired by the railway to Argenteuil, where he
took a carriage. He reached Cormeilles as the clock struck nine. He
was ushered into the _salon_, where M. Moriaz was reading his journal.
Samuel was pale, and his lips trembled with emotion. He greeted M.
Moriaz with profound respect, saying:

“I feel, monsieur, like a criminal. Be merciful, and refuse her to me.”

M. Moriaz replied: “The fact is, you come, monsieur, in the words of the
evangelist, ‘like a thief in the night’; but I have nothing to refuse
you. You are not the son-in-law I frankly avow, whom I should have
chosen. This matters not; my daughter belongs to herself, she is
mistress of her own actions, and I have no reason to believe that she
errs in her choice. You are a man of taste and of honour, and you know
the worth of what she has given you. If you render Antoinette happy, you
will find in me a warm friend. I have said all that is necessary; let us
suppose that you have replied to me, and talk of something else.”

Samuel Brohl considered the matter settled; he insisted no longer, and
entered at once upon another topic. He knew how to be agreeable and
dignified at the same time. He was as amiable and gracious as his lively
emotion would permit. M. Moriaz was obliged to confess to himself that
Count Larinski was as good company at Cormeilles as he had been at Saint
Moritz, and had no other fault than having taken it into his head to
become his son-in-law.

Their interview was a prolonged one. During this time Antoinette
had been promenading the walk in front of the house, inhaling the
jasmine-perfumed air, pouring out her heart to the night and to the
stars. Her happy reverie was troubled only by the presence of a bat,
flitting incessantly from one end of the terrace to the other, flapping
its wings about her head. The loathsome creature seemed to be
especially in quest of her, circling around and above her with obstinate
persistency, even venturing to graze her hair in passing; Antoinette
even fancied that she could distinguish its hideous face, with deep
pouches and long ears, and she moved away, quivering with disgust.

She heard a step on the gravel-walk. Samuel Brohl had taken leave of
M. Moriaz and was crossing the terrace to regain his carriage. He
recognised Antoinette, approached her and clasped on her wrist a
bracelet he held in his hand, saying as he did so: “What could I give
you that would equal in value the medallion you deigned to offer me and
that should never leave me? However, here is a trinket by which I set
great store. My mother loved it; she always refused to part with it,
even in the time of her greatest distress; she wore it on her arm when
she died.”

We are not all moulded alike; and there is no human clay in which are
not intermingled some spangles of gold. Intriguers as well as downright
knaves are often capable of experiencing moments of sincere and pure
sentiments; in certain encounters every human being rises superior to
him-or herself. The upper part of Mlle. Moriaz’s face was shaded by her
red hood, the lower part lit up by the moon, which was slowly rising
above the hills. Samuel Brohl contemplated her in silence; she seemed
to him as beautiful as a dream. During two entire minutes he forgot that
she had an income of a hundred thousand livres, and that, according to
all probabilities, M. Moriaz would die one day. His head was completely
turned by the thought that this woman loved him, that soon she would be
his. Yes, for precisely two minutes, Samuel Brohl was as passionately in
love with Mlle. Moriaz as might, perchance, have been Count Larinski.

He could not resist the impulse that transported him. He folded in his
arms the slender, supple form of Antoinette, and imprinted upon her hair
a kiss of flame, a true Polish kiss. She offered no resistance; but at
this moment the bat that had already forced upon her its distasteful
company renewed the attack, struck her full in the face, and stuck fast
in her hood. Antoinette felt the touch of its cold, clammy wings, of
its hooked claws. She tore the hood from her head and flung it away in
horror. Samuel Brohl sprang forward to pick it up, pressed it to his
lips, and made his escape, like a thief carrying off his booty.

When Antoinette re-entered the _salon_, she found there Mlle. Moiseney,
whose boisterous, overwhelming joy had just put M. Moriaz to flight.
This time Mlle. Moiseney knew everything. She had seen Samuel Brohl
arrive, she had been unable to control her overweening curiosity, and,
without the slightest scruples, she had listened at the door. She cast
herself into Antoinette’s arms, pressed her to her heart, and cried:
“Ah, my dear! oh, my dear! Did I not always say that it would end thus?”

Mlle. Moriaz hastened to free herself from her embraces; she felt the
need of being alone. On entering her chamber she took a hasty survey of
it: her furniture, her pretty knick-knacks, her rose-tined tapestry,
the muslin hangings of her bed, the large silver crucifix hanging on the
extreme wall, all seemed to regard her with astonishment, asking, “What
has happened?” And she replied:

“You are right, something has happened.”

She remained in contemplation before a portrait of her mother, whom she
had lost very young.

“I have been told,” she mused, “that you were a great romance-reader. I
do not care for romances at all--I scarcely ever read them; but I have
just been making one myself, with which you would not be discontented.
This man would astonish you a little; he would please you still more.
Some hours ago he seemed lost to me forever. I brazened it out. I went
in search of him, and when he saw me he surrendered. Only now he
was with me on the terrace; his lips touched me here on my hair, and
thrilled me from head to foot. Do not feel displeased with me--his are
pure and royal lips! They have been touched by the sacred fire; they
never have lied; never have there fallen from them other than proud and
noble words; they modestly recount the history of a life without blemish
Ah! why are you not here? I have a thousand things to say to you, which
you alone could comprehend; others do not comprehend me.”

She began her toilet for the night. When she had unfastened her hair,
she remembered that there was One in her chamber who could comprehend
everything, and to whom she had yet said nothing. She knelt down,
her wealth of hair streaming over her beautiful shoulders, her hands
reverently clasped, her eyes fixed on the silver crucifix, and she said,
in a low tone:

“Forgive me that I have forgotten thee, thou who never hast forgotten
me! I return thanks to thee that thou hast granted my desires; thou hast
given me the happiness of which I have dreamed without daring to ask it.
Ah, yes, I am happy, perfectly happy! I promise thee that I will cast
the reflection of my joy among the poor and unfortunate of this world: I
will love them as I have never loved them before! When we give them food
and drink, we give it also unto thee; and when we give them flowers,
this crown of thorns that has wounded thy brow bursts into bloom. I will
give them flowers and bread. It is vain to say that thou art a jealous
God. Full as may be my heart, thou knowest that there is always room
for thee, and that thou never canst knock at the door without my crying:
‘Enter; the house and all that therein is belong unto thee! My happiness
blesses thee: oh, bless thou it!’”

While Mlle. Moriaz thus held communion with her crucifix, Samuel Brohl
was rolling along the great highway from Cormeilles to Argenteuil,
a distance of six kilometres. His head was held erect, his face was
radiant, his eyes were like balls of fire, his temples throbbed, and it
seemed to him that his dilated chest might have held the world. He was
speaking to himself--murmuring over and over again the same phrase. “She
is mine!” he repeated to the vines bordering the road, to the mill of
Trouillet, to the Sannois Hills, whose vague outlines loomed up against
the sky. “She is mine!” he cried to the moon, which this evening shone
for him alone, whose sole occupation was to gaze upon Samuel Brohl. It
was plain to see that she was in the secret, that she knew that before
long Samuel Brohl would marry Mlle. Moriaz. She had donned her festal
garments to celebrate this marvellous adventure; her great gleaming face
expressed sympathy and joy.

Although he had exhorted his coachman to make haste, Samuel missed
the train, which was the last. He decided to put up for the night at
Argenteuil, and sought hospitality at the inn of the Coeur-Volant, where
he ordered served forthwith a great bowl of punch, his favourite drink.
He betook himself to bed in the full expectation of enjoying most
delicious dreams; but his sleep was troubled by a truly disagreeable
incident. Glorious days are at times succeeded by most wretched nights,
and the inn of Coeur-Volant was destined to leave most disagreeable
reminiscences with Samuel Brohl.

Towards four o’clock he heard some one knocking at his door, and a voice
not unknown to him cried:

“Open, I beseech you!”

He was seized with an insupportable anguish; he felt like one paralyzed,
and it was with great difficulty that he rose up in a sitting posture.
He remembered that the bolt was drawn, and this reassured him. What was
not his stupefied amazement to see the bolt glide back in its shaft! The
door opened; some one entered, slowly approached Samuel, drew back the
curtains of his bed, and bent towards him, fixing upon him great eager
eyes that he recognised. They were singular eyes, these, at once full of
sweetness and full of fire, of audacity and of candour; a child, a grand
soul, an unbalanced weakling--all this in one was in this gaze.

Samuel Brohl quailed with horror. He tried to speak, but his tongue was
powerless to move. He made desperate efforts to unloose it; he finally
succeeded in moving his lips, and he murmured:

“Is it you, Abel? I believed you dead.”

Evidently Count Abel, the veritable Abel Larinski, was not dead. He was
on his feet, his eyes were terribly wide open, and his face never had
worn more life-like colouring. Nothing remained but to believe that
he had been buried alive, and that he had been resuscitated. In coming
forth from the tomb, he had carried with him a portion of its dust;
his hair was covered with a singular powder of an earthy hue, and at
intervals he shook himself as though to make it fall from him.

With the exception of this there was nothing alarming in his appearance;
but a mocking, half-crafty smile played about his lips. After a long
pause, he said to Samuel:

“Yes, it is indeed I. You did not expect me?”

“Are you sure that you are not dead?” rejoined Samuel.

“Perfectly sure,” he replied, once more shaking a mass of dust from his
head. “Does my return incommode you, Samuel Brohl?” he added. “Your name
is Samuel, I believe; it is a pretty name. Why have you taken mine? You
must give it back to me.”

“Not to-day,” pleaded Samuel, in a stifled voice, “nor to-morrow, nor
the day after to-morrow; but after the marriage.”

Count Abel burst out laughing, which was by no means his habit, and
which therefore greatly surprised Samuel. Then he cried:

“It is I she will marry--she will be the Countess Larinski.”

Suddenly the door opened again, and Mlle. Antoinette Moriaz appeared,
robed in white like a bride, a crown on her head, a bouquet in her
hand. She bent her steps towards Samuel, but the apparition arrested her
progress, saying:

“It is not he whom you love; it is my history. Do you not see that this
is a false Pole? His father was a German Jew, who kept a tavern. Here it
was that this hero grew up. I will relate to you how.”

Here Samuel put his hand over his mouth, and stammered: “Oh, for mercy’s
sake, say nothing!”

Heeding him not, the apparition continued: “Yes, Samuel Brohl is a
hero. For five years he was the pledged lover of an old woman, and he
fulfilled all the duties of his post. This cherished hero well earned
his money. Are you not eager to be called Mme. Brohl?”

With these words, he opened wide his arms to Mlle. Moriaz, who fixed
upon him a gaze at the same time astonishing and tender, and straining
her to his bosom, kissed her hair and her crown.

Then Samuel Brohl recovered strength, life, movement; clinching his
hands, he sprang forward to dispute with Abel Larinski his prey.
Suddenly, with a shiver of terror and dismay, he paused; he had heard
proceeding from a distant corner of the chamber a shrill, malignant
laugh. He turned, and distinctly perceived his father--a greasy cap
on his head, wrapped in a forlorn, threadbare, dirty caftan. This was
unquestionably Jeremiah Brohl, and this night it seemed truly that the
whole world had arisen from the dead. The little old man continued to
laugh jeeringly; then in a sharp, peevish voice, he cried: “_Schandbube!
vermaledeiter Schlingel! ich will dich zu Brei schlagen!_” which
signifies: “Scoundrel! accursed blackguard! I will beat you to a jelly!”
 It was a mode of address that Samuel had heard often in his infancy;
but familiar though he might be with paternal amenities, when he saw
his father uplift a withered, claw-like hand, a cry escaped his lips;
he started back to evade the blow, entangled his feet in the legs of a
chair, stumbled, and flung himself violently against a table.

He opened his eyes and saw no one. He ran to the window and threw open
the shutter; the growing dawn illumined the chamber with its grayish
light. Thank God! there was no one there. The vision had been so real
that it was some time before Samuel Brohl could fully regain his senses,
and persuade himself that his nightmare was forever dissipated, that
phantoms were phantoms, that cemeteries do not surrender their prey.
When he had once acquired this rejoicing conviction, he spoke to
the dead man who had appeared to him, and whose provoking visit had
indiscreetly troubled his sleep, and with considerable hauteur he said,
in a tone of superb defiance: “We must be resigned, my poor Abel; we
shall see each other again only in the valley of Jehosaphat; I have seen
twenty shovelfuls of earth cast upon you--you are dead; I live, and she
is mine!”

Thereupon he hastened to settle his account, and to quit the
Coeur-Volant, within whose walls he promised himself never again to set
foot.

At the very same moment, M. Moriaz, who had risen early, was engaged in
writing the following letter:

“It is done, my dear friend--I have yielded. Pray, do not reproach me
with my weakness; what else could I do? When one has been for twenty
years the most submissive of fathers, one does not emancipate one’s self
in a day; I never have been in the habit of erecting barriers, and it is
scarcely likely that I could learn to do so at my age. Ah! _mon Dieu!_
who knows if, after all, her heart has not counselled her well, if one
day she will not satisfy us all that she was in the right. It must be
confessed that this _diable_ of a man has an indescribable charm about
him. I can detect only one fault in him: he has committed the error
of existing at all; it is a grave error, I admit, but thus far I have
nothing else with which to reproach him.

“When one loses a battle, nothing remains but to plan an orderly
retreat. Count Larinski, I regret to inform you, is armed with all
needful weapons; he carries with him his certificate of birth, and
certificate of the registry of death of both his parents. No pretext can
be made on this score, and my future son-in-law will not aid me to gain
time. The sole point upon which we must henceforth direct our attention
is the contract. We scarcely can take too many precautions; we must see
that this Pole’s hands are absolutely tied. If you will permit me, I
will one day ask you to confer with me and my notary, who is also yours.
I venture to hope that upon this point Antoinette will consent to be
guided by our counsels.

“I am not gay, my friend; but, having been born a philosopher, I bear
my misfortunes patiently, and I will forthwith reread _Le Monde comme
il va, ou la Vision de Babouc_, in order to endeavour to persuade myself
that, if all is not well, all is at least supportable.”

The evening of the same day, M. Moriaz received the following response:

“I never will pardon you. You are a great chemist, I grant, but a
pitiful, a most deplorable father. Your weakness, which well merits
another name, is without excuse. You should have resisted; you should
have stood your ground firmly. Antoinette, although she is of age, never
in the world would have decided to address to you a formal request of
consent to this marriage. She would have made some scenes; she would
have pouted; she would have endeavoured to soften you by assuming the
airs of a tearful, heart-broken widow; she would have draped herself in
black crape. And after that? Desperate case! These Artemisias are very
tiresome, I admit; but one can accustom one’s self to anything. Should
philosophers, who plead such sublime indifference about the affairs of
this mundane sphere, be at the mercy of a fit of the sulks, or a dress
of black crape? Besides, black is all the fashion just now, even for
those who are not in mourning.

“You speak of contracts! You are surely jesting! What! distrustful of
a Pole? take precautions against an antique man?--I quote from Abbe
Miollens--against a soul as noble as great? Think what you are doing! At
the mere thought of his disinterestedness being called into question, M.
Larinski would swoon away as he did in my _salon_. It is a little way he
has, which is most excellent, since it proves successful. Do not think
of such trifles as contracts; marry them with equal rights, and leave
the consequences to Providence! Follies have neither beauty nor merit,
unless they are complete. Ah, my good friend, Poland has its charm, has
it? Admirable! But you must swallow the whole thing. I am your obedient
servant.”



CHAPTER IX

The pitiless sentence pronounced by Mme. de Lorcy grieved M. Moriaz, but
did not discourage him. It was his opinion that, let her say what she
might, precautions were good; that, well though it might be to bear our
misfortunes patiently, there was no law forbidding us to assuage them;
that it was quite permissible to prefer to complete follies those of a
modified character, and that a bad cold or an influenza was decidedly
preferable to inflammation of the lungs, which is so apt to prove fatal.
“Time and myself will suffice for all things,” proudly said Philip II.
M. Moriaz said, with perhaps less pride: “To postpone a thing so long as
possible, and to hold deliberate counsel with one’s notary, are the
best correctives of a dangerous marriage that cannot be prevented.” His
notary, M. Noirot, in whom he reposed entire confidence, was absent;
a case of importance had carried him to Italy. Nothing remained but to
await his return, until which everything stood in suspense.

In the first conversation he had with his daughter on the subject, M.
Moriaz found her very reasonable, very well disposed to enter into his
views, to accede to his desires. She was too thoroughly pleased with
his resignation not to be willing to reward him for it with a little
complaisancy; besides, she was too happy to be impatient; she had gained
the main points of her case--it cost her little to yield in matters of
secondary detail.

“You will be accused of having taken a most inconsiderate step,” said
her father to her. “You are little sensible to the judgment of the
world, to what people say; I am much more so. Humour my weakness or
cowardice. Let us endeavour to keep up appearances; do not let us appear
to be in a hurry, or to have something to hide; let us act with due
deliberation. Just at present no one is in Paris; let us give our
friends time to return there. We will present Count Larinski to them.
Great happiness does not fear being discussed. Your choice will be
regarded unfavourably by some, approved by others. M. Larinski has
the gift of pleasing; he will please, and all the world will pardon my
resignation, which Mme. de Lorcy esteems a crime.”

“You promised me that your resignation would be mingled with
cheerfulness: I find it somewhat melancholy.”

“You scarcely could expect me to be intoxicated with joy.”

“Will you at least assure me that you have taken your part bravely, and
that you will think of no further appeal?”

“I swear it to you!”

“Very good; then we will honour your weakness,” she replied, and she
said Amen to all that he proposed.

It was agreed that the marriage should take place during the winter,
and that two months should be allowed to elapse before proceeding to
the preliminary formalities. M. Moriaz undertook to explain matters to
Samuel Brohl, who found the arrangement little to his taste. He took
pains, however, to give no signs of this. He told M. Moriaz that he was
still in the first bewildering surprise of his happiness, that he was
not sorry to have time to recover from it; but he secretly promised
himself to devise some artifice for abridging delays, for hastening the
_denoument_. He was apprehensive of accidents, unforeseen occurrences,
squalls, storms, tornadoes, sudden blights, in short everything that
might damage or destroy a harvest; he impatiently longed to gather in
his, and to have it carefully stowed away in his granary. In the interim
he wrote to his old friend M. Guldenthal a letter at once majestic
and confidential, which produced a most striking effect. M. Guldenthal
concluded that a good marriage was much better security than a poor
gun. Besides, he had had the agreeable surprise of being completely
reimbursed for his loan, capital and interest. He was charmed to have so
excellent a debtor return to him, and he hastened to advance to him all
that he could possibly want, even more.

A month passed peaceably by, during which time Samuel Brohl repaired two
or three times each week to Cormeilles. He made himself adored by the
entire household, including the gardener, the porter and his family,
and the Angora cat that had welcomed him at the time of his first visit.
This pretty, soft white puss had conceived for Samuel Brohl a most
deplorable sympathy; perhaps she had recognised that he possessed the
soul of a cat, together with all the feline graces. She lavished on him
the most flattering attentions; she loved to rub coaxingly against him,
to spring on his knee, to repose in his lap. In retaliation, the great,
tawny spaniel belonging to Mlle. Moriaz treated the newcomer with the
utmost severity and was continually looking askance at him; when Samuel
attempted a caress, he would growl ominously and show his teeth, which
called forth numerous stern corrections from his mistress. Dogs are born
gendarmes or police agents; they have marvellous powers of divination
and instinctive hatred of people whose social status is not orthodox,
whose credentials are irregular, or who have borrowed the credentials
of others. As to Mlle. Moiseney, who had not the scent of a spaniel,
she had gone distracted over this noble, this heroic, this incomparable
Count Larinski. In a _tete-a-tete_ he had contrived to have with her, he
had evinced much respect for her character, so much admiration for her
natural and acquired enlightenment, that she had been moved to tears;
for the first time she felt herself understood. What moved her, however,
still more was that he asked her as a favour never to quit Mlle. Moriaz
and to consider as her own the house he hoped one day to possess. “What
a man!” she ejaculated, with as much conviction as Mlle. Galet.

The principal study of Samuel Brohl was to insinuate himself into the
good graces of M. Moriaz, whose mental reservations he dreaded. He
succeeded in some measure, or at least he disarmed any lingering
suspicions by the irreproachable adjustment of his manners, by the
reserve of his language, by his great show of lack of curiosity
regarding all questions that might have a proximate or remote connection
with his interests. How, then, had Mme. de Lorcy come to take it into
her head that there was something of the appraiser about Samuel
Brohl, and that his eyes took an inventory of her furniture? If he had
forgotten himself at Maisons, he never forgot himself at Cormeilles.
What cared he for the sordid affairs of the sublunary sphere? He floated
in ether; heaven had opened to him its portals; the blessed are too
absorbed in their ecstasy to pay heed to details or to take an inventory
of paradise. Nevertheless, Samuel’s ecstasies did not prevent him from
embracing every opportunity to render himself useful or agreeable to
M. Moriaz. He frequently asked permission to accompany him into his
laboratory. M. Moriaz flattered himself that he had discovered a new
body to which he attributed most curious properties. Since his return he
had been occupied with some very delicate experiments, which he did not
always carry out to his satisfaction; his movements were brusque, his
hands all thumbs; very often he chanced to ruin everything by breaking
his vessels. Samuel proposed to assist him in a manipulation requiring
considerable dexterity; he had very flexible fingers, was as expert as a
juggler, and the manipulation succeeded beyond all hopes.

Mme. de Lorcy was furious at having been outwitted by Count Larinski;
she retracted all the concessions she had made concerning him; her
rancour had decided that the man of fainting-fits could not be other
than an imposter. She had disputes on this subject with M. Langis, who
persisted in maintaining that M. Larinski was a great comedian, but that
this, strictly considered, did not prevent his being a true count; in
the course of his travels he had met specimens of them who cheated at
cards and pocketed affronts. Mme. de Lorcy, in return, accused him
of being a simpleton. She had written again to Vienna, in hopes of
obtaining some further intelligence; she had been able to learn nothing
satisfactory. She did not lose courage; she well knew that, in the
important affairs of life, M. Moriaz found it difficult to dispense with
her approbation, and she promised herself to choose with discretion the
moment to make a decisive assault upon him. In the meanwhile she gave
herself the pleasure of tormenting him by her silence, and of grieving
him by her long-continued pouting. One day M. Moriaz said to his
daughter:

“Mme. de Lorcy is displeased with us; this grieves me. I fear you have
dropped some word that has wounded her. I shall be greatly obliged to
you if you will go and see her and coax her into good-humour.”

“You gave me a far from agreeable commission,” she rejoined, “but I can
refuse you nothing; I shall go to-morrow to Maisons.”

At the precise moment when this conversation was taking place, Mme.
de Lorcy, who was passing the day in Paris, entered the Ecole des
Beaux-Arts. The exhibition of the work of a celebrated painter, recently
deceased, had attracted thither a great throng of people. Mme. de Lorcy
moved to and fro, when suddenly she descried a little old woman, sixty
years of age, with a snub nose, whose little gray eyes gleamed with
malice and impertinence. Her chin in the air, holding up her eye-glasses
with her hand, she scrutinized all the pictures with a critical,
disdainful air.

“Ah! truly it is the Princess Gulof,” said Mme. de Lorcy to herself,
and turned away to avoid an encounter. It was at Ostend, three years
previous, during the season of the baths, that she had made the
acquaintance of the princess; she did not care to renew it. This
haughty, capricious Russian, with whom a chance occurrence at the _table
d’hote_ had thrown her into intercourse, had not taken a place among her
pleasantest reminiscences.

Princess Gulof was the wife of a governor-general whom she had wedded in
second marriage after a long widowhood. He did not see her often, two or
three times a year, that was all. Floating about from one end of Europe
to another, they kept up a regular exchange of letters; the prince never
took any step without consulting his wife, who usually gave him sound
advice. During the first years of their marriage, he had committed the
error of being seriously in love with her: there are some species of
ugliness that inspire actually insane passions. The princess found this
in the most wretched taste, and soon brought Dimitri Paulovitch to his
senses. From that moment perfect concord reigned between this wedded
couple, who were parted by the entire continent of Europe, united by the
mail-bags. The princess did not bear a very irreproachable record. She
looked upon morality as pure matter of conventionality, and she made no
secret of her thoughts. She was always on the alert for new discoveries,
fresh experiences; she never waited to read a book to the end before
flinging it into the waste-paper basket, most frequently the first
chapter sufficed; she had met with many disappointments, she had wearied
of many caprices, and she had arrived at the conclusion that man is,
after all, of but small account. Nevertheless, there had come to her
late in life a comparatively lasting caprice; during nearly five years
she had flattered herself that she had found what she sought. Alas! for
the first time she had been abandoned, forsaken, and that before she had
herself grown tired of her fancy. This desertion had inflicted a sharp
wound on her pride; she had conceived an implacable hatred for the
faithless one, and then she had forgotten him. She had plunged into
the natural sciences, she had made dissections--it was her way of being
avenged. She held very advanced ideas; she believed in the most radical
of the doctrines of evolution; she deemed it a clearly demonstrated fact
that man is a development of the monkey, the monkey of the monad. She
profoundly despised any one who permitted himself to doubt this. She did
not count melancholy; to analyze or dissect everything, that was her way
of being happy.

During their common sojourn at Ostend, Mme. de Lorcy had gained the good
graces of the Princess Gulof through the dexterity with which she had
dressed the wounds of Moufflard, her lapdog, whose paw had been injured
by some awkward individual. She had been quite pleased with Mme. de
Lorcy, her sympathy and her kindly services, and she had bestowed her
most amiable attentions upon her. Mme. de Lorcy had done her best to
respond to her advances; but she found herself revolted by this old
magpie whose prattling never ceased, and whose chief delight was in the
recital of the secret chronicles of every capital of Europe; Mme. de
Lorcy, in fact, soon grew disgusted with her cosmopolitan gossip and her
physiology; she found her cynical and evil-minded. In meeting her at the
Ecole des Beaux-Arts, her first impulse was to evade her; but suddenly
she changed her mind. For some weeks past she had been governed by a
fixed idea, about which all else revolved; an inspiration came over her,
which doubtless fell directly from the skies.

“Princess Gulof,” said she to herself, “has passed her life in running
around the world; her real home is a railroad-car; there is not a large
city where she has failed to make a sojourn; she is acquainted with the
whole world: is it not possible that she knows Count Larinski?”

Mme. de Lorcy retraced her steps, cut her way through the crowd,
succeeded in approaching the princess, and, taking her by the arm,
exclaimed: “Ah! is it you, princess! How is Moufflard?”

The princess turned her head, regarded her fixedly a moment, and then
pressing her hand between her thumb and forefinger she rejoined with as
little ceremony as though they had met the day before: “Moufflard does
very poorly indeed, my dear. He died two months ago of indigestion.”

“How you must have mourned his loss!”

“I am still inconsolable.”

“Ah! well, princess, I shall undertake to console you. I own a lapdog,
not yet six months old: you never saw a more charming one or one with a
shorter nose or whiter and more delicate hair. I am a great utilitarian,
as you know. I only care for large dogs that are of some use. Will you
accept of me Moufflard II? But you must come and fetch him yourself,
which will procure me the pleasure of seeing you at Maisons.”

The princess replied that she was on her way to England; that she was
merely taking Paris in passing; that her hours were numbered; and two
minutes later she announced to Mme. de Lorcy that she would call on her
the following day, in the afternoon.

True to her appointment, Princess Gulof entered Mme. de Lorcy’s _salon_
the following day. The ladies occupied themselves first of all with
the lapdog, which was found charming and quite worthy to succeed
to Moufflard I. Mme. de Lorcy watched all the time for a suitable
opportunity of introducing the subject nearest to her heart; when she
thought it had come, she observed:

“Apropos, princess, you who know everything, you who are a true
cosmopolitan, have you ever heard of a mysterious personage who calls
himself Count Abel Larinski?”

“Not that I am aware of, my dear, although his name may not be
absolutely unknown to me.”

“Search among your reminiscences; you must have encountered him
somewhere; you have visited all the countries of the world--”

“Of the habitable world,” she interposed; “but according to my especial
point of view Siberia scarcely can be called so, and it is there, if I
mistake not, that your Count Larinski must have been sent.”

“Would to heaven!--Perhaps there was question of procuring this little
pleasure for his father; but, unfortunately, he took the precaution to
emigrate to America. The inconvenience of America is, that people can
return from there, for my Larinski has returned, and it is that that
grieves me.”

“What has he done to you?” inquired the princess pinching the ears of
the dog who was slumbering in her lap.

“I spoke to you at Ostend about my goddaughter Mlle. Moriaz, who is an
adorable creature. I proposed to marry her to my nephew, M. Langis, a
most highly accomplished young man. This Larinski came suddenly on the
scene, he cast a charm over the child, and he will marry her.”

“What a pity! Is he handsome?”

“Yes; that, to tell the truth, is his sole merit.”

“It is merit sufficient,” replied the princess, whose gray eyes twinkled
as she spoke. “There is nothing certain but a man’s beauty; all else is
open to discussion.”

“Pray, allow me to consider matters from a more matter-of-fact point of
view,” said Mme. de Lorcy. “Also I may as well confide to you my whole
perplexity: I suspect Count Larinski of being neither a true Larinski
nor a true count; I would stake my life that the Larinskis are all dead,
and that this man is some adventurer.”

“You will end by interesting me,” rejoined the princess. “Do not speak
too severely of adventurers, however; they are one of the most curious
varieties of the human family. Let your goddaughter marry hers; it will
bring a piquant element into her life; the poor world is so generally a
prey to ennui.”

“Thank you! my goddaughter was not born to marry an adventurer. I detest
this Larinski, and I have vowed that I will play him some abominable
trick!”

“Do not become excited, my dear. What colour are his eyes?”

“Green as those of the cats or of the owls.”

Once more the eyes of Princess Gulof flashed and twinkled, and she
cried: “An adventurer with green eyes! Why, it is a superb match, and I
find you hard to please.”

“You grieve me, princess,” said Mme. de Lorcy. “I had promised
myself that you would lend me the assistance of your judgment, your
incomparable penetration, your experienced eye; that you would aid me
in unmasking this Pole, in detecting in him some irremediable vice that
would at once prove an insurmountable obstacle to the marriage. Be good,
for once in your life; may I present him to you?”

“I repeat to you that I am merely taking Paris in passing,” replied the
princess, “and I am expected in England. Besides, you do too much honour
to my incomparable penetration. I swear to you that I am no connoisseur
in Larinskis; you may as well spare yourself the pains of presenting
to me yours. I am a good-natured woman, who has often been made a good
dupe, and I do not complain of it. The best reminiscences of my past
are of sundry agreeable errors, and of men skilled in deception. I have
found it the wisest way to judge by the labels, and never to ask any
one to show me the contents of his sack, for I long ago discovered that
sacks are very apt to be empty or at best only poorly filled. Let your
goddaughter act according to her own head; if she deceives herself, it
is because she wishes to be deceived, and she knows better than you what
suits her. _Eh! bon Dieu_, what matters it if there be one more unhappy
household under the broad canopy of heaven? Besides, it is only fools
who are unhappy, and who stupidly pause before a closed portal; others
manage in some way to find a loop-hole of escape. Marriage, my dear, is
an institution worn threadbare. Ten years hence there will be only free
women and husbands on trial. Ten years hence the Countess Larinski will
be a liberated countess. Let her serve her time as a galley-slave, and
she will come out entirely cured of her follies.”

Just as Princess Gulof was finishing this remarkable declaration of her
principles, the door opened and Mlle. Moriaz entered. Whatever it might
cost her to do so, the future Countess Larinski faithfully kept the
promise she had made to her father. Mme. de Lorcy was strictly on her
guard; she hastened to meet her, held out both hands, kissed her on both
cheeks, and reproached her, in the most affectionate tone in the world,
for the rarity of her visits. Then she presented her to the princess,
who said: “Come here, my beauty, that I may look at you; I have been
told that you are adorable.”

When Antoinette approached, she fixed on her a keen, penetrating glance,
examined her from head to foot, passed all her perfections in review:
one might have taken her for some Normandy farmer at a cattle-fair.
The result of this investigation was satisfactory; the princess cried,
“Truly she does very well!” and proceeded to assert that Mlle. Moriaz
greatly resembled a certain person who had played a certain role in
a certain adventure that she undertook to narrate. She had scarcely
finished this recital when she entered on another. Mme. de Lorcy was on
thorns. She knew by experience that the anecdotes of Princess Gulof
were ordinarily somewhat indelicate and ill-suited to maiden ears.
She watched Antoinette anxiously, and, when she saw the approach of an
especially objectionable passage, she was suddenly seized with a fit of
coughing. The princess, comprehending the significance of that, made an
effort to gloss over, but her glossings were very transparent. Mme.
de Lorcy coughed anew, and the princess ended by losing patience, and,
brusquely interrupting herself, exclaimed: “And this, that, and the
other, etc. Thus ended the adventure.”

Mlle. Moriaz listened with an astonished air, not in the least
understanding these attacks of coughing and these interruptions, nor
divining the significance of the constant repetition of “this, that,
and the other, etc.” Princess Gulof struck her as a very eccentric and
unpleasantly brusque person; she even suspected her of being slightly
deranged or at least rather crack-brained; yet she was pleased with
her for being present upon this especial occasion and sparing her a
_tete-a-tete_ with Mme. de Lorcy with its disagreeable explanations and
unpleasant discussions.

She remained nearly an hour, planted on a chair, watching with a sort of
stupor the turning of the fan of this word-mill, whose clapper kept up
such an incessant noise. After having criticised to her heart’s content
her neighbours, including under that title emperors and grand-dukes,
and having abundantly multiplied the et ceteras, Princess Gulof suddenly
turned the conversation to physiology: this science, whose depths she
believed herself to have fathomed, was, in her estimation, the secret
of everything, the Alpha and Omega of human life. She exposed certain
materialistic views, making use of expressions that shocked the modest
and delicate ears of Mlle. Moriaz. The astonishment the latter had at
first experienced became now blended with horror and disgust; she judged
that her visit had lasted long enough, and she proceeded to beat a
retreat, which Mme. de Lorcy made no effort to prevent.

Upon arriving at Cormeilles, her carriage crossed with a young man on
horseback, who with his head bowed down allowed his animal full liberty
to take his own course. This young man trembled when a clear, soprano
voice, which he preferred to the most beautiful music in the world,
cried to him, “Where are you going, Camille?”

He bowed over his horse’s neck, drew down his hat over his eyes, and
replied, “To Maisons.”

“Do not go there. I have just left because there is a dreadful old woman
there who says horrid things.” Then Mlle. Moriaz added, in a queenly
tone, “You cannot pass--you are my prisoner.”

She obliged him to turn back; ten minutes later she had alighted from
her coupe, he had sprung from his saddle, and they were seated side by
side on a rustic bench.

A few days previous M. Langis had met M. Moriaz, who had complained
bitterly of being forsaken by him as well as by Mme. de Lorcy, and who
had extracted from him the promise to come and see him. Camille had kept
this promise. Had he chosen well his time of doing so? The truth is, he
had been both rejoiced and heart-broken to learn that Mlle. Moriaz was
absent. Man is a strange combination of contradictions, especially a
man who is in love. In the same way he had bestowed both blessings and
imprecations upon Heaven for permitting him to meet Antoinette. During
some moments he had lost countenance, but had quickly recovered himself;
he had formed the generous resolution to act out consistently his role
of friend and brother. He had acquitted himself of it so well at Saint
Moritz, that Antoinette believed him cured of the caprice of a day with
which she had inspired him and which she had never taken seriously.

“The last time I saw you,” said she, “you dropped a remark that pained
me, but I am pleased to think that you did not mean to do so.”

“I am a terrible culprit,” he rejoined, “and I smite myself upon the
breast therefore. I was wanting in respect to your idol.”

“Fortunately, my idol knew nothing about it, and, if he had known, I
would have appeased him by saying: ‘Pardon this young man; he does not
always know what he is saying.’”

“He even seldom knows it; but what help is there for it? A man given to
fainting always did seem a curiosity to me. I know we should endeavour
to conquer our prejudices; every country has its customs, and, since
Poland is a country that pleases you, I will make an effort to see only
its good sides.”

“Now that is the right way to talk. I hope this very day to reconcile
you with Count Larinski; stay and dine with us--he will be here very
soon; the first duty of the people whom I love is to love one another.”

M. Langis at first energetically declined accepting this invitation;
Antoinette insisted: he ended by bowing in sign of obedience. Youth has
a taste for suffering.

Tracing figures in the gravel with a stick he had picked up, M. Langis
said, in a wholly unconstrained voice: “I do not wish M. Larinski any
harm, and yet you must admit that I would have the right to detest him
cordially, for I had the honour two years ago, if I mistake not, of
asking your hand in marriage. Do you remember it?”

“Perfectly,” she replied, fixing upon him her pure, clear eyes; “but I
ought to avow to you that this fancy of yours never seemed to me either
very reasonable or very serious.”

“You are wrong; I can certify to you that your refusal plunged me for
as much as forty-eight hours into the depths of despair--I mean one
of those genuine despairs that neither eat, drink, nor sleep, and that
speak openly of suicide!”

“And at the end of forty-eight hours were you consoled?”

“_Eh! bon Dieu_, it surely was time to come to reason. I had hesitated
a long time before asking your hand, because I thought, ‘If she refuses
me, I cannot see her any more.’ But I still do see you, so all is well!”

“And how soon do you mean to marry?”

“I? Never! I shall die a bachelor. An aspirant to the hand of Mlle.
Moriaz, being unable to win her, could not care for another woman.
Nothing remains but to strike the attitude of the inconsolable lover.”

“And when this ceases to hinder one from eating, drinking, or
sleeping--what then?”

“One becomes interesting without being inconvenienced by the
consequences,” he gaily interposed. Then, letting his eyes wander idly
around for a moment, he added: “It seems to me that you have in some
way changed the order of this terrace; put to the right what was at the
left, thinned out the shrubbery, cut the trees; I feel completely lost
here.”

“You mistake greatly; nothing is changed here; it is you who have become
forgetful. How! you now longer recognise this terrace, scene of so many
exploits? I was a thorough tyrant; I did with you what I pleased. You
revolted sometimes, but in his heart the slave adored his chains. Open
your eyes. See! here is the sycamore you climbed one day to escape me
when I wanted you to make believe that you were a girl, as you said, and
you had little fancy for such a silly role. There is the alley where
we played ball, and yonder the hedge and the grove where we played
hide-and-seek.”

“Say rather, _cligne-musette_; it is more poetical,” he rejoined. “When
I was down in Transylvania I made a _chanson_ about it all, and set it
myself to music.”

“Sing me your _chanson_.”

“You are mocking at me; my voice is false, as you well know; but I will
consent to recite it to you. The rhymes are not rich--I am no son of
Parnassus.”

With these words, lowering his voice, not daring to look her in the
face, he recited the couplets.

“Your _chanson_ is very pretty,” said she; “but it does not tell the
truth, for here we are sitting together on this bench; we have not lost
each other at all.”

She was so innocent that she had no idea of the torture she was
inflicting, and he saw this so plainly that he could not so much as have
the satisfaction of finding fault with her; yet he asked himself whether
in the best woman’s heart there was not a foundation of cruelty, of
unconscious ferocity. He felt the tears start to his eyes; he scarcely
could restrain them; he abruptly bowed his head, and began to examine
a beautiful horned beetle, which was just crossing the gravel-path at a
quick pace, apparently having some very important affairs to regulate.
When M. Langis raised his head his eyes were dry, his face serene, his
lips smiling.

“It is very certain,” he observed, “that two years ago I must have
appeared supremely ridiculous to you. This little playmate of old, this
foolish little Camille, to attempt to transform himself into a husband!
The pretension was absurd indeed.”

“Not at all,” she replied; “but I thought at once that it was a mistake.
Little Camilles are apt to be hot-headed and fanciful; they are subject
to self-deceptions regarding their sentiments. Friendship and love,
however, are two entirely different things! I once said to Mlle.
Moiseney that a woman never should marry an intimate friend, because
it would be a sure way of losing him as such, and friends are good to
keep.”

“Bah! How much do you care now for yours? I find my role very modest,
very insignificant. Open the trap-door--it is time for me to disappear.”

“Bad counsel! I shall not open the trap-door. One always has need of
friends. I can readily imagine the possibility of the very happiest
married woman needing some advice or assistance that she could not ask
of her husband, for husbands do not understand everything. If ever such
a thing happens to me, Camille, I shall turn to you.”

“Agreed!” he cried; “to help you out of embarrassment, I would run, if
necessary, all the way from Transylvania.”

He held out his right hand, which she shook warmly.

At this moment they heard a step that Mlle. Moriaz at once recognised,
and Count Larinski appeared from the walk bordering the house.
Antoinette hastened to meet him, and led him forward by laying hold of
the tip of his glove, which he was in the act of drawing off.

“Gentlemen,” said she, “I do not need to present you to each other; you
are already acquainted.”

It is a very difficult thing to lead two men who do not like each
other into conversation: the present effort proved a total failure.
Fortunately for all parties, M. Moriaz shortly made his appearance at
the end of the terrace, and M. Langis arose to join him. Antoinette
remained alone with Samuel Brohl, who at once rather brusquely asked:

“Has M. Langis the intention of remaining here forever?”

“He has only just arrived,” she replied.

“And you will send him away soon?”

“I thought so little of sending him away that I asked him to dinner, in
order to give you an opportunity of becoming more fully acquainted with
him.”

“I thank you for your amiable intentions, but M. Langis pleases me
little.”

“What have you against him?”

“I have met him sometimes at Mme. de Lorcy’s, and he always has shown me
a most dubious politeness. I scent in him an enemy.”

“Pure imagination! M. Langis has been my friend from childhood up, and I
have forewarned him that it is his duty to love the people whom I love.”

“I mistrust these childhood’s friends,” said he, growing excited. “I
should not wonder if this youth was in love with you.”

“Ah, indeed! then you should have heard him but now. He has been
reminding me, this youth, that two years ago he sought my hand, and
he assured me that forty-eight hours sufficed to console him for my
refusal.”

“I did not know that the case was so grave, or the personage so
dangerous. Truly, do you mean to keep him to dinner?”

“I invited him; can I retract?”

“Very well, I will leave the place,” he cried, rising.

She uplifted her eyes to his face and remained transfixed with
astonishment, so completely was his face transformed. His contracted
brows formed an acute angle, and he had a sharp, hard, evil air. This
was a Larinski with whom she was not yet acquainted, or rather it was
Samuel Brohl who had just appeared to her--Samuel Brohl, who had
entered upon the scene as suddenly as though he had emerged from a magic
surprise-box. She could not remove her eyes from him, and he at once
perceived the impression he was making on her. Forthwith Samuel Brohl
re-entered his box, whose cover closed over him, and it was a true Pole
who said to Mlle. Moriaz, in a grave, melancholy, and respectful tone:

“Pardon me, I am not always master of my impressions.”

“That is right,” said she; “and you will remain, won’t you?”

“Impossible,” he replied; “I should be cross, and you would not be
pleased.”

She urged him; he opposed her entreaties with a polite but firm
resistance.

“Adieu,” said she. “When shall I see you again?”

“To-morrow--or the day after--I do not know.”

“Really, do you not know?”

He perceived that her eyes were full of tears. Tenderly kissing her hand
he said, with a smile that consoled her:

“This is the first time we have had any dispute; it is possible that
I may be wrong, but it seems to me that if I were a woman I would not
willingly marry a man who was always right.”

These words uttered, he assured himself anew that her eyes were humid,
and then he left, charmed to have proved the extent of the empire he
held over her.

When she rejoined M. Langis, the young man asked:

“Does it chance to be I who put Count Larinski to flight? If so, I
should be quite heart-broken.”

“Reassure yourself,” said she, “he came expressly to inform me that his
evening was not free.”

The dinner was only passably lively. Mlle. Moiseney owed M. Langis a
grudge; she could not forgive him for having made fun of her more than
once--in her eyes an unpardonable sin. M. Moriaz was enchanted to find
himself once more in company with his dear Camille; but he kept asking
himself, mournfully, “Why is not he to be my son-in-law?” Antoinette
had several attacks of abstraction; she did not, however, omit the least
friendly attention to Camille. Love had become master of this generous
soul; it might cause it to commit many imprudences, but it was not in
its power to cause it to commit an injustice.

At nine o’clock M. Langis mounted his horse and took his departure.

Meanwhile, Mlle. Moriaz, her arm resting on the ledge of her window, was
meditating on the strange conduct of Count Larinski as she gazed on the
stars; the sky was without clouds, unless a little black speck above
Mount-Valerien might be so called. Mlle. Moriaz’s heart swelled with
emotion, and she felt implicit confidence that all would be arranged the
next day. What is one black spot in the immensity of a starry sky?



CHAPTER X

In all that Samuel Brohl did, even in his wildest freaks, there
was somewhat of calculation, or contrivance. Unquestionably, he had
experienced intense displeasure at encountering M. Camille Langis at
Cormeilles; he had, doubtless, very particular and very personal
reasons for not liking him. He knew, however, that there was need for
controlling his temper, his impressions, his rancour; and, if he ceased
to do so for a moment, it was because he counted upon deriving advantage
therefrom. He was impatient to enter into possession, to feel his
good-fortune sheltered from all hazards; delays, procrastinations,
long waiting, displeased and irritated him. He suspected M. Moriaz of
purposely putting his shoulder to the wheel of time, and of preparing
a contract that would completely tie the hands of Count Larinski.
He resolved to seize the first opportunity of proving that he was
mistrustful, stormy, susceptible, in the hope that Mlle. Moriaz would
become alarmed and say to her father, “I intend to marry in three weeks,
and without any conditions.” The opportunity had presented itself, and
Samuel Brohl had taken good care not to lose it.

The next day he received the following note:

“You have caused me pain, a great deal of pain. Already! I passed a
sorrowful evening, and slept wretchedly all night. I have reflected
seriously upon our dispute; I have endeavoured to persuade myself that I
was in the wrong: I have neither been able to succeed, nor to comprehend
you. Ah! how your lack of confidence astonishes me! It is so easy to
believe when one loves. Please write me word quickly that you also have
reflected, and that you have acknowledged your misdemeanour. I will not
insist upon your doing penance, your face humbled to the ground; but I
will condemn you to love me to-day more than yesterday, to-morrow more
than to-day. Upon these conditions, I will pass a sponge across your
grave error, and we shall speak of it no more.

“Ever yours. It is agreed, is it not?” Samuel Brohl had the surprise of
receiving at the same time another letter, thus worded:

“MY DEAR COUNT: I cannot explain to myself your conduct; you no longer
give me any signs of life. I believed that I had some claims upon you,
and that you would hasten to announce to me in person the great event of
events, and seek my congratulations. Come, I beg of you, and dine this
evening at Maisons with Abbe Miollens, who is dying to embrace you; he
studies men in Horace, you know, and he finds none whom he prefers to
you.

“You need not answer, but come; else I will be displeased with you as
long as I live.”

Samuel replied as follows to Mlle. Moriaz:

“Be assured I have suffered more than you. Forgive me; much should be
forgiven a man who has suffered much. My imagination is subject to the
wildest alarms. Great, unlooked-for joy has rendered me mistrustful.
I have been especially low-spirited of late. After having resolutely
fought against my happiness, I tremble now lest it escape me; it appears
to me too beautiful not to prove only a dream. To be loved by you! How
can I help fearing to lose the great boon? Each evening I ask myself:
‘Will she still love me to-morrow?’ Perhaps my anxiety is blended with
secret remorse. My pride, ever on the alert to take umbrage, has often
been my torment; you can tell me it is only self-love: I will endeavour
to cure myself of it, but this cannot be done in a day. During these
long months of waiting there will come to me more than one suspicion,
more than one troubled thought. I promise you, however, that I shall
maintain a rigid silence concerning them, and, if possible, hide them.

“You condemn me, for my punishment, to love you to-day more than
yesterday; you know well this were impossible. No; I shall inflict upon
myself another chastisement. Mme. de Lorcy has invited me to dinner. I
suspect her of having a very mediocre feeling of good-will for me, and
I also accuse her of being cold and insensible; of understanding
nothing whatever of the heart’s unreasonableness, which is true wisdom.
Nevertheless, I will refrain from declining her invitation. It is at
Maisons and not at Cormeilles that I shall this day pass my evening. Are
you content with me? Is not the penance severe enough?

“But to-morrow--oh! I shall arrive at your home to-morrow by two
o’clock, and I shall enter by the little green gate at the foot of the
orchard. Will you do me a favour? Promenade about two o’clock in the
gravel-walk that I adore. The wall being low at that place, I
shall perceive from afar, before entering, the white silk of your
sun-umbrella. I am counting, you see, upon sunshine. How very childish!
Yet, even this is not strange; I was born three months and a half ago;
I commenced to live July 5th of this year; at four o’clock in the
afternoon, in the cathedral at Chur. Forgive me all my errors, my
suspicions, my childish absurdities.”

Mlle. Moriaz concluded that it would be well to shorten the term of
waiting, and that she would ask Count Larinski to fix the date of their
marriage himself. As to the contract, she had immediate occasion to
speak of it to her father, who announced to her that he had invited his
notary, Maitre Noirot, to dine with him the next day.

She was silent a few moments, and then said, “Can you explain to me the
use of notaries?”

He replied about as did _le Philosophe sans le savoir_: “We only see the
present; notaries foresee the future and possible contingencies.”

She replied that she did not believe in contingencies, and that she
did not like precautions, because they presupposed distrust, and might
appear offensive.

“We have charming weather to-day,” said her father; “nevertheless there
is a possibility of rain to-morrow. If I started this evening on
a journey, I should carry my umbrella, without fearing to insult
Providence. Who speaks to you of offending M. Larinski? Not content with
approving of the step I propose taking, he will thank me for it. Why did
he at first refuse to marry you? Because you are rich, and he is poor.
The contract I wish to have drawn up will thoroughly set at ease his
disinterestedness and his pride.”

“The question of money no longer exists for him,” she eagerly replied;
“it is my desire that it should not be started again. And since you like
comparisons, let us suppose that you invited one of your friends to take
a turn in your garden. Your espaliers are laden with fruit, and you know
that your friend is an honest man, and that, besides, he does not care
for pears. Suppose you were to put handcuffs on him, would he or would
he not be insulted?”

He answered in an exceedingly vexed tone, that this was entirely
different, and Mlle. Moiseney having taken the liberty to interfere in
the discussion in Antoinette’s behalf, declaring that Counts Larinski
are not to be distrusted, and that men of science are incapable of
comprehending delicacy of sentiment, he gave full vent to his wrath,
telling the worthy demoiselle to meddle with what concerned her. For the
first time in his life he was seriously angry. Antoinette caressed him
into good-humour, promised that she would put on the best possible
face to Maitre Noirot, that she would pay religious attention to his
counsels, and that she would endeavour to profit by them.

While M. Moriaz was engaged in this stormy interview with his daughter,
Samuel Brohl was _en route_ for Maisons. After the first flush of
astonishment, the note and invitation of Mme. de Lorcy had pleased
him immensely; he saw in it the proof that she had ceased to struggle
against the inevitable--against Samuel Brohl and destiny; that she had
resolved to bear her disappointment with a cheerful countenance. He
formed the generous resolution to console her for her vexation; to gain
her good-will by force of modesty and graceful attentions.

Alone in his compartment of the cars, Samuel Brohl was happy, perfectly
happy. He was nearing port; he held it for an established fact that,
before a fortnight, the banns would be published. Was he alone in
his compartment? An adored image kept him company; he spoke to it, it
replied to him. Blended with a rather uncommon frigidity of soul,
Samuel Brohl had an imagination that readily took fire, and, when his
imagination was kindled, he felt within him something warm, which he
took for a heart, and sincerely persuaded himself that he had such an
organ. At this moment he saw Antoinette as he had left her the evening
previous, her face animated, her cheeks flushed, her countenance full of
reproach, her eyes tearful. She never had appeared to him so charming.
He believed himself so madly in love that he was inclined to mock a
little at himself. He teased in anticipation the joys that were in
reserve for him; he revelled in thought of the day and the hour when
this superb creature would be his, when he could view her as his
own undisputed possession, and devour page after page, chapter after
chapter, of this elegantly printed, richly bound book.

However, he was not the man to wholly absorb himself in such a reverie.
His thoughts travelled farther; in idea he embraced his entire future,
which he fashioned out at pleasure. He took leave of his sorrowful past
as a blind man who by some miracle recovers his sight, parts from his
dog and his staff--troublesome witnesses of evil days. He had done with
petty employments, with ungrateful toil, with humiliating servitude,
with anxiety about the morrow, with the necessity for counting every
sou, with meagre repasts, with sordid expedients, with sorrow, distress,
and usuries; to all these he said farewell. Henceforth he would pick up
silver and gold by the shovelful; he would have a share in abundance of
festivals--the joy of doing nothing--the pleasure of commanding--all the
sweetness and all the calm satisfaction of delightful egotism--reposing
in a bed of eider-down--fed upon delicate birds--owning two or three
houses, a carriage, horses, and a box at the opera. What a future!
At intervals Samuel Brohl passed his tongue over his lips; they were
parched with thirst.

Alnaschar the Lazy received one hundred drachms of silver as his entire
patrimony, and he promised himself that he would one day marry the
daughter of the grand-vizier. He meant to clothe himself like a prince,
to mount upon a horse with a saddle of fine gold and housings of gold,
richly embroidered with diamonds and pearls. He proposed to see that
his wife formed good habits, to train her to obedience, to teach her to
stand before him and be always ready to wait upon him; he resolved to
discipline her with his looks, his hand, and his foot. Samuel Brohl
possessed a calmer spirit than the Athenian Hippoclide; he was less
brutal than Alnaschar of Bagdad: was he much less ferocious? He
proposed, he also, to educate his wife; he intended that the daughter of
the grand-vizier should consecrate herself wholly to his happiness, to
his service. To possess a beautiful slave, with velvety eyes, chestnut
hair, tinged with gold, who would make of Samuel Brohl her padishah
and her god, who would pass her life at his knees on the alert for his
wishes, reading his good pleasure in his face, attentive to his fancies
and to his eye-brows, belonging to him body and soul, uplifting to him
the gaze of a timid gazelle or a faithful spaniel--such was his dream of
conjugal felicity. And little need would he have to exert himself much
in the education of Mlle. Antoinette Moriaz. Love would charge itself
with that. She adored Samuel Brohl, and he relied upon her devotion; it
were impossible that she could refuse him anything! She was prepared in
advance for every compliance, every obedience; she was ready to be his
humble servant in all things. Knaves make it their boast that they can
readily fathom honest people; the truth is, they only half comprehend
them. Honest people have sentiments, as do certain languages, reputed
easy, which are full of mystery, of refined delicacy, inaccessible to
the vulgar mind. A commercial traveller often learns to speak Italian in
three weeks, and yet never really knows the language; Samuel Brohl had
gained a superficial knowledge of Mlle. Moriaz in a few days, and yet he
was far from having a true comprehension of her.

He arrived at Maisons in the most cheerful, self-satisfied frame of
mind. As he walked through the park, he remembered that Mme. de Lorcy
had lost her only two children when they were still of a tender age;
that she was therefore free to will her property as she pleased; that
she had a short neck, an apoplectic temperament; that Antoinette was her
goddaughter; that although she was piqued with Count Larinski the count
was adroit, and would find a way to regain her sympathies. The park
appeared to him magnificent; he admired its long, regular alleys, which
had the appearance of extending as far as Peking; he paused some moments
before the purple beech, and it seemed to him that there must be some
resemblance between this beautiful tree and himself. He contemplated
with the eyes of proprietorship the terrace planted with superb lindens,
and he decided that he would establish himself in his Maisons chateau,
that his pretty Cormeilles villa would merely be his country-seat. As
it may be seen, his imagination refused him nothing; it placed happiness
and wealth untold at his command.

We are unable to state whether Mme. de Lorcy actually had an apoplectic
temperament; the one thing certain is, that she was not dead. Samuel
Brohl perceived her from afar on the veranda, which she had just stepped
out upon in order to watch for his arrival. He had forgotten himself in
the park, which should one day be his park, and she was beginning to be
uneasy about his coming.

She cried out to him: “At last! You always make us wait for you,”
 adding, in a most affable tone, “We meet to-day under less tragic
circumstances than the last time you were here, and I hope you will bear
away a pleasanter remembrance of Maisons.”

He respectfully kissed her hand, saying: “Happiness must be purchased; I
cannot pay too dearly for mine.”

She ushered him into the _salon_, where he had scarcely set foot, when
he descried an old woman lounging on a _causeuse_, fanning herself as
she chatted with Abbe Miollens. He remained motionless, his eyes fixed,
scarcely breathing, cold as marble; it seemed to him that the four walls
of the _salon_ swayed from right to left, and left to right, and that
the floor was sliding from under his feet like the deck of a pitching
vessel.

The previous day, Antoinette once departed, Mme. de Lorcy had resumed
her attack on Princess Gulof, and the princess had ended by consenting
to delay her departure, to dine with the adventurer of the green eyes,
and to subject him to a close scrutiny. There she was; yes, it was
indeed she! The first impulse of Samuel Brohl was to regain the door as
speedily as possible; but he did nothing of the kind. He looked at Mme.
de Lorcy: she herself was regarding him with astonishment; she wondered
what could suddenly have overcome him; she could find no explanation for
the bewilderment apparent in his countenance. “It is a mere chance,” he
thought at last; “she has not intentionally drawn me into a snare.” This
thought was productive of a sort of half relief.

“_Eh bien!_ what is it?” she asked. “Has my poor _salon_ still the
misfortune to be hurtful to you?”

He pointed to a _jardiniere_, saying: “You are fond of hyacinths and
tuberoses; their perfume overpowered me for a moment. I fear you think
me very effeminate.”

She replied in a caressing voice: “I take you for a most worthy man
who has terrible nerves; but you know by experience that if you have
weaknesses I have salts. Will you have my smelling-bottle?”

“You are a thousand times too good,” he rejoined, and bravely marched
forward to face the danger. It is a well-known fact that dangers in a
silken robe are the most formidable of all.

Mme. de Lorcy presented him to the princess, who raised her chin to
examine him with her little glittering eyes. It seemed to him that those
gray orbs directed at him were two balls, which struck him in the heart;
he quivered from head to foot and asked himself confusedly whether he
were dead or living. He soon perceived that he was still living; the
princess had remained impassible--not a muscle of her face had moved.
She ended by bestowing upon Samuel a smile that was almost gracious,
and addressing to him some insignificant words, which he only half
understood, but which seemed to him exquisite--delicious. He fancied
that she was saying to him: “You have a chance, you were born lucky;
my sight has been impaired for some years, and I do not recognise you.
Bless your star, you are saved!” He experienced such a transport of joy
that he could have flung his arms about the neck of Abbe Miollens, who
came up to him with extended hand, saying:

“What have you been thinking about, my dear count? Since we last met a
very great event has been accomplished. What woman wishes, God wishes;
but, after all, my own humble efforts were not without avail, and I am
proud of it.”

Mme. de Lorcy requested Count Larinski to offer his arm to Princess
Gulof and lead her out to dinner. He mechanically complied; but he had
not the strength to utter a syllable as he conducted the princess to
table. She herself said nothing; she seemed wholly busied in arranging
with her unoccupied hand a lock of her gray hair, which had strayed
too far over her forehead. He looked fixedly at this short, plump hand,
which one day in a fit of jealous fury had administered to him two smart
blows; his cheeks recognised it.

During dinner the princess was very gay: she paid more attention to Abbe
Miollens than to Count Larinski; she took pleasure in teasing the good
priest--in endeavouring to shock him a little. It was not easy to shock
him; to his natural, easy good-nature he united an innate respect for
grandeurs and for princesses. She did not neglect so good an opportunity
to air her monkey-development theories. He merrily flung back the ball;
he declared that he should prefer to be a fallen angel rather than a
perfected monkey; that in his estimation a parvenu made a much sorrier
figure in the world than the descendent of an old family of ruined
nobility. She replied that she was more democratic than he. “It is
pleasant to me,” said she, “to think that I am a progressive ape, who
has a wide future before him, and who, by taking proper pains, may hope
to attain new advancement.”

While they were thus chatting, Samuel Brohl was striving with all his
might to recover from the terrible blow he had received. He noted with
keen satisfaction that the eyesight of the princess was considerably
impaired; that the microscopic studies, for which she had always had a
taste, had resulted in rendering her somewhat near-sighted; that she was
obliged to look out carefully to find her way among her wine-glasses.
“She has not seen me for six years,” thought he, “and I have become
a different man, I have undergone a complete metamorphosis; I have
difficulty sometimes in recognising myself. Formerly, my face was
close-shaven, now I have let my entire beard grow. My voice, my accent,
the poise of my head, my manners, the expression of my countenance, all
are changed; Poland has entered my blood--I am Samuel no longer, I am
Larinski.” He blessed the microscope, which enfeebled the sight of old
women; he blessed Count Abel Larinski, who had made of him his
twin brother. Before the end of the repast he had recovered all his
assurance, all his aplomb. He began to take part in the conversation:
he recounted in a sorrowful tone a sorrowful little story; he retailed
sundry playful anecdotes with a melancholy grace and sprightliness; he
expressed the most chivalrous sentiments; shaking his lion’s mane, he
spoke of the prisoner at the Vatican with tears in his voice. It were
impossible to be a more thorough Larinski.

The princess manifested, in listening to him, an astonished curiosity;
she concluded by saying to him: “Count, I admire you; but I believe only
in physiology, and you are a little too much of a Pole for me.”

After they had left the table and repaired to the _salon_, several
callers dropped in. It was like a deliverance to Samuel. If the society
was not numerous enough for him to lose himself in it, at least it
served him as a shield. He held it for a certainty that the princess
had not recognised him; yet he did not cease feeling in her presence
unutterably ill at ease. This Calmuck visage of hers recalled to him
all the miseries, the shame, the hard, grinding slavery of his youth;
he could not look at her without feeling his brow burn as though it were
being seared with a hot iron.

He entered into conversation with a supercilious, haughty, and pedantic
counsellor-at-law, whose interminable monologues distilled ennui. This
fine speaker seemed charming to Samuel, who found in him wit, knowledge,
scholarship, and taste; he possessed the (in his eyes) meritorious
quality of not knowing Samuel Brohl. For Samuel had come to divide the
human race into two categories: the first comprehended those well-to-do,
thriving people who did not know a certain Brohl; he placed in the
second old women who did know him. He interrogated the counsellor with
deference, he hung upon his words, he smiled with an air of approbation
at all the absurdities that escaped him; he would have been willing to
have his discourse last three hours by the watch; if this charming bore
had shown symptoms of escaping him, he would have held him back by the
button.

Suddenly he heard a harsh voice, saying to Mme. de Lorcy: “Where is
Count Larinski? Bring him to me; I want to have a discussion with him.”

He could not do otherwise than comply; he quitted his counsellor with
regret, went over and took a seat in the arm-chair that Mme. de Lorcy
drew up for him at the side of the princess, and which had for him the
effect of a stool of repentance. Mme. de Lorcy moved away, and he was
left _tete-a-tete_ with Princess Gulof, who said to him, “I have been
told that congratulations are due to you, and I must make them at
once--although we are enemies.”

“By what right are we enemies, princess?” he asked with a slightly
troubled feeling, which quickly passed away as she answered:

“I am a Russian and you are a Pole, but we shall have no time for
fighting; I leave for London to-morrow morning at seven o’clock.”

He was on the point of casting himself at her feet and tenderly kissing
her two hands, in testimony of his gratitude. “To-morrow at seven
o’clock,” he mentally ejaculated. “I have slandered her; she has some
good in her.”

“When I say that I am a Russian,” resumed the princess, “it is merely a
formal speech. Love of country is a prejudice, an idea that has had its
day, that had sense in the times of Epaminondas or of Theseus, but that
has it no longer. We live in the age of the telegraph, the locomotive;
and I know of nothing more absurd now than a frontier, or more
ridiculous than a patriot. Rumour says that you fought like a hero in
the insurrection of 1863; that you gave proof of incomparable prowess,
and that you killed with your own hand ten Cossacks? What harm had they
done you, those poor Cossacks? Do they not sometimes haunt your dreams?
Can you think of your victims without disquietude and without remorse?”

He replied, in a dry, haughty tone: “I really do not know, princess, how
many Cossacks I have killed; but I do know that there are some subjects
on which I do not love to expatiate.”

“You are right--I should not comprehend you. Don Quixote did not do
Sancho the honour to explain himself to him every day.”

“Ah, I beg of you, let us talk a little of the man-monkey,” he observed,
in a rather more pliant tone than he had at first assumed. “That is a
question that has the advantage of being neither Russian nor Polish.”

“You will not succeed that way in throwing me off the track. I mean to
tell you all the evil I think of you, no matter how it may incense you.
You uttered, at table, theories that displeased me. You are not only a
Polish patriot; you are an idealist, a true disciple of Plato, and you
do not know how I always have detested this man. In all these
sixty years that I have been in this world, I have seen nothing but
selfishness, and grasping after self-gratification. Twice during
dinner you spoke of an ideal world. What is an ideal world? Where is it
situated? You speak of it as of a house whose inhabitants you are well
acquainted with, whose key is in your pocket. Can you show me the key? I
promise not to steal it from you. O poet!--for you are quite as much of
a poet as of a Pole, which is not saying much--”

“Nothing remains but to hang me,” he interposed, smilingly.

“No, I shall not hang you. Opinions are free, and there is room enough
in the world for all, even idealists. Besides, if you were to be hanged,
it would bring to the verge of despair a charming girl who adores you,
who was created expressly for you, and whom you will shortly marry. When
will the ceremony take place?”

“If I dared hope that you would do me the honour of being present,
princess, I should postpone it until your return from England.”

“You are too amiable; but I could not on any consideration retard the
happiness of Mlle. Moriaz. There, my dear count, I congratulate you
sincerely. I had the pleasure to meet here the future Countess Larinski.
She is adorable! It is an exquisite nature, hers--a true poet’s wife.
She must have brains, discernment; she has chosen you--that says
everything. As to her fortune, I dare not ask you if she has any; you
would turn away from me in disgust. Do idealists trouble their heads
with such vile questions?”

She leaned towards him, and, fanning herself excitedly, added: “These
poor idealists! they have one misfortune.”

“And what is that, princess?”

“They dream with open eyes, and the awakening is sometimes disagreeable.
Ah, my dear Count Larinski, this, that, and the other, _et cetera_. Thus
endeth the adventure.”

Then, stretching out her neck until her face was close to his, she
darted at him a venomous, viper-like look, and, in a voice that seemed
to cut into his tympanum like a sharp-toothed saw, she hissed, “Samuel
Brohl, the man with the green eyes, sooner or later the mountains must
meet!”

It seemed to him that the candelabra on the mantel-piece darted out jets
of flame, whose green, blue, and rose-coloured tongues ascended to
the ceiling; and it appeared to him as though his heart was beating as
noisily as a clock-pendulum, and that every one would turn to inquire
whence came the noise. But every one was occupied; no one turned round;
no one suspected that there was a man present on whom a thunderbolt had
just fallen.

The man passed his hand over his brow, which was covered with a cold
sweat; then dispelling, by an effort of will, the cloud that veiled his
eyes, he, in turn, leaned towards the princess, and with quivering lip
and evil, sardonic glance, said to her, in a low voice:

“Princess, I have a slight acquaintance with this Samuel Brohl of
whom you speak. He is not a man who will allow himself to be strangled
without a great deal of outcry. You are not much in the habit of
writing, nevertheless he received from you two letters, which he copied,
placing the originals in safety. If ever he sees the necessity of
appearing in a court of justice, these two letters can be made to create
quite a sensation, and unquestionably they will be the delight of all
the petty journals of Paris.”

Thereupon he made a profound bow, respectfully took leave of Mme. de
Lorcy, and retired, followed by Abbe Miollens, who inflicted a real
torture by insisting on accompanying him to the station.

No longer restrained by Mme. de Lorcy’s presence, the abbe spoke
freely of the happy event in which he prided himself to have been a
co-operator; he overwhelmed him with congratulation, and all the good
wishes he could possibly think of for his happiness. During a quarter of
an hour he lavished on him his myrrh and honey. Samuel would gladly have
wrung his neck. He could not breathe until the abbe had freed him from
his obtrusive society.

A storm muttered in the almost cloudless sky. It was a dry storm; the
rain fell elsewhere. The incessant lightning, accompanied by distant
thunder, gleamed from all quarters of the horizon, and darted its
luminous flashes over the whole extent of the plain. At intervals the
hills seemed to be on fire. Several times Samuel, who stood with his
nose against the glass of the car-door, thought that he saw in the
direction of Cormeilles the flaring light of a conflagration, in which
were blazing his dream and two millions, to say nothing of his great
expectations.

He bitterly reproached himself for his folly of the previous day. “If
I had passed yesterday evening with her,” he thought, “surely she
would have spoken of the Princess Gulof. I would have taken measures
accordingly, and nothing would have happened.” It was all M. Langis’s
fault; it was to him that he imputed the disaster, and he hated him all
the more.

However, as he approached Paris, he felt his courage returning.

“Those two letters frightened the old fairy,” he thought. “She will
think twice before she declares war with me. No, she will not dare.” He
added: “And if she dared, Antoinette loves me so much that I can make
her believe what I please.”

And he prepared in his mind what he should say, in case the event
occurred.

At that very moment Mme. de Lorcy, who was alone with Princess Gulof,
was saying: “Well, my dear, you have talked with my man. What do you
think of him?”

The princess distressed her by her reply. “I think, my dear,” she
rejoined, “that Count Larinski is the last of the heroes of romance--or,
if you like better, the last of the troubadours; but I have no reason to
believe him to be an adventurer.”

Mme. de Lorcy could get nothing further from Princess Gulof; she had
invited her to remain overnight; she got no pay for her hospitality. The
princess spent part of the night in reflecting and deliberating. Samuel
Brohl’s insolent menace had produced some effect. She sought to remember
the exact purport of the two letters that formerly she had had the
imprudence to write him from London, while he was fulfilling a business
commission for her in Paris. On his return she had required Samuel to
burn these two compromising epistles, in her presence; he had deceived
her; he burned the envelopes and blank paper. The thought of some day
having her composition quoted in court, and printed verbatim in the
petty journals, terrified her, and made her blood boil in her veins;
she hardly cared to take Paris and St. Petersburg into her confidence
concerning an experience the recollection of which caused her
disgust--but to let such an admirable opportunity of vengeance escape
her! renounce the delight of the gods and of princesses! permit this man
who had just defied her to accomplish his underhand intrigue! She could
not resign herself to the idea, and the consequence was that, during the
night she spent at Maisons, she scarcely closed her eyes.



CHAPTER XI

The following day, after breakfast, Mlle. Moriaz was walking alone on
the terrace. The weather was delightfully mild. She was bare-headed, and
had opened her white silk umbrella to protect herself from the sun; for
Samuel Brohl had been a true prophet--there was sunshine. She looked up
at the sky, where no trace was left of the wind-storm of the preceding
evening, and it seemed to her that she never had seen the sky so blue.
She looked at her flower-beds, and the flowers that she saw were perhaps
not there. She looked at the orchard, growing on the slope that bordered
the terrace, and she admired the foliage of the apple-trees, over which
Autumn, with liberal hand, had scattered gold and purple; the grass
there was as high as her knee, and was fragrant and glossy. Above the
apple-trees she saw the spire of the church at Cormeilles; it seemed to
amuse itself watching the flying clouds. It was a high-festival day.
The bells were ringing out a full peal; they spoke to this happy girl
of that far-off, mysterious land which we remember, without ever having
seen it. Their silvery voices were answered by the cheerful cackling of
the hens. She at once understood that a joyful event was occurring
in the poultry-yard, as well as in the belfry; that below, as well as
above, an arrival was being celebrated. But what pleased her more than
all the rest was the little deep-set gateway with its ivy-hung arch at
the end of the orchard. It was through this gate that he would come.

She walked several times around the terrace. The gravel was elastic, and
rebounded under her step. Never had Mlle. Moriaz felt so light: life,
the present, the future, weighed no heavier on her brow than a bird in
the hand that holds it and feels it tremble. Her heart fluttered like a
bird; like a bird it had wings, and only asked to fly. She believed that
there was happiness everywhere; there seemed to be joy diffused through
the air, in the wind, in every sound, and in all silences. She gazed
smilingly on the vast landscape that was spread out before her eyes, and
the sparkling Seine sent back her smile.

Some one came to announce that a lady, a stranger, had called, who
wished to speak with her. Immediately thereupon the stranger appeared,
and Mlle. Moriaz was most disagreeably surprised to find herself in the
presence of the Princess Gulof, whom she would willingly never have
seen again. “This is an unpleasant visit,” she thought, as she asked
her guest to be seated on a rustic bench. “What can this woman want with
me?”

“It was M. Moriaz whom I desired to speak with,” began the princess.
“I am told that he is out. I shall leave in a few hours for Calais;
I cannot await his return, and I have, therefore, decided to address
myself to you, mademoiselle. I have come here to render you one of those
little services that one woman owes to another; but, first of all, I
would like to be assured that I may rely on your absolute discretion; I
do not desire to appear in this affair.”

“In what affair, madame?”

“One of no little consequence; it concerns your marriage.”

“You are extremely kind to concern yourself with my marriage; but I do
not understand----”

“You will understand in a few moments. So you promise me----”

“I promise nothing, madame, before I understand.”

The princess looked in amazement at Mlle. Moriaz. She had anticipated
talking with a dove; she found that the dove had a less accommodating
temper and a much stiffer neck than she had believed. She hesitated for
a moment whether she would not at once end the interview; she decided,
however, to proceed:

“I have a story to relate to you,” she continued, in a familiar tone;
“listen with attention, I beg of you. I err if in the end you do not
find it interesting. Thirteen or fourteen years ago, one of those
unlucky chances, common in travelling, obliged me to pass several hours
in a miserable little town in Galicia. The inn, or rather the tavern,
where I stopped, was very dirty; the tavern-keeper, an ill-looking
little German Jew, was still dirtier than his tavern, and he had a son
who was in no better condition. I am given to forming illusions about
people. In spite of his filth, this youth interested me. His stupid
father refused him all instruction, and beat him unmercifully; he
appeared intelligent; he made me think of a fresh-water fish condemned
to live in a quagmire. He was called Samuel Brohl: remember the name. I
pitied him and I saw no other way of saving him than to buy him of his
father. This horrid little man demanded an exorbitant price. I assure
you his pretensions were absurd. Well, my dear, I was out of cash; I had
with me just the money sufficient for the expenses of the rest of the
journey; but I wore on my arm a bracelet that had the advantage of
pleasing him. It was a Persian trinket, more singular than beautiful. I
can see it now; it was formed of three large plates of gold ornamented
with grotesque animals, and joined by a filigree network. I valued this
bracelet; it had been brought to me from Teheran. By means of a secret
spring, one of the plates opened, and I had had engraved inside the
most interesting dates of my life, and underneath them my profession of
faith, with which you have no concern. Ah! my dear, when one has once
been touched by that dangerous passion called philanthropy, one becomes
capable of exchanging a Persian bracelet for a Samuel Brohl, and I swear
to you that it was a real fool’s bargain that I made. This miserable
fellow paid me badly for my kindness to him. I sent him to the
university, and later I took him into my service as secretary. He had a
black heart. One fine morning, he took to his heels and disappeared.”

“That was revolting ingratitude,” interrupted Antoinette, “and your good
work, madame, was poorly recompensed; but I do not see what relation
Samuel Brohl can have to my marriage.”

“You are too impatient, my darling. If you had given me time I would
have told you that I had had the very unexpected pleasure of dining
yesterday with him at Mme. de Lorcy’s. This German has made great
advances since I lost sight of him; not content with becoming a Pole,
he is now a person of vast importance. He is called Count Abel Larinski,
and he is to marry very soon Mlle. Antoinette Moriaz.”

The blood rushed into Antoinette’s cheeks, and her eyes flashed fire.
Princess Gulof entirely mistook the sentiment that animated her, and
said: “My dear, don’t be angry, don’t be indignant, your indignation
will not help you at all. Without doubt, a rascal capable of deceiving
such a charming girl as you deserves death ten times over; but be
careful not to make an exposure! My dear, scandal always splashes mud
over every one concerned, and there is a rather vulgar but exceedingly
sensible Turkish proverb that says that the more garlic is crushed, the
stronger becomes its odour. Believe me, you would not come off without
a tinge of ridicule; certain mistakes always appear a little ridiculous,
and it is useless to proclaim them to the universe. Thank Heaven! you
are not yet the Countess Larinski--I arrived in time to save you. Be
silent about the discovery you have just made; by no means mention it to
Samuel Brohl, and seek a proper pretext to break with him. You would not
be a woman if you could not find ten for one.”

Mlle. Moriaz could no longer refrain her anger. “Madame,” she exclaimed
excitedly, “will you declare to M. Larinski, in my presence, that his
name is Samuel Brohl?”

“I made that declaration to him yesterday--it is useless to repeat it.
He was nearer dead than alive, and I was truly sorry for the state into
which I had thrown him. I cannot disguise from myself that I am the
cause of all this; why did I take the boy from his father’s tavern and
his natal mud? Perhaps there he would have remained honest. It was I who
launched him into the world and gave him the desire to advance, I put
the trump-cards into his hand, but he found that he could not win fast
enough by fair play, so he ended by cheating. It is not my place to
overwhelm the poor devil--we owe some consideration to those who are
under obligations to us; and, once more, I desire not to appear further
in this business. Promise me that Samuel Brohl never will be informed of
the measures I have taken.”

She replied, in a haughty tone: “I promise you, madame, that I never
will do Count Larinski the wrong to repeat to him a single word of the
very likely story you have related to me.”

The princess rose hastily, remained standing before Mlle. Moriaz, and
contemplated her in silence; finally she said, in tones of the most
cutting sarcasm: “Ah! you do not believe me, my dear. Decidedly you
do not believe me. You are right; you should not put faith in an old
woman’s childish chatter. No, my darling, there is no Samuel Brohl: I
dined yesterday at Maisons with the most authentic of Counts Larinski,
and nothing remains for me to say but to present my best wishes for the
certain happiness of the Countess Larinski, _et cetera_--of the Countess
Larinski and company.”

With these words she bowed, turned on her heels, and disappeared.

Mlle. Moriaz remained an instant as if stunned by a blow. She questioned
herself as to whether she had not seen a vision, or had had the
nightmare. Was it, indeed, a Russian princess of flesh and blood who had
just been there, who had been seated close beside her, and had conversed
so strangely with her that the belfry of Cormeilles could not hear
it without falling into a profound stupor? In fact, the belfry of
Cormeilles had become silent, its bells no longer rang; an appalling
silence reigned for two leagues round.

Antoinette soon controlled her emotions. “The day before yesterday,” she
thought, “this woman appeared to me to be deranged: she is a lunatic;
I wish that Abel were here, he could tell me what happened at dinner
between him and this dotard, and we should laugh over it together.
Perhaps nothing happened at all. The Princess Gulof should be confined.
They do very wrong to let maniacs like that go at large. It is
dangerous; the bells of Cormeilles have ceased ringing. Ah! _bon Dieu_,
who knows? Mme. de Lorcy surely has a hand in this business; it is the
result of some grand plot. How many acts are there in the play? Here
we are at the second or third; but there are some jokes that are very
provoking. I shall end by being seriously angry.”

Princess Gulof appeared to have entirely failed in her object. It
seemed to Mlle. Moriaz that for the last twenty minutes she loved Count
Larinski more than ever before.

The hour drew near; he was on the way; she had never been so impatient
to see him. She saw some one at the end of the terrace. It was M.
Camille Langis, who was going towards the laboratory.

He turned his head, retraced his steps, and came to her. M. Moriaz had
asked him to translate two pages of a German memoir which he had not
been able to understand. Camille was bringing the translation; perhaps
that was the reason of his coming back to Cormeilles after two days;
perhaps, too, it was only a pretext.

Mlle. Moriaz could not help thinking that his visit was inopportune;
that he had chose an unfortunate time for it. “If the count finds him
still here,” thought she, “I am not afraid that he will make a scene,
but all his pleasure will be spoiled.” There was a tinge of coldness in
her welcome to M. Langis, of which he was sensible.

“I am in the way,” he said, making a movement to retire.

She kept him, and altered her tone: “You are never in the way, Camille.
Sit there.”

He seated himself, and talked of the races at Chantilly, that he had
attended the day before.

She listened to him, bowed her head in sign of approval; but she heard
his voice through a mist that veiled her senses. She lifted her hand to
brush away a wasp that annoyed her by its buzzing. The lace of her cuff,
in falling back, left her wrist exposed.

“What a curious bracelet you have!” said M. Langis.

“Have you not seen it before?” she replied. “It is some time since----”

She interrupted herself, a sudden idea occurring to her. She looked at
her wrist. This bracelet from which she never was parted--this bracelet
that Count Larinski had given to her--this bracelet that he loved
because it had belonged to his mother, and that the late Countess
Larinski had worn as long as she lived--resembled none other; but Mlle.
Moriaz observed that it had a strong resemblance to the Persian
bracelet that the Princess Gulof had described to her, and which she
had exchanged for Samuel Brohl. The three gold plates, the grotesque
animals, the filigree network--nothing was wanting. She took it from
her arm and handed it to M. Langis, saying to him: “There is, it seems,
something written on the interior of one of these plates; but you must
know the secret to be able to open it. Can you guess secrets?”

He carefully examined the bracelet. “Two of these plates,” said he,
“are solid, and of heavy gold; the third is hollow, and might serve as a
case. I see a little hinge that is almost invisible; but I seek in vain
for the secret--I cannot find it.”

“Is the hinge strong?”

“Not very, and the lid easily could be forced open.”

“That is what I want you to do,” she rejoined.

“What are you thinking of? I would not spoil a trinket that you value.”

She replied: “I have made the acquaintance of a Russian princess who has
a mania for physiology and dissection. I have caught the disease, and I
want to begin to dissect. I am fond of this trinket, but I want to know
what is inside. Do as I tell you,” she continued. “You will find in the
laboratory the necessary instruments. Go; the key is in the door.”

He consulted her look; her eye was burning, her voice broken, and she
repeated: “Go--go! Do you not understand me?”

He obeyed, went to the laboratory, taking the bracelet with him. After
five minutes he returned saying: “I am very unskilful; I crushed the lid
in raising it; but you wished it, and your curiosity will be satisfied.”

She could, in truth, satisfy her curiosity. She eagerly seized the
bracelet, and on the back of the plate, now left bare, she saw engraved
in the gold, characters almost microscopic in size. Through the greatest
attention she succeeded in deciphering them. She distinguished several
dates, marking the year, the month, and the day, when some important
event had occurred to the Princess Gulof. These dates, accompanied by
no indication of any kind, formerly sufficed to recall the principal
experiments that she had practised on mankind before having discovered
Samuel Brohl. The result had not been very cheerful, for beneath this
form of calendar stood a confession of faith, thus expressed, “Vanity
of vanities, all is vanity!” This melancholy declaration was signed,
and the signature was perfectly legible. Mlle. Moriaz spelled it
out readily, although at that moment her sight was dim, and she was
convinced that the trinket, which Count Larinski had presented to her as
a family relic, had belonged to Anna Petrovna, Princess Gulof.

She grew mortally pale, and lost consciousness; she seemed on the verge
of an attack of delirium. In the agitation of her mind, she imagined
that she saw herself at a great distance, at the end of the world, and
very small; she was climbing a mountain, on the other side of which
there was a man awaiting her. She questioned herself, “Am I, or is this
traveller, Mlle. Moriaz?” She closed her eyes, and saw a blank abyss
open before her, in which her life was ingulfed, whirled about, like the
leaf of a tree in a whirlpool.

M. Langis drew near her, and, lightly slapping the palms of her hands,
said, “What is the matter?”

She roused herself, made an effort to lift her head, and let it sink
again. The trouble that lay in the depths of her heart choked her;
she experienced an irresistible need of confiding in some one, and she
judged that the man who was talking to her was one of those men to whom
a woman can tell her secret, one of those souls to whom she could
pour out her shame without blushing. She began, in a broken voice,
a confused, disconnected recital that Camille could scarcely follow.
However, he finally understood; he felt himself divided between an
immense pity for her despair, and a fierce lover’s joy that tightened
his throat and well-nigh strangled him.

The belfry of Cormeilles had recovered its voice; two o’clock rang out
on the air. Antoinette rose and exclaimed: “I was to meet him at the
pretty little gate that you see from here! He will have the right to be
angry if I keep him waiting.”

At once she hastened towards the balustered steps that led from the
terrace to the orchard. M. Langis followed her, seeking to detain her.
“You need not see him again,” said he. “I will meet him. Pray, charge me
with your explanations.”

She repelled him and replied, in a voice of authority: “I wish to see
him, no one but I can say to him what I have in my heart. I command you
to remain here; I intend that he shall blame no one but me.” She added
with a curl of the lips meant for a smile: “You must remember, I do not
believe yet that I have been deceived; I will not believe it until I
have read the lie in his eyes.”

She hastily descended into the orchard, and, during five minutes, her
eye fixed on the gate, she waited for Samuel Brohl. Her impatience
counted the seconds, and yet Mlle. Moriaz could have wished the gate
would never open. There was near by an old apple-tree that she loved;
in the old days she had more than once suspended her hammock from one of
its arched and drooping branches. She leaned against the gnarled trunk
of the old tree. It seemed to her that she was not alone; some one
protected her.

At last the gate opened and admitted Samuel Brohl, who had a smile on
his lips. His first words were: “And your umbrella! You have forgotten
it?”

She replied: “Do you not see that there is no sunshine?” And she
remained leaning against the apple-tree.

He uplifted his hand to show her the blue sky; he let it fall again. He
looked at Antoinette, and he was afraid. He guessed immediately that she
knew all. At once he grew audacious.

“I spent a dull day yesterday,” said he. “Mme. de Lorcy invited me to
dine with a crazy woman; but the night made up for it. I saw Engadine
in my dreams--the firs, the Alpine pines, the emerald lakes, and a red
hood.”

“I, too, dreamed last night. I dreamed that the bracelet you gave me
belonged to the crazy woman of whom you speak, and that she had her name
engraved on it.”

She threw him the bracelet: he picked it up, examined it, turned and
returned it in his trembling fingers. She grew impatient. “Look at the
place that has been forced open. Don’t you know how to read?”

He read, and became stupefied. Who would have believed that this trinket
that he had found among his father’s old traps had come to him from
Princess Gulof? that it was the price she had paid for Samuel Brohl’s
ignominy and shame? Samuel was a fatalist; he felt that his star had
set, that Fate had conspired to ruin his hopes, that he was found guilty
and condemned. His heart grew heavy within him.

“Can you tell me what I ought to think of a certain Samuel Brohl?” she
asked.

That name, pronounced by her, fell on him like a mass of lead; he never
would have believed that there could be so much weight in a human word.
He trembled under the blow; then he struck his brow with his clinched
hand and replied:

“Samuel Brohl is a man as worthy of your pity as he is of mine. If you
knew all that he has suffered, all that he has dared, you could not help
deeply pitying him and admiring him. Listen to me; Samuel Brohl is an
unfortunate man--”

“Or a wretch!” she interrupted, in a terrible voice. She was seized by
a fit of nervous laughter; she cried out: “Mme. Brohl! I will not be
called Mme. Brohl. Ah! that poor Countess Larinski!”

He had a spasm of rage that would have terrified her had she conjectured
what agitated him. He raised his head, crossed his arms on his breast,
and said, with a bitter smile:

“It was not the man that you loved, it was the count.”

She replied, “The man whom I loved never lied.”

“Yes, I lied!” he cried, gasping for breath. “I drank that cup of shame
without remorse or disgust. I lied because I loved you madly. I lied
because you were dearer to me than my honour. I lied because I despaired
of touching your heart, and any road seemed good that led to you. Why
did I meet you? why could I not see you without recognising in you the
dream of my whole life? Happiness had passed me by, it was about to take
flight; I caught it in a trap--I lied. Who would not lie, to be loved by
you?”

Samuel Brohl never had looked so handsome. Despair and passion kindled a
sombre flame in his eyes; he had the sinister charm of a fiery Satan.
He fixed on Antoinette a fascinating glance that said: “What matter my
name, my lies, and the rest? My face is not a mask, and I am the man who
pleased you.” He had not the least suspicion of the astonishing facility
with which Antoinette had taken back the heart that she had given away
so easily; he did not suspect that miracles can be wrought by contempt.
In the middle ages people believed in golems, figures in clay of an
entrancing beauty, which had all the appearance of life. Under a lock of
hair was written, in Hebrew characters, on their brow, the word “Truth.”
 If they chanced to lie, the word was obliterated; they lost all their
charm, the clay was no longer anything but clay.

Mlle. Moriaz divined Samuel Brohl’s thought; she exclaimed: “The man I
loved was he whose history you related to me.”

He would have liked to kill her, so that she never should belong to
another. Behind Antoinette, not twenty steps distant, he descried
the curb of a well, and grew dizzy at the sight. He discovered, with
despair, that he was not made of the stuff for crime. He dropped down on
his knees in the grass, and cried, “If you will not pardon me, nothing
remains for me but to die!” She stood motionless and impassive. She
repeated between her teeth Camille Langis’s phrase: “I am waiting until
this great comedian has finished playing his piece.”

He rose and started to run towards the well. She was in front of him and
barred the passage, but at the same moment she felt two hands clasp
her waist, and the breath of two lips that sought her lips and that
murmured, “You love me still, since you do not want me to die.”

She struggled with violence and horror; she succeeded, by a frantic
effort, in disengaging herself from his grasp. She fled towards the
house. Samuel Brohl rushed after her in mad pursuit; he was just
reaching her, when he suddenly stopped. He had caught sight of M.
Langis, hurrying from out a thicket, where he had been hidden. Growing
uneasy, he had approached the orchard through a path concealed by the
heavy foliage. Antoinette, out of breath, ran to him, gasping, “Camille,
save me from this man!” and she threw herself into his arms, which
closed about her with delight. He felt her sink; she would have fallen
had he not supported her.

At the same instant a menacing voice saluted him with the words,
“Monsieur, we will meet again!”

“To-day, if you will,” he replied.

Antoinette’s wild excitement had given place to insensibility; she
neither saw nor heard; her limbs no longer sustained her. Camille had
great difficulty in bringing her to the house; she could not ascend the
steps of the terrace; he was obliged to carry her. Mlle. Moiseney saw
him, and filled the air with her cries. She ran forward, she lavished
her best care on her queen. All the time she was busy in bringing her to
her senses she was asking Camille for explanations, to which she did not
pay the least attention; she interrupted him at every word to exclaim:
“This has been designed, and you are at the bottom of the plot. I have
suspected you--you owe Antoinette a grudge. Your wounded vanity never
has recovered from her refusal, and you are determined to be revenged.
Perhaps you flatter yourself that she will end by loving you. She does
not love you, and she never will love you. Who are you, to dare compare
yourself with Count Larinski? Be silent! Do I believe in Samuel Brohl? I
do not know Samuel Brohl. I venture my head that there is no such person
as Samuel Brohl.”

“Not much of a venture, mademoiselle,” replied M. Moriaz, who had
arrived in the meantime.

Antoinette remained during an hour in a state of mute languor; then a
violent fever took possession of her. When the physician who had been
sent for arrived, M. Langis accompanied him into the chamber of the sick
girl. She was delirious: seated upright, she kept continually passing
her hand over her brow; she sought to efface the taint of a kiss she
had received one moonlight night, and the impression in her hair of the
flapping of a bat’s wings that had caught in her hood. These two things
were confounded in her memory. From time to time she said: “Where is my
portrait? Give me my portrait.”

It was about ten o’clock when M. Langis called on Samuel Brohl, who was
not astonished to see him appear; he had hoped he would come. Samuel
had regained self-possession. He was calm and dignified. However, the
tempest through which he had gone had left on his features some vestige
of its passage. His lips quivered, and his beautiful chestnut locks
curled like serpents about his temples, and gave his head a Medusa-like
appearance.

He said to Camille: “Where and when? Our seconds will undertake the
arrangement of the rest.”

“You mistake, monsieur, the motive of my visit,” replied M. Langis. “I
am grieved to destroy your illusions, but I did not come to arrange a
meeting with you.”

“Do you refuse to give me satisfaction?”

“What satisfaction do I owe you?”

“You insulted me.”

“When?”

“And you said: ‘The day, the place, the weapons. I leave all to your
choice.’”

M. Langis could not refrain from smiling. “Ah! you at last acknowledge
that your fainting-fit was comedy?” he rejoined.

“Acknowledge on your part,” replied Samuel, “that you insult persons
when you believe that they are not in a state to hear you. Your courage
likes to take the safe side.”

“Be reasonable,” replied Camille. “I placed myself at Count Larinski’s
disposal: you cannot require me to fight with a Samuel Brohl!”

Samuel sprang to his feet; with fierce bearing and head erect he
advanced to the young man, who awaited him unflinchingly, and whose
resolute manner awed him. He cast upon him a sinister look, turned,
and reseated himself, bit his lips until the blood came; then said in a
placid voice:

“Will you do me the favour of telling me, monsieur, to what I owe the
honour of this visit?”

“I came to demand of you a portrait that Mlle. Moriaz is desirous of
having returned.”

“If I refuse to give it up, you will doubtless appeal to my delicacy?”

“Do you doubt it?” ironically replied Camille.

“That proves, monsieur, that you still believe in Count Larinski; that
it is to him you speak at this moment?”

“You deceive yourself. I came to see Samuel Brohl, who is a
business-man, and it is a commercial transaction that I intend to hold
with him.” And drawing from his pocket a porte-monnaie, he added: “You
see I do not come empty-handed.”

Samuel settled himself in his arm-chair. Half closing his eyes, he
watched M. Langis through his eye-lashes. A change passed over his
features; his nose became more crooked, and his chin more pointed; he no
longer resembled a lion, he was a fox. His lips wore the sugared smile
of a usurer, one who lays snares for the sons of wealthy families, and
who scents out every favourable case. If at this moment Jeremiah Brohl
had seen him from the other world, he would have recognised his own
flesh and blood.

He said at last to Camille: “You are a man of understanding, monsieur; I
am ready to listen to you.”

“I am very glad of it, and, to speak frankly, I had no doubts about it.
I knew you to be very intelligent, very much disposed to make the best
of an unpleasant conjuncture.”

“Ah! spare my modesty. I thank you for your excellent opinion of me; I
should warn you that I am accused of being greedy after gain. You will
leave some of the feathers from your wings between my fingers.”

For a reply M. Langis significantly patted the porte-monnaie which
he held in his hand, and which was literally stuffed with bank-notes.
Immediately Samuel took from a locked drawer a casket, and proceeded to
open it.

“This is a very precious gem,” he said. “The medallion is gold, and the
work on the miniature is exquisite. It is a master-piece--the colour
equals the design. The mouth is marvellously rendered. Mengs or Liotard
could not have done better. At what do you value this work of art?”

“You are more of a connoisseur than I. I will leave it to your own
valuation.”

“I will let you have the trinket for five thousand francs; it is almost
nothing.”

Camille began to draw out the five thousand francs from his
porte-monnaie. “How prompt you are!” remarked Samuel. “The portrait has
not only a value as a work of art; I am sure you attach a sentimental
value to it, for I suspect you of being head and ears in love with the
original.”

“I find you too greedy,” replied Camille, casting on him a crushing
glance.

“Do not be angry. I am accustomed to exercise methodical precision in
business affairs. My father always sold at a fixed price, and I, too,
never lower my charges. You will readily understand that what is worth
five thousand francs to a friend is worth double to a lover. This gem is
worth ten thousand francs. You can take it or leave it.”

“I will take it,” replied M. Langis.

“Since we agree,” continued Samuel, “I possess still other articles
which might suit you.”

“Why, do you think of selling me your clothing?”

“Let us come to an understanding. I have other articles of the same
lot.”

And he brought from a closet the red hood, which he spread out on the
table.

“Here is an article of clothing--to use your own words--that may be of
interest to you. Its colour is beautiful; if you saw it in the sunshine,
it would dazzle you. I grant that the stuff is common--it is very
ordinary cashmere--but if you deign to examine it closely, you will be
struck by the peculiar perfume that it exhales. The Italians call it
‘_l’odor femminino_.’”

“And what is your rate of charge for the ‘_odor femminino_?’”

“I will be moderate. I will let you have this article and its perfume
for five thousand francs. It is actually giving it away.”

“Assuredly. We will say ten and five--that makes fifteen thousand.”

“One moment. You can pay for all together. I have other things to offer
you. One would say that the floor burned your feet, and that you could
not endure being in this room.”

“I allow that I long to leave this--what shall I say?--this shop, lair,
or den.”

“You are young, monsieur; it never does to hurry; haste causes us acts
of forgetfulness that we afterwards regret. You would be sorry not to
take away with you these two scraps of paper.”

At these words he drew from his note-book two letters, which he
unfolded.

“Is there much more?” demanded Camille. “I fear that I shall become
short of funds, and be obliged to go back for more.”

“Ah! these two letters, I will not part with them for a trifle, the
second especially. It is only twelve lines in length; but what pretty
English handwriting! Only see! and the style is loving and tender. I
will add that it is signed. Ah! monsieur, Mlle. Moriaz will be charmed
to see these scrawls again. Under what obligations she will be to you!
You will make the most of it; you will tell her that you wrested them
from me, your dagger at my throat--that you terrified me. With what a
gracious smile she will reward your heroism! According to my opinion,
that smile is as well worth ten thousand francs as the medallion--the
two gems are of equal value.”

“If you want more, it makes no difference.”

“No, monsieur; I have told you I have only one price.”

“At this rate, it is twenty-five thousand francs that I owe you. You
have nothing more to sell me?”

“Alas! that is all.”

“Will you swear it?”

“What, monsieur! you admit, then, that Samuel Brohl has a word of
honour--that when he has sworn, he can be believed?”

“You are right; I am still very young.”

“That is all, then, I swear to you,” affirmed Samuel, sighing. “My shop
is poorly stocked; I had begun laying in a supply, but an unfortunate
accident deranged my little business.”

“Bah! be consoled,” replied M. Langis; “you will find another
opportunity; a genius of such lofty flights as yours never is at a loss.
You have been unfortunate; some day Fortune will compensate you for the
wrongs she has done you, and the world will accord justice to your fine
talents.”

Speaking thus, he laid on the table twenty-five notes of a thousand
francs each. He counted them; Samuel counted them after him, and at once
delivered to him the medallion, the hood, and the two letters.

Camille rose to leave. “Monsieur Brohl,” he said, “from the first day
I saw you, I formed the highest opinion of your character. The reality
surpasses my expectations. I am charmed to have made your acquaintance,
and I venture to hope that you are not sorry to have made mine. However,
I shall not say, _au revoir_.”

“Who knows?” replied Samuel, suddenly changing his countenance and
attitude. And he added, “If you are fond of being astonished, monsieur,
will you remain still another instant in this den?”

He rolled and twisted the twenty-five one-thousand-franc notes into
lamp-lighters; then, with a grand gesture, _a la Poniatowski_, he
approached the candle, held them in the flame until they blazed, and
then threw them on the hearth, where they were soon consumed.

Turning towards M. Langis, he cried, “Will you now do me the honour of
fighting with me?”

“After such a noble act as that, I can refuse you nothing,” returned
Camille. “I will do you that signal honour.”

“Just what I desire,” replied Samuel. “I am the offended; I have the
choice of arms.” And, in showing M. Langis out, he said, “I will not
conceal from you that I have frequented the shooting-galleries, and that
I am a first-class pistol-shot.”

Camille bowed and went out.

The next day, in a lucid interval, Mlle. Moriaz saw at the foot of
her bed a medallion laid on a red hood. From that moment the physician
announced an improvement in her symptoms.



CHAPTER XII

Six days after these events, Samuel Brohl, having passed through
Namur and Liege without stopping at either place, arrived by rail at
Aix-la-Chapelle. He went directly to the Hotel Royal, close to the
railroad-station; he ordered a hearty dinner to be served him, which he
washed down with foaming champagne. He had an excellent appetite; his
soul kept holiday; his heart was expanded, inflated with joy, and his
brain intoxicated. He had revenged himself; he had meted out justice to
that insolent fellow, his rival. Mlle. Moriaz did not belong to
Samuel Brohl, but she never would belong to Camille Langis. Near the
Franco-Belgian frontier, on the verge of a forest, a man had been shot
in the breast; Samuel Brohl had seen him fall; and some one had cried,
“He is dead!” It is asserted that Aix-la-Chapelle is a very dull city,
that the very dogs suffer so sadly from ennui that they piteously beg
passers-by to kick them, with a view to having a little excitement.
Samuel never felt one moment’s ennui during the evening that he spent
in Charlemagne’s city. He had constantly in mind a certain spot in a
forest, and a man falling; and he experienced a thrill of delight.

After the champagne, he drank punch, an after that he slept like a
dormouse; unfortunately, sleep dissipated his exhilaration, and when he
awoke his gaiety had left him. He had the fatal custom of reflecting;
his reflections saddened him; he was revenged, but what then? He thought
for a long while of Mlle. Moriaz; he gazed with melancholy eye at his
two hands, which had allowed her and good fortune to elude their grasp.

He recited in a low voice some German verses, signifying:

“I have resolved to bury my songs and my dreams; bring me a large
coffin. Why is this coffin so heavy? Because in it with my dreams I have
laid away my love and my sorrows.”

When he had recited these verses Samuel felt sadder than before, and he
cursed the poets. “They did me great harm,” he said, bitterly. “Without
them I had spent days interwoven with gold and silk. My future was
secure: it was they who gave me a distaste for my position. I believed
in them; I was the dupe of their hollow declamation; they taught me
thoughtless contempt, and they gave me the sickly ambition to play the
silly part of a man of fine sentiments. I despised the mud. Where am I
now?”

He had formed the project of going to Holland and of embarking thence
for America. What would he do in the United States? He did not know yet.
He passed in review all the professions that at all suited him; they
all required an outlay for first expenses. Thanks to God and to M.
Guldenthal, whose loan was in the greatest danger, he was not destitute
of all supplies. But a week previous he had held into the flames and
burned twenty-five one-thousand-franc bills of the Bank of France. He
felt some remorse for the act; he could not help thinking that a revenge
that cost twenty-five thousand francs was an article of luxury of which
poor devils should deprive themselves. In thinking over this adventure,
it seemed to him that it was another than himself who had burned those
bills, or at least that he had mechanically executed this _auto-da-fe_
through a sort of thoughtless impulse, like a puppet moved by an
invisible string. Suddenly the phantom with whom he had had frequent
conversations appeared, and there was a sneer on its lips. Samuel
addressed it once more--this was to be the last time; he said:

“Imbecile! You are my evil genius. It was you who caused me to commit
this extravagance. You yourself lighted the candle, you put the bills
into my hands, you guided my arm, extended it, held it above the fatal
flame. This act of supreme heroism was your work; it is not I, it is
you, who paid so dearly for the pleasure of astonishing one who wantonly
insulted me, and of killing him. Cursed forever be the day when I
assumed your name, and when I conceived the foolish notion of becoming
your second self! I made myself a Pole: did Poland ever have the least
idea of government? You of all men were the most incapable of making
your way; I aped a poor model indeed. Abel Larinski, I break off all
connection with you; I wind up the affairs of our firm, I put the key
under the door, or drop it down the well. O my great Pole! I return to
you your title, your name, and with your name all that you gave me--your
pride, your pretensions, your dangerous delicacy, your attitudes, your
sentimental grimaces, and your waving plume.”

It was thus that Samuel Brohl took a decisive farewell of Count Abel
Larinski, who might henceforth rest quietly in his grave; there was no
further danger of a dead man being compromised by a living one. What
name did Samuel Brohl mean now to assume? Out of spite to his destiny,
he chose for the time the humblest of all; he decided to call himself
Kicks, which was his mother’s name.

His melancholy would have known no bounds, had he suspected that Camille
Langis was still in the world. Camille Langis for two weeks lay between
life and death, but the ball had finally been successfully extracted.
Mme. de Lorcy hastened to Mons and nursed him like a mother; she had the
joy of bringing him back alive to Paris.

Care was taken that no mention of the duel should be made to Mlle.
Moriaz, and not a word concerning it reached her; her condition for a
long time caused the gravest anxiety. After she became convalescent she
remained sunk in a gloomy, taciturn sadness. She never made the least
allusion to what had passed, and would not permit any one to speak of it
to her. She had been deceived, and a mortification, mingled with dread,
was the result of her mistake. It seemed to her that nothing remained in
life for her but remembrance and silence.

Towards the end of November, M. Moriaz proposed to her that they should
return to Paris. She expressed her desire not to leave Cormeilles--to
pass the winter in solitude; the human face terrified her. M. Moriaz
tried to represent to her that she was unreasonable.

“Will you wear eternal mourning for a stranger?” he asked; “for, in
reality, the man that you loved you never saw. Ah! _mon Dieu_, you
deceived, you deluded yourself. Is there, I will not say a single woman,
but a single member of the Institute, who has not once been grossly
imposed on? It is through the means of failures in experiments that
science progresses.”

And he rose to still higher considerations; he endeavoured to prove to
her that, if it is bad to have erred, an excessive fear of erring is
a still worse evil, because it is better to lose one’s way than not to
walk at all.

When he had finished his harangue, she said, shaking her head, “I have
no longer faith in any one.”

“What! not even in the brave fellow to whom you owe the recovery of your
portrait and your letters?”

“Of whom do you speak?” she exclaimed.

Then he declared to her how M. Langis had effected the descent into the
den, without telling her what had resulted therefrom.

“Ah! that was kind, very kind,” she said. “I never doubted that Camille
was a true friend.”

“A friend? Are you very sure that it is only friendship that he feels
for you?”

Whereupon M. Moriaz told her all the rest. She grew pensive and sank
into a reverie. Suddenly the door of the _salon_ opened, and Camille
entered. After inquiring after her health, he informed her that in
consequence of a cold he, too, had been sick; and, as he was now free
from business engagements, his physician was sending him to pass the
winter in Sorrento.

She replied: “That is a journey that I would like to make. Will you take
me with you?”

She gazed fixedly at him; there was everything in her gaze. He bent his
knee before her, and for some moments they remained hand-in-hand, and
eye to eye. In the midst of this, Mlle. Moiseney appeared, who, at sight
of this _tableau vivant_, stood perfectly confounded.

“You are very much astonished, mademoiselle,” said M. Moriaz to her.

“Not so much as you fancy, monsieur,” replied she, recovering herself.
“I did not dare to say it, but in my heart I always believed, always
thought--Yes, I always was sure that it would end thus.”

“God bless Pope Joan!” he cried; “I shall cease to correct her.”

We have failed to learn what Samuel Brohl is doing in America. In
waiting for something better, has he become an humble teacher? has he
attempted a new matrimonial enterprise? has he become a reporter of the
_New York Herald_, or a politician in one of the Northern States, or
a carpet-bagger in South Carolina? does he dream of being some day
President of the glorious republic with the starry banner?

Up to the present time, no American journal has devoted the shortest
paragraph to him. Adventurers are beings who constantly vanish and
reappear; they belong to the family of divers; but, after many plunges,
they always end by some catastrophe. The wave supports the drowning man
an instant, then bears him away and drags him down to the depths of the
briny abyss; there is heard a splash, a ripple, a hoarse cry, followed
by a smothered groan, and Samuel Brohl is no more! For some days the
question is agitated whether his real name is Brohl, Kicks, or Larinski;
soon something else is talked about, and his memory becomes a prey to
eternal silence.





End of Project Gutenberg’s Samuel Brohl & Company, by Victor Cherbuliez

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SAMUEL BROHL & COMPANY ***

***** This file should be named 2470-0.txt or 2470-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/7/2470/

Produced by Dagny; John Bickers; David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation”
 or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.”

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
“Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’ WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
