Project Gutenberg's Aslauga's Knight, by Fredrich de la Motte-Fouque

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Aslauga's Knight

Author: Fredrich de la Motte-Fouque

Posting Date: January 2, 2009 [EBook #2827]
Release Date: September, 2001

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ASLAUGA'S KNIGHT ***




Produced by Sandra Laythorpe





ASLAUGA'S KNIGHT

By Fredrich de la Motte-Fouque




CHAPTER I.


Many years ago there lived in the island of Fuhnen a noble knight,
called Froda, the friend of the Skalds, who was so named because he not
only offered free hospitality in his fair castle to every renowned and
noble bard, but likewise strove with all his might to discover those
ancient songs, and tales, and legends which, in Runic writings or
elsewhere, were still to be found; he had even made some voyages to
Iceland in search of them, and had fought many a hard battle with the
pirates of those seas--for he was also a right valiant knight, and he
followed his great ancestors not only in their love of song, but also
in their bold deeds of arms. Although he was still scarcely beyond
the prime of youth, yet all the other nobles in the island willingly
submitted themselves to him, whether in council or in war; nay, his
renown had even been carried ere now over the sea to the neighbouring
land of Germany.

One bright autumn evening this honour-loving knight sat before his
castle, as he was often wont to do, that he might look far and wide over
land and sea, and that he might invite any travellers who were passing
by, as was his custom, to share in his noble hospitality.

But on this day he saw little of all that he was accustomed to look
upon; for on his knees there lay an ancient book with skilfully and
richly painted characters, which a learned Icelander had just sent to
him across the sea: it was the history of Aslauga, the fair daughter of
Sigurd, who at first, concealing her high birth, kept goats among the
simple peasants of the land, clothed in mean attire; then, in the golden
veil of her flowing hair, won the love of King Ragnar Lodbrog; and at
last shone brightly on the Danish throne as his glorious queen, till the
day of her death.

To the Knight Froda it seemed as though the gracious Lady Aslauga rose
in life and birth before him, so that his calm and steadfast heart,
true indeed to ladies' service, but never yet devoted to one particular
female image, burst forth in a clear flame of love for the fair daughter
of Sigurd. "What matters it," thought he to himself, "that it is more
than a hundred years since she disappeared from earth? She sees so
clearly into this heart of mine--and what more can a knight desire?
wherefore she shall henceforth be my honoured love, and shall inspire
me in battle and in song." And therewith he sang a lay on his new love,
which ran in the following manner:


        "They ride over hill and dale apace
         To seek for their love the fairest face--
         They search through city and forest-glade
         To find for their love the gentlest maid--
         They climb wherever a path may lead
         To seek the wisest dame for their meed.
         Ride on, ye knights: but ye never may see
         What the light of song has shown to me:
         Loveliest, gentlest, and wisest of all,
         Bold be the deeds that her name shall recall;
         What though she ne'er bless my earthly sight?
         Yet death shall reveal her countenance bright.
         Fair world, good night!  Good day, sweet love!
         Who seeks here in faith shall find above."


"Such purpose may come to good," said a hollow voice near the knight;
and when he looked round, he saw the form of a poor peasant woman, so
closely wrapped in a grey mantle that he could not discern any part of
her countenance. She looked over his shoulder on the book, and said,
with a deep sigh, "I know that story well; and it fares no better with
me than with the princess of whom it tells." Froda looked at her with
astonishment. "Yes, yes," pursued she, with strange becks and nods; "I
am the descendant of the mighty Rolf, to whom the fairest castles and
forests and fields of this island once belonged; your castle and your
domains, Froda, amongst others, were his. We are now cast down to
poverty; and because I am not so fair as Aslauga there is no hope that
my possessions will be restored to me; and therefore I am fain to veil
my poor face from every eye." It seemed that she shed warm tears beneath
her mantle. At this Froda was greatly moved, and begged her, for
God's sake, to let him know how he could help her, for that he was a
descendant of the famous northern heroes of the olden time; and perhaps
yet something more than they--namely, a good Christian. "I almost
think," murmured she from beneath her covering, "that you are that very
Froda whom men call the Good, and the friend of the Skalds, and of whose
generosity and mildness such wonderful stories are told. If it be so,
there may be help for me. You need only give up to me the half of your
fields and meadows, and I should be in a condition to live in some
measure such a life as befits the descendant of the mighty Rolf." Then
Froda looked thoughtfully on the ground; partly because she had asked
for so very much; partly, also, because he was considering whether she
could really be descended from the powerful Rolf. But the veiled form
said, after a pause, "I must have been mistaken, and you are not indeed
that renowned, gentle-hearted Froda: for how could he have doubted so
long about such a trifle? But I will try the utmost means. See now! for
the sake of the fair Aslauga, of whom you have both read and sang--for
the sake of the honoured daughter of Sigurd, grant my request!" Then
Froda started up eagerly, and cried, "Let it be as you have said!" and
gave her his knightly hand to confirm his words. But he could not grasp
the hand of the peasant-woman, although her dark form remained close
before him. A secret shudder began to run through his limbs, whilst
suddenly a light seemed to shine forth from the apparition--a golden
light--in which she became wholly wrapped; so that he felt as though
Aslauga stood before him in the flowing veil of her golden hair, and
smiling graciously on him. Transported and dazzled, he sank on his
knees. When he rose up once more he only saw a cloudy mist of autumn
spreading over the meadow, fringed at its edges with lingering evening
lights, and then vanishing far over the waves. The knight scarcely knew
what had happened to him. He returned to his chamber buried in thought,
and sometimes feeling sure that he had beheld Aslauga, sometimes, again,
that some goblin had risen before him with deceitful tricks, mocking in
spiteful wise the service which he had vowed to his dead mistress.
But henceforth, wherever he roved, over valley or forest or heath, or
whether he sailed upon the waves of the sea, the like appearances met
him. Once he found a lute lying in a wood, and drove a wolf away from
it, and when sounds burst from the lute without its being touched a fair
child rose up from it, as of old Aslauga herself had done. At another
time he would see goats clambering among the highest cliffs by the
sea-shore, and it was a golden form who tended them. Then, again, a
bright queen, resplendent in a dazzling bark, would seem to glide past
him, and salute him graciously,--and if he strove to approach any of
those he found nothing but cloud, and mist, and vapour. Of all this many
a lay might be sung. But so much he learnt from them all--that the fair
Lady Aslauga accepted his service, and that he was now indeed and in
truth become her knight.

Meanwhile the winter had come and gone. In northern lands this season
never fails to bring to those who understand and love it many an image
full of beauty and meaning, with which a child of man might well be
satisfied, so far as earthly happiness can satisfy, through all his time
on earth. But when the spring came glancing forth with its opening buds
and flowing waters there came also bright and sunny tidings from the
land of Germany to Fuhnen.

There stood on the rich banks of the Maine, where it pours its waters
through the fertile land of Franconia, a castle of almost royal
magnificence, whose orphan-mistress was a relation of the German
emperor. She was named Hildegardis; and was acknowledged far and wide
as the fairest of maidens. Therefore her imperial uncle wished that she
should wed none but the bravest knight who could anywhere be met with.
Accordingly he followed the example of many a noble lord in such a case,
and proclaimed a tournament, at which the chief prize should be the hand
of the peerless Hildegardis, unless the victor already bore in his heart
a lady wedded or betrothed to him; for the lists were not to be closed
to any brave warrior of equal birth, that the contest of strength and
courage might be so much the richer in competitors.

Now the renowned Froda had tidings of this from his German
brethren-in-arms; and he prepared himself to appear at the festival.
Before all things, he forged for himself a splendid suit of armour; as,
indeed, he was the most excellent armourer of the north, far-famed as
it is for skill in that art. He worked the helmet out of pure gold, and
formed it so that it seemed to be covered with bright flowing locks,
which called to mind Aslauga's tresses. He also fashioned, on the
breastplate of his armour, overlaid with silver, a golden image in half
relief, which represented Aslauga in her veil of flowing locks, that he
might make known, even at the beginning of the tournament--"This knight,
bearing the image of a lady upon his breast, fights not for the hand
of the beautiful Hildegardis, but only for the joy of battle and for
knightly fame." Then he took out of his stables a beautiful Danish
steed, embarked it carefully on board a vessel, and sailed prosperously
to the opposite shore.




CHAPTER II.



In one of those fair beech-woods which abound in the fertile land of
Germany he fell in with a young and courteous knight of delicate form,
who asked the noble northman to share the meal which he had invitingly
spread out upon the greensward, under the shade of the pleasantest
boughs. Whilst the two knights sat peacefully together at their repast
they felt drawn towards each other and rejoiced when on rising from it,
they observed that they were about to follow the same road. They had not
come to this good understanding by means of many words; for the young
knight Edwald was of a silent nature, and would sit for hours with a
quiet smile upon his lips without opening them to speak. But even in
that quiet smile there lay a gentle, winning grace; and when from time
to time a few simple words of deep meaning sprang to his lips they
seemed like a gift deserving of thanks. It was the same with the little
songs which he sang ever and anon: they were ended almost as soon as
begun; but in each short couplet there dwelt a deep and winning spirit,
whether it called forth a kindly sigh or a peaceful smile. It seemed
to the noble Froda as if a younger brother rode beside him, or even a
tender, blooming son. They travelled thus many days together; and it
appeared as if their path were marked out for them in inseparable union;
and much as they rejoiced at this, yet they looked sadly at each other
whenever they set out afresh, or where cross-roads met, on finding that
neither took a different direction: nay, it seemed at times as if a tear
gathered in Edwald's downcast eye.

It happened on a time, that at their hostelry they met an arrogant,
overbearing knight, of gigantic stature and powerful frame, whose
speech and carriage proved him to be not of German but foreign birth. He
appeared to come from the land of Bohemia. He cast a contemptuous
smile on Froda, who, as usual, had opened the ancient book of Aslauga's
history, and was attentively reading in it. "You must be a ghostly
knight?" he said, inquiringly; and it appeared as if a whole train of
unseemly jests were ready to follow. But Froda answered so firmly and
seriously with a negative that the Bohemian stopped short suddenly;
as when the beasts, after venturing to mock their king, the lion, are
subdued to quietness by one glance of his eye. But not so easily was
the Bohemian knight subdued; rather the more did he begin to mock young
Edwald for his delicate form and for his silence--all which he bore for
some time with great patience; but when at last the stranger used an
unbecoming phrase, he arose, girded on his sword, and bowing gracefully,
he said, "I thank you, Sir Knight, that you have given me this
opportunity of proving that I am neither a slothful nor unpractised
knight; for only thus can your behaviour be excused, which otherwise
must be deemed most unmannerly. Are you ready?"

With these words he moved towards the door; the Bohemian knight
followed, smiling scornfully; while Froda was full of care for his young
and slender companion, although his honour was so dear to him that he
could in no way interpose.

But it soon appeared how needless were the northman's fears. With equal
vigour and address did Edwald assault his gigantic adversary, so that to
look upon, it was almost like one of those combats between a knight and
some monster of the forest, of which ancient legends tell. The issue,
too, was not unlike. While the Bohemian was collecting himself for a
decisive stroke Edwald rushed in upon him, and, with the force of a
wrestler, cast him to the ground. But he spared his conquered foe,
helped him courteously to rise, and then turned to mount his own steed.
Soon after he and Froda left the hostelry, and once more their journey
led them on the same path as before.

"From henceforth this gives me pleasure," said Froda, pointing with
satisfaction to their common road. "I must own to you, Edchen"--he had
accustomed himself, in loving confidence, to call his young friend
by that childlike name--"I must own to you that hitherto, when I have
thought that you might perhaps be journeying with me to the tournament
held in honour of the fair Hildegardis, a heaviness came over my heart.
Your noble knightly spirit I well knew, but I feared lest the strength
of your slender limbs might not be equal to it. Now I have learned to
know you as a warrior who may long seek his match; and God be praised if
we still hold on in the same path, and welcome our earliest meeting in
the lists!"

But Edwald looked at him sorrowfully, and said, "What can my skill
and strength avail if they be tried against you, and for the greatest
earthly prize, which one of us alone can win? Alas! I have long
foreboded with a heavy heart the sad truth, that you also are journeying
to the tournament of the fair Hildegardis."

"Edchen," answered Froda, with a smile, "my gentle, loving youth, see
you not that I already wear on my breastplate the image of a liege lady?
I strive but for renown in arms, and not for your fair Hildegardis!"

"MY fair Hildegardis!" answered Edwald, with a sigh. "That she is not,
nor ever will be--or should she, ah! Froda, it would pierce your heart.
I know well the northland faith is deep-rooted as your rocks, and hard
to dissolve as their summits of snow; but let no man think that he can
look unscathed into the eyes of Hildegardis. Has not she, the haughty,
the too haughty maiden, so bewitched my tranquil, lowly mind, that I
forget the gulf which lies between us, and still pursue her; and would
rather perish than renounce the daring hope to win that eagle spirit for
my own?"

"I will help you to it, Edchen," answered Froda, smiling still. "Would
that I knew how this all-conquering lady looks! She must resemble the
Valkyrien of our heathen forefathers, since so many mighty warriors are
overcome by her."

Edwald solemnly drew forth a picture from beneath his breastplate, and
held it before him. Fixed, and as if enchanted, Froda gazed upon it,
with glowing cheeks and sparkling eyes; the smile passed away from his
countenance, as the sunlight fades away from the meadows before the
coming darkness of the storm.

"See you not now, my noble comrade," whispered Edwald, "that for one of
us two, or perhaps for both, the joy of life is gone?"

"Not yet," replied Froda, with a powerful effort; "but hide your magic
picture, and let us rest beneath this shade. You must be somewhat spent
with your late encounter, and a strange weariness oppresses me with
leaden weight." They dismounted from their steeds, and stretched
themselves upon the ground.

The noble Froda had no thought of sleep; but he wished to be undisturbed
whilst he wrestled strongly with himself, and strove, if it might be, to
drive from his mind that image of fearful beauty. It seemed as if this
new influence had already become a part of his very life, and at last
a restless dreamy sleep did indeed overshadow the exhausted warrior. He
fancied himself engaged in combat with many knights, whilst Hildegardis
looked on smiling from a richly-adorned balcony; and just as he thought
he had gained the victory the bleeding Edwald lay groaning beneath his
horse's feet. Then again it seemed as if Hildegardis stood by his side
in a church, and they were about to receive the marriage-blessing. He
knew well that this was not right, and the "yes," which he was to utter,
he pressed back with resolute effort into his heart, and forthwith
his eyes were moistened with burning tears. From yet stranger and more
bewildering visions the voice of Edwald at last awoke him. He raised
himself up, and heard his young companion saying courteously, as he
looked towards a neighbouring thicket, "Only return, noble maiden; I
will surely help you if I can; and I had no wish to scare you away, but
that the slumbers of my brother in arms might not be disturbed by you."
A golden gleam shone through the branches as it vanished.

"For heaven's sake, my faithful comrade," cried Froda, "to whom are you
speaking, and who has been here by me?"

"I cannot myself rightly understand," said Edwald. "Hardly had you
dropped asleep when a figure came forth from the forest, closely wrapped
in a dark mantle. At first I took her for a peasant. She seated herself
at your head; and though I could see nothing of her countenance, I could
well observe that she was sorely troubled, and even shedding tears. I
made signs to her to depart, lest she should disturb your sleep; and
would have offered her a piece of gold, supposing that poverty must
be the cause of her deep distress. But my hand seemed powerless, and
a shudder passed through me, as if I had entertained such a purpose
towards a queen. Immediately glittering locks of gold waved here and
there between the folds of her close-wrapped mantle, and the thicket
began almost to shine in the light which they shed. 'Poor youth,' said
she then, 'you love truly, and can well understand how a lofty woman's
heart burns in keenest sorrow when a noble knight, who vowed himself to
be her own, withdraws his heart, and, like a weak bondman, is led away
to meaner hopes.' Hereupon she arose, and, sighing, disappeared in
yonder thicket. It almost seemed to me, Froda, as though she uttered
your name."

"Yes, it was me she named," answered Froda; "and not in vain she named
me. Aslauga, thy knight comes, and enters the lists, and all for thee
and thy reward alone! At the same time, my Edchen, we will win for you
your haughty bride." With this he sprang upon his steed, full of the
proud joy of former times; and when the magic of Hildegardis' beauty,
dazzling and bewildering, would rise up before him, he said, smiling,
"Aslauga!" and the sun of his inner life shone forth again cloudless and
serene.




CHAPTER III.



From a balcony of her castle on the Maine Hildegardis was wont to
refresh herself in the cool of the evening by gazing on the rich
landscape below, but gazing more eagerly on the glitter of arms,
which often came in sight from many a distant road; for knights were
approaching singly, or with a train of followers, all eager to prove
their courage and their strength in striving for the high prize of the
tournament. She was in truth a proud and high-minded maiden--perhaps
more so than became even her dazzling beauty and her princely rank. As
she now gazed with a proud smile on the glittering roads a damsel of her
train began the following lay:--


        "The joyous song of birds in spring
              Upon the wing
         Doth echo far through wood and dell,
              And freely tell
         Their treasures sweet of love and mirth,
         Too gladsome for this lowly earth.

        "The gentle breath of flowers in May,
              O'er meadows gay,
         Doth fill the pure and balmy air
              With perfume rare;
         Still floating round each slender form,
         Though scorched by sun, or torn by storm.

        "But every high and glorious aim,
              And the pure flame
         That deep abiding in my heart
              Can ne'er depart,
         Too lofty for my falt'ring tongue,
         Must die with me, unknown, unsung."


"Wherefore do you sing that song, and at this moment?" said Hildegardis,
striving to appear scornful and proud, though a deep and secret sadness
was plainly enough seen to overshadow her countenance. "It came into my
head unawares," replied the damsel, "as I looked upon the road by which
the gentle Edwald with his pleasant lays first approached us; for it was
from him I learnt it. But seems it not to you, my gracious lady, and to
you too, my companions, as if Edwald himself were again riding that way
towards the castle?" "Dreamer!" said Hildegardis, scornfully--and yet
could not for some space withdraw her eyes from the knight, till at
length, with an effort, she turned them on Froda, who rode beside him,
saying: "Yes, truly, that knight is Edwald; but what can you find
to notice in the meek-spirited, silent boy? Here, fix your eyes, my
maidens, on this majestic figure, if you would behold a knight indeed."
She was silent. A voice within her, as though of prophecy, said, "Now
the victor of the tournament rides into the courtyard;" and she, who
had never feared the presence of any human being, now felt humbled, and
almost painfully awed, when she beheld the northern knight.

At the evening meal the two newly-arrived knights were placed opposite
to the royal Hildegardis. As Froda, after the northern fashion, remained
in full armour, the golden image of Aslauga gleamed from his silver
breast-plate full before the eyes of the haughty lady. She smiled
scornfully, as if conscious that it depended on her will to drive that
image from the breast and from the heart of the stranger-knight.
Then suddenly a clear golden light passed through the hall, so that
Hildegardis said, "O, the keen lightning!" and covered her eyes with
both her hands. But Froda looked into the dazzling radiance with a
joyful gaze of welcome. At this Hildegardis feared him yet more, though
at the same time she thought, "This loftiest and most mysterious of men
must be born for me alone." Yet could she not forbear, almost against
her will, to look from time to time in friendly tenderness on the poor
Edwald, who sat there silent, and with a sweet smile seemed to pity and
to mock his own suffering and his own vain hopes.

When the two knights were alone in their sleeping-chamber Edwald looked
for a long time in silence into the dewy, balmy night. Then he sang to
his lute:


        "A hero wise and brave,
           A lowly, tender youth,
         Are wandering through the land
           In steadfast love and truth.

        "The hero, by his deeds,
           Both bliss and fame had won,
         And still, with heartfelt joy,
           The faithful child looked on."


But Froda took the lute from his hands, and said, "No, Edchen, I will
teach you another song; listen--!


      "'There's a gleam in the hall, and like morning's light
        Hath shone upon all her presence bright.
        Suitors watch as she passes by--
        She may gladden their hearts by one glance of her eye:
        But coldly she gazeth upon the throng,
        And they that have sought her may seek her long.
        She turns her away from the richly clad knight,
        She heeds not the words of the learned wight;
        The prince is before her in all his pride,
        But other the visions around her that glide.
        Then tell me, in all the wide world's space,
        Who may e'er win that lady's grace?
        In sorrowful love there sits apart
        The gentle squire who hath her heart;
        They all are deceived by fancies vain,
        And he knows it not who the prize shall gain.'"


Edwald thrilled. "As God wills," said he, softly to himself. "But I
cannot understand how such a thing could be." "As God wills," repeated
Froda. The two friends embraced each other, and soon after fell into a
peaceful slumber.

Some days afterwards Froda sat in a secluded bower of the castle garden,
and was reading in the ancient book of his lovely mistress Aslauga. It
happened at that very time that Hildegardis passed by. She stood still,
and said, thoughtfully, "Strange union that you are of knight and sage,
how comes it that you bring forth so little out of the deep treasures of
your knowledge? And yet I think you must have many a choice history at
your command, even such as that which now lies open before you; for I
see rich and bright pictures of knights and ladies painted amongst the
letters."

"It is, indeed, the most surpassing and enchanting history in all the
world," said Froda; "but you have neither patience nor thoughtfulness to
listen to our wonderful legends of the north."

"Why think you so?" answered Hildegardis, with that pride which she
rejoiced to display towards Froda, when she could find courage to do so;
and, placing herself on a stone seat opposite, she commanded him at once
to read something to her out of that fair book.

Froda began, and in the very effort which he made to change the old
heroic speech of Iceland into the German tongue, his heart and mind were
stirred more fervently and solemnly. As he looked up from time to time,
he beheld the countenance of Hildegardis beaming in ever-growing beauty
with joy, wonder, and interest; and the thought passed through his mind
whether this could indeed be his destined bride, to whom Aslauga herself
was guiding him.

Then suddenly the characters became strangely confused; it seemed as
if the pictures began to move, so that he was obliged to stop. While he
fixed his eyes with a strong effort upon the book, endeavouring to drive
away this strange confusion, he heard a well-known sweetly solemn voice,
which said, "Leave a little space for me, fair lady. The history which
that knight is reading to you relates to me; and I hear it gladly."

Before the eyes of Froda, as he raised them from his book, sat Aslauga
in all the glory of her flowing golden locks beside Hildegardis, on
the seat. With tears of affright in her eyes, the maiden sank back and
fainted. Solemnly, yet graciously, Aslauga warned her knight with a
motion of her fair right hand, and vanished.

"What have I done to you?" said Hildegardis when recovered from her
swoon by his care, "what have I done to you, evil-minded knight, that
you call up your northern spectres before me, and well-nigh destroy me
through terror of your magic arts?" "Lady," answered Froda, "may God help
me, as I have not called hither the wondrous lady who but now appeared
to us. But now her will is known to me, and I commend you to God's
keeping."

With that he walked thoughtfully out of the bower. Hildegardis fled in
terror from the gloomy shade, and, rushing out on the opposite side,
reached a fair open grass-plot, where Edwald, in the soft glow of
twilight, was gathering flowers, and, meeting her with a courteous
smile, offered her a nosegay of narcissus and pansies.




CHAPTER IV.



At length the day fixed for the tournament arrived, and a distinguished
noble, appointed by the German emperor, arranged all things in the most
magnificent and sumptuous guise for the solemn festival. The field of
combat opened wide, and fair, and level, thickly strewn with the finest
sand, so that, both man and horse might find sure footing; and, like a
pure field of snow, it shone forth from the midst of the flowery plain.
Rich hangings of silk from Arabia, curiously embroidered with Indian
gold, adorned with their various colours the lists enclosing the space,
and hung from the lofty galleries which had been erected for the ladies
and the nobles who were to behold the combat. At the upper end, under a
canopy of majestic arches richly wrought in gold, was the place of the
Lady Hildegardis. Green wreaths and garlands waved gracefully between
the glittering pillars in the soft breezes of July. And with impatient
eyes the multitude, who crowded beyond the lists, gazed upwards,
expecting the appearance of the fairest maiden of Germany, and were
only at times drawn to another part by the stately approach of the
combatants. Oh, how many a bright suit of armour, many a silken
richly-embroidered mantle, how many a lofty waving plume was here to be
seen! The splendid troop of knights moved within the lists, greeting and
conversing with each other, as a bed of flowers stirred by a breath
of wind; but the flower-stems had grown to lofty trees, the yellow and
white flower-leaves had changed to gold and silver, and the dew-drops to
pearls and diamonds. For whatever was most fair and costly, most varied
and full of meaning, had these noble knights collected in honour of
this day. Many an eye was turned on Froda, who, without scarf, plume,
or mantle, with his shining silver breastplate, on which appeared the
golden image of Aslauga, and with his well-wrought helmet of golden
locks, shone, in the midst of the crowd, like polished brass. Others,
again, there were, who took pleasure in looking at the young Edwald; his
whole armour was covered by a mantle of white silk, embroidered in azure
and silver, as his whole helmet was concealed by a waving plume of white
feathers. He was arrayed with almost feminine elegance, and yet the
conscious power with which he controlled his fiery, snow-white steed
made known the victorious strength and manliness of the warlike
stripling.

In strange contrast appeared the tall and almost gigantic figure of
a knight clothed in a mantle of black glossy bearskin, bordered with
costly fur, but without any ornament of shining metal. His very helmet
was covered with dark bearskin, and, instead of plumes, a mass of
blood-red horsehair hung like a flowing mane profusely on every side.
Well did Froda and Edwald remember that dark knight, for he was the
uncourteous guest of the hostelry. He also seemed to remark the two
knights, for he turned his unruly steed suddenly round, forced his
way through the crowd of warriors, and, after he had spoken over the
enclosure to a hideous bronze-coloured woman, sprang with a wild leap
across the lists, and, with the speed of an arrow, vanished out of
sight. The old woman looked after him with a friendly nod. The assembled
people laughed as at a strange masquing device; but Edwald and Froda
had their own almost shuddering thoughts concerning it, which, however,
neither imparted to the other.

The kettle-drums rolled, the trumpets sounded, and led by the aged duke,
Hildegardis advanced, richly apparelled, but more dazzling through the
brightness of her own beauty. She stepped forward beneath the arches of
the golden bower, and bowed to the assembly. The knights bent low, and
the feeling rushed into many a heart, "There is no man on earth who can
deserve a bride so queenly." When Froda bowed his head, it seemed to him
as if the golden radiance of Aslauga'a tresses floated before his sight;
and his spirit rose in joy and pride that his lady held him worthy to be
so often reminded of her.

And now the tournament began. At first the knights strove with blunted
swords and battle-axes; then they ran their course with lances man to
man; but at last they divided into two equal parties, and a general
assault began, in which every one was allowed to use at his own
will either sword or lance. Froda and Edwald equally surpassed their
antagonists, as (measuring each his own strength and that of his friend)
they had foreseen. And now it must be decided by a single combat with
lances to whom the highest prize of victory should belong. Before this
trial began, they rode slowly together into the middle of the course,
and consulted where each should take his place. "Keep you your
guiding-star still before your sight," said Froda, with a smile; "the
like gracious help will not be wanting to me." Edwald looked round
astonished for the lady of whom his friend seemed to speak, but Froda
went on, "I have done wrong in hiding aught from you, but after the
tournament you shall know all. Now lay aside all needless thoughts of
wonder, dear Edchen, and sit firm in your saddle, for I warn you that
I shall run this course with all my might. Not my honour alone is at
stake, but the far higher honour of my lady."

"So also do I purpose to demean myself," said Edwald, with a friendly
smile. They shook each other by the hand, and rode to their places.

Amidst the sound of trumpets they met again, running their course with
lightning speed; the lances shivered with a crash, the horses staggered,
the knights, firm in their saddles, pulled them up, and rode back to
their places. But as they prepared for another course, Edwald's white
steed snorted in wild affright, and Froda's powerful chestnut reared up
foaming.

It was plain that the two noble animals shrunk from a second hard
encounter, but their riders held them fast with spur and bit, and,
firm and obedient, they again dashed forward at the second call of
the trumpet. Edwald, who by one deep, ardent gaze on the beauty of his
mistress had stamped it afresh on his soul, cried aloud at the moment
of encounter, "Hildegardis!" and so mightily did his lance strike
his valiant adversary, that Froda sank backwards on his steed, with
difficulty keeping his seat in his saddle, or holding firm in his
stirrups, whilst Edwald flew by unshaken, lowered his spear to salute
Hildegardis as he passed her bower, and then, amidst the loud applause
of the multitude, rushed to his place, ready for the third course. And,
ah! Hildegardis herself, overcome by surprise, had greeted him with a
blush and a look of kindness; it seemed to him as if the overwhelming
joy of victory were already gained. But it was not so, for the valiant
Froda, burning with noble shame, had again tamed his affrighted
steed, and, chastising him sharply with the spur for his share in
this mischance, said in a low voice, "Beautiful and beloved lady, show
thyself to me--the honour of thy name is at stake." To every other eye
it seemed as if a golden rosy-tinted summer's cloud was passing over the
deep-blue sky, but Froda beheld the heavenly countenance of his lady,
felt the waving of her golden tresses, and cried, "Aslauga!" The two
rushed together, and Edwald was hurled from his saddle far upon the
dusty plain.

Froda remained for a time motionless, according to the laws of chivalry,
as though waiting to see whether any one would dispute his victory,
and appearing on his mailed steed like some lofty statue of brass. All
around stood the multitude in silent wonderment. When at length they
burst forth into shouts of triumph, he beckoned earnestly with his hand,
and all were again silent. He then sprang lightly from his saddle, and
hastened to the spot where the fallen Edwald was striving to rise. He
pressed him closely to his breast, led his snow-white steed towards
him, and would not be denied holding the stirrups of the youth whilst
he mounted. Then he bestrode his own steed, and rode by Edwald's side
towards the golden bower of Hildegardis, where, with lowered spear and
open vizor, he thus spoke: "Fairest of all living ladies, I bring you
here Edwald, your knightly bridegroom, before whose lance and sword all
the knights of this tournament have fallen away, I only excepted, who
can make no claim to the choicest prize of victory, since I, as the
image on my breastplate may show, already serve another mistress."

The duke was even now advancing towards the two warriors, to lead them
into the golden bower, but Hildegardis restrained him with a look of
displeasure, saying immediately, while her cheeks glowed with anger,
"Then you seem, Sir Froda, the Danish knight, to serve your lady ill;
for even now you openly styled me the fairest of living ladies."

"That did I," answered Froda, bending courteously, "because my fair
mistress belongs to the dead."

A slight shudder passed at these words through the assembly, and through
the heart of Hildegardis; but soon the anger of the maiden blazed forth
again, and the more because the most wonderful and excellent knight she
knew had scorned her for the sake of a dead mistress.

"I make known to all," she said, with solemn earnestness, "that
according to the just decree of my imperial uncle, this hand can never
belong to a vanquished knight, however noble and honourable he may
otherwise have proved himself. As the conqueror of this tournament,
therefore, is bound to another service, this combat concerns me not; and
I depart hence as I came, a free and unbetrothed maiden."

The duke seemed about to reply, but she turned haughtily away, and left
the bower. Suddenly a gust of wind shook the green wreaths and garlands,
and they fell untwined and rustling behind her. In this the people,
displeased with the pride of Hildegardis, thought they beheld an omen of
punishment, and with jeering words noticed it as they departed.




CHAPTER V.



The two knights had returned to their apartments in deep silence. When
they arrived there, Edwald caused himself to be disarmed, and laid every
piece of his fair shining armour together with a kind of tender care,
almost as if he were burying the corpse of a beloved friend. Then he
beckoned to his squires to leave the chamber, took his lute on his arm,
and sang the following song to its notes:--


        "Bury them, bury them out of sight,
           For hope and fame are fled;
         And peaceful resting and quiet night
           Are all now left for the dead."


"You will stir up my anger against your lute," said Froda. "You had
accustomed it to more joyful songs than this. It is too good for a
passing-bell, and you too good to toll it. I tell you yet, my young
hero, all will end gloriously."

Edwald looked a while with wonder in his face, and he answered kindly:
"Beloved Froda, if it displeases you, I will surely sing no more." But
at the same time he struck a few sad chords, which sounded infinitely
sweet and tender. Then the northern knight, much moved, clasped him in
his arms, and said: "Dear Edchen, sing and say and do whatever pleases
you; it shall ever rejoice me. But you may well believe me, for I speak
not this without a spirit of presage--your sorrow shall change, whether
to death or life I know not, but great and overpowering joy awaits you."
Edwald rose firmly and cheerfully from his seat, seized his companion's
arm with a strong grasp, and walked forth with him through the blooming
alleys of the garden into the balmy air.

At that very hour an aged woman, muffled in many a covering, was led
secretly to the apartment of the Lady Hildegardis. The appearance of the
dark-complexioned stranger was mysterious, and she had gathered round
her for some time, by many feats of jugglery, a part of the multitude
returning home from the tournament, but had dispersed them at last in
wild affright. Before this happened, the tire-woman of Hildegardis had
hastened to her mistress, to entertain her with an account of the
rare and pleasant feats of the bronze-coloured woman. The maidens in
attendance, seeing their lady deeply moved, and wishing to banish
her melancholy, bade the tire-woman bring the old stranger hither.
Hildegardis forbade it not, hoping that she should thus divert the
attention of her maidens, while she gave herself up more deeply and
earnestly to the varying imaginations which flitted through her mind.

The messenger found the place already deserted; and the strange old
woman alone in the midst, laughing immoderately. When questioned by her,
she did not deny that she had all at once taken the form of a monstrous
owl, announcing to the spectators in a screeching voice that she was the
Devil--and that every one upon this rushed screaming home.

The tire-woman trembled at the fearful jest, but durst not return to
ask again the pleasure of Hildegardis, whose discontented mood she had
already remarked. She gave strict charge to the old woman, with many a
threat and promise, to demean herself discreetly in the castle: after
which she brought her in by the most secret way, that none of those whom
she had terrified might see her enter.

The aged crone now stood before Hildegardis, and winked to her, in the
midst of her low and humble salutation, in a strangely familiar
manner, as though there were some secret between them. The lady felt an
involuntary shudder, and could not withdraw her gaze from the features
of that hideous countenance, hateful as it was to her. The curiosity
which had led the rest to desire a sight of the strange woman was by no
means gratified, for she performed none but the most common tricks of
jugglery, and related only well-known tales, so that the tire-woman felt
wearied and indifferent and, ashamed of having brought the stranger, she
stole away unnoticed. Several other maidens followed her example, and,
as these withdrew, the old crone twisted her mouth into a smile,
and repeated the same hideous confidential wink towards the lady.
Hildegardis could not understand what attracted her in the jests and
tales of the bronze-coloured woman; but so it was, that in her whole
life she had never bestowed such attention on the words of any one.
Still the old woman went on and on, and already the night looked
dark without the windows, but the attendants who still remained with
Hildegardis had sunk into a deep sleep, and had lighted none of the wax
tapers in the apartment.

Then, in the dusky gloom, the dark old crone rose from the low seat on
which she had been sitting, as if she now felt herself well at ease,
advanced towards Hildegardis, who sat as if spell-bound with terror,
placed herself beside her on the purple couch, and embracing her in her
long dry arms with a hateful caress, whispered a few words in her ear.
It seemed to the lady as if she uttered the names of Froda and Edwald,
and from them came the sound of a flute, which, clear and silvery as
were its tones, seemed to lull her into a trance. She could indeed
move her limbs, but only to follow those sounds, which, like a silver
network, floated round the hideous form of the old woman. She moved from
the chamber, and Hildegardis followed her through all her slumbering
maidens, still singing softly as she went, "Ye maidens, ye maidens, I
wander by night."

Without the castle, accompanied by squire and groom, stood the gigantic
Bohemian warrior; he laid on the shoulders of the crone a bag of gold so
heavy that she sank half whimpering, half laughing, on the ground; then
lifted the entranced Hildegardis on his steed, and galloped with her
silently into the ever-deepening gloom of night.

"All ye noble lords and knights, who yesterday contended gallantly for
the prize of victory and the hand of the peerless Hildegardis, arise,
arise! saddle your steeds, and to the rescue! The peerless Hildegardis
is carried away!"

Thus proclaimed many a herald through castle and town in the bright red
dawn of the following day; and on all sides rose the dust from the tread
of knights and noble squires along those roads by which so lately,
in the evening twilight, Hildegardis in proud repose had gazed on her
approaching suitors.

Two of them, well known to us, remained inseparably together, but they
knew as little as the others whether they had taken the right direction,
for how and when the adored lady could have disappeared from her
apartments was still to the whole castle a fearful and mysterious
secret.

Edwald and Froda rode as long as the sun moved over their heads,
unwearied as he; and now, when he sank in the waves of the river, they
thought to win the race from him, and still spurred on their jaded
steeds. But the noble animals staggered and panted, and the knights were
constrained to grant them some little refreshment in a grassy meadow.
Secure of bringing them back at their first call, their masters removed
both bit and curb, that they might be refreshed with the green pasture,
and with the deep blue waters of the Maine, while they themselves
reposed under the shade of a neighbouring thicket of alders. And deep
in the cool, dark shade, there shone, as it were, a mild but clear
sparkling light, and checked the speech of Froda, who at that moment
was beginning to tell his friend the tale of his knightly service to
his sovereign lady, which had been delayed hitherto, first by Edwald's
sadness, and then by the haste of their journey. Ah, well did Froda know
that lovely golden light! "Let us follow it, Edchen," said he in a low
tone, "and leave the horses a while to their pasture." Edwald in silence
followed his companion's advice. A secret voice, half sweet, half
fearful, seemed to tell him that here was the path, the only right path
to Hildegardis. Once only he said in astonishment, "Never before have I
seen the evening glow shine on the leaves so brightly." Froda shook his
head with a smile, and they pursued in silence their unknown track.

When they came forth on the other side of the alder-thicket upon the
bank of the Maine, which almost wound round it, Edwald saw well that
another glow than that of evening was shining on them, for dark clouds
of night already covered the heavens, and the guiding light stood fixed
on the shore of the river. It lit up the waves, so that they could see
a high woody island in the midst of the stream, and a boat on the hither
side of the shore fast bound to a stake. But on approaching, the knights
saw much more; a troop of horsemen of strange and foreign appearance
were all asleep, and in the midst of them, slumbering on cushions, a
female form in white garments.

"Hildegardis!" murmured Edwald to himself, with a smile, and at the
same time he drew his sword in readiness for the combat as soon as the
robbers should awake, and beckoned to Froda to raise the sleeping lady,
and convey her to a place of safety. But at this moment something like
an owl passed whizzing over the dark squadron, and they all started up
with clattering arms and hideous outcries. A wild unequal combat arose
in the darkness of night, for that beaming light had disappeared.
Freda and Edwald were driven asunder, and only at a distance heard each
other's mighty war-cry. Hildegardis, startled from her magic sleep,
uncertain whether she were waking or dreaming, fled bewildered and
weeping bitterly into the deep shades of the alder-thicket.




CHAPTER VI.



Froda felt his arm grow weary, and the warm blood was flowing from two
wounds in his shoulder; he wished so to lie down in death that he might
rise up with honour from his bloody grave to the exalted lady whom he
served. He cast his shield behind him, grasped his sword-hilt with both
hands, and rushed wildly, with a loud war-cry, upon the affrighted foe.
Instantly he heard some voices cry, "It is the rage of the northern
heroes which has come upon him." And the whole troop were scattered in
dismay, while the exhausted knight remained wounded and alone in the
darkness.

Then the golden hair of Aslauga gleamed once more in the alder-shade;
and Froda said, leaning, through weariness, on his sword, "I think not
that I am wounded to death; but whenever that time shall come, O beloved
lady, wilt thou not indeed appear to me in all thy loveliness and
brightness?" A soft "Yes" breathed against his cheek, and the golden
light vanished.

But now Hildegardis came forth from the thicket, half fainting with
terror, and said feebly, "Within is the fair and frightful spectre of
the north--without is the battle. Oh, merciful heaven! whither shall I
go?"

Then Froda approached to sooth the affrighted one, to speak some words
of comfort to her, and to inquire after Edwald; but wild shouts and the
rattling of armour announced the return of the Bohemian warriors. With
haste Froda led the maiden to the boat, pushed off from the shore,
and rowed her with the last effort of his failing strength towards
the island which he had observed in the midst of the stream. But the
pursuers had already kindled torches, and waved them sparkling here and
there. By this light they soon discovered the boat; they saw that the
dreaded Danish knight was bleeding, and gained fresh courage for their
pursuit. Hardly had Froda pushed the boat to the shore of the island,
before he perceived a Bohemian on the other side in another skiff, and
soon afterwards the greater number of the enemy embarked to row towards
the island. "To the wood, fair maiden," he whispered, as soon as he
had landed Hildegardis on the shore; "there conceal yourself, whilst
I endeavour to prevent the landing of the robbers." But Hildegardis,
clinging to his arm, whispered again, "Do I not see that you are pale
and bleeding? and would you have me expire with terror in the dark and
lonely clefts of this rock? Ah! and if your northern gold-haired spectre
were to appear again and seat herself beside me! Think you that I do not
see her there now, shining through the thicket!"

"She shines!" echoed Froda, and new strength and hope ran through
every vein. He climbed the hill, following the gracious gleam; and
Hildegardis, though trembling at the sight, went readily with her
companion, saying only from time to time, in a low voice "Ah, Sir
Knight!--my noble wondrous knight--leave me not here alone; that would
be my death." The knight, soothing her courteously, stepped ever onwards
through the darkness of dell and forest, for already he heard the sound
of the Bohemians landing on the shore of the island. Suddenly he stood
before a cave thick-covered with underwood, and the gleam disappeared.
"Here, then," he whispered, endeavouring to hold the branches asunder.
For a moment she paused, and said, "If you should but let the branches
close again behind me, and I were to remain alone with spectres in this
cave! But, Froda, you will surely follow me--a trembling, hunted child
as I am? Will you not?" Without more misgivings she passed through the
branches; and the knight, who would willingly have remained without as a
guard, followed her. Earnestly he listened through the stillness of
the night, whilst Hildegardis hardly dared to draw her breath. Then was
heard the tramp of an armed man, coming ever nearer and nearer, and
now close to the entrance of the cave. In vain did Froda strive to
free himself from the trembling maiden. Already the branches before the
entrance were cracking and breaking, and Froda sighed deeply. "Must I,
then, fall like a lurking fugitive, entangled in a woman's garments? It
is a base death to die. But can I cast this half-fainting creature away
from me on the dark, hard earth, perhaps into some deep abyss? Come,
then, what will, thou, Lady Aslauga, knowest that I die an honourable
death!"

"Froda! Hildegardis!" breathed a gentle, well-known voice at the
entrance, and recognising Edwald, Froda bore the lady towards him into
the starlight, saying, "She will die of terror in our sight in this
deep cavern. Is the foe near at hand?" "Most of them lie lifeless on the
shore, or swim bleeding through the waves," said Edwald. "Set your mind
at rest, and repose yourself. Are you wounded, beloved Froda?" He gave
this short account to his astonished companions--how, in the darkness,
he had mixed with the Bohemians and pressed into the skiff, and that it
had been easy to him on landing to disperse the robbers entirely, who
supposed that they were attacked by one of their own crew, and thought
themselves bewitched. "They began at last to fall on one another"--so
he ended his history; "and we have only now to wait for the morning
to conduct the lady home, for those who are wandering about of that
owl-squadron will doubtless hide themselves from the eye of day." While
speaking, he had skilfully and carefully arranged a couch of twigs and
moss for Hildegardis, and when the wearied one, after uttering some
gentle words of gratitude, had sunk into a slumber, he began, as well
as the darkness would allow, to bind up the wounds of his friend. During
this anxious task, while the dark boughs of the trees murmured over
their heads, and the rippling of the stream was heard from afar, Froda,
in a low voice, made known to his brother-in-arms to the service of what
lady he was bound. Edwald listened with deep attention, but at last he
said tenderly, "Trust me, the noble Princess Aslauga will not resent it,
if you pledge yourself to this earthly beauty in faithful love. Ah!
even now doubtless you are sinning in the dreams of Hildegardis,
richly-gifted and happy knight! I will not stand in your way with
my vain wishes; I see now clearly that she can never, never love me.
Therefore I will this very day hasten to the war which so many valiant
knights of Germany are waging in the heathen land of Prussia, and the
black cross, which distinguishes them for warriors of the Church, I will
lay as the best balm on my throbbing heart. Take, then, dear Froda, that
fair hand which you have won in battle, and live henceforth a life of
surpassing happiness and joy."

"Edwald," said Froda, gravely, "this is the first time that I ever heard
one word from your lips which a true knight could not fulfil. Do as
it pleases you towards the fair and haughty Hildegardis, but Aslauga
remains my mistress ever, and no other do I desire in life or death."
The youth was startled by these stern words, and made no reply. Both,
without saying more to each other, watched through the night in solemn
thought.

The next morning, when the rising sun shone brightly over the flowery
plains around the Castle of Hildegardis, the watchman on the tower blew
a joyful blast from his horn, for his keen eye had distinguished far in
the distance his fair lady, who was riding from the forest between her
two deliverers; and from castle, town, and hamlet, came forth many a
rejoicing train to assure themselves with their own eyes of the happy
news.

Hildegardis turned to Edwald with eyes sparkling through tears, and
said, "Were it not for you, young knight, they might have sought long
and vainly before they found the lost maiden or the noble Froda, who
would now be lying in that dark cavern a bleeding and lifeless corpse."
Edwald bowed lowly in reply, but persevered in his wonted silence.
It even seemed as though an unusual grief restrained the smile which
erewhile answered so readily, in childlike sweetness, to every friendly
word.

The noble guardian of Hildegardis had, in the overflowing joy of his
heart, prepared a sumptuous banquet, and invited all the knights
and ladies present to attend it. Whilst Froda and Edwald, in all the
brightness of their glory, were ascending the steps in the train of
their rescued lady, Edwald said to his friend, "Noble, steadfast knight,
you can never love me more!" And as Froda looked in astonishment, he
continued--"Thus it is when children presume to counsel heroes, however
well they may mean it. Now have I offended grievously against you,
and yet more against the noble Lady Aslauga." "Because you would have
plucked every flower of your own garden to gladden me with them?" said
Froda. "No; you are my gentle brother-in-arms now, as heretofore, dear
Edchen, and are perhaps become yet dearer to me."

Then Edwald smiled again in silent contentment, like a flower after the
morning showers of May.

The eyes of Hildegardis glanced mildly and kindly on him, and she
often conversed graciously with him, while, on the other hand, since
yesterday, a reverential awe seemed to separate her from Froda. But
Edwald also was much altered. However he welcomed with modest joy the
favour of his lady, it yet seemed as if some barrier were between them
which forbade him to entertain the most distant hope of successful love.

It chanced that a noble count, from the court of the Emperor, was
announced, who being bound on an important embassy, had wished to
pay his respects to the Lady Hildegardis by the way. She received him
gladly, and as soon as the first salutations were over, he said, looking
at her and at Edwald, "I know not if my good fortune may not have
brought me hither to a very joyful festivity. That would be right
welcome news to the Emperor my master." Hildegardis and Edwald were
lovely to look upon in their blushes and confusion, but the count,
perceiving at once that he had been too hasty, inclined himself
respectfully towards the young knight, and said, "Pardon me, noble Duke
Edwald, my too great forwardness, but I know the wish of my sovereign,
and the hope to find it already fulfilled prompted my tongue to speak."
All eyes were fixed inquiringly on the young hero, who answered, in
graceful confusion, "It is true; the Emperor, when I was last in his
camp, through his undeserved favour, raised me to the rank of a duke.
It was my good fortune, that in an encounter, some of the enemy's horse,
who had dared to assault the sacred person of the Emperor, dispersed
and fled on my approach." The count then, at the request of Hildegardis,
related every circumstance of the heroic deed; and it appeared that
Edwald had not only rescued the Emperor from the most imminent peril,
but also, with the cool and daring skill of a general, had gained the
victory which decided the event of the war.

Surprise at first sealed the lips of all; and even before their
congratulations could begin, Hildegardis had turned towards Edwald, and
said in a low voice, which yet, in that silence, was clearly heard by
all, "The noble count has made known the wish of my imperial uncle,
and I conceal it no longer, my own heart's wish is the same--I am Duke
Edwald's bride." And with that she extended to him her fair right hand,
and all present waited only till he should take it, before they burst
into a shout of congratulation. But Edwald forbore to do so; he only
sunk on one knee before his lady, saying, "God forbid that the lofty
Hildegardis should ever recall a word spoken solemnly to noble knights
and dames. 'To no vanquished knight,' you said, 'might the hand of
the Emperor's niece belong'--and behold there Froda, the noble Danish
knight, my conqueror." Hildegardis, with a slight blush, turned hastily
away, hiding her eyes, and as Edwald arose, it seemed as though there
were a tear upon his cheek.

In his clanging armour Froda advanced to the middle of the hall,
exclaiming, "I declare my late victory over Duke Edwald to have been
the chance of fortune, and I challenge the noble knight to meet me again
to-morrow in the lists."

At the same time he threw his iron gauntlet ringing on the pavement.

But Edwald moved not to take it up. On the contrary, a glow of lofty
anger was on his cheeks, and his eyes sparkled with indignation, so
that his friend would hardly have recognised him; and after a silence he
spoke--

"Noble Sir Froda, if I have ever offended you, we are now even. How
durst you, a warrior gloriously wounded by two sword-strokes, challenge
a man unhurt into the lists to-morrow, if you did not despise him?"

"Forgive me, Duke Edwald," answered Froda, somewhat abashed, but with
cheerfulness, "I have spoken too boldly. Not till I am completely cured
do I call you to the field."

Then Edwald took up the gauntlet joyfully. He knelt once more before
Hildegardis, who, turning away her face, gave him her fair hand to kiss,
and walked, with his arm in that of his noble Danish friend, out of the
hall.




CHAPTER VII.



While Froda's wounds were healing Edwald would sometimes wander, when
the shades of evening fell dark and silent around, on the flowery
terraces beneath the windows of Hildegardis, and sing pleasant little
songs; amongst others the following:--


        "Heal fast, heal fast, ye hero-wounds;
           O knight, be quickly strong;
             Beloved strife
             For fame and life,
           O tarry not too long!"


But that one which the maidens of the castle loved best to learn from
him was this, and it was perhaps the longest song that Edwald had ever
sung in his whole life:--


       "Would I on earth were lying,
          By noble hero slain;
        So that love's gentle sighing
          Breathed me to life again!

       "Would I an emperor were,
          Of wealth and power!
        Would I were gathering twigs
          In woodland bower!

       "Would that in lone seclusion
          I lived a hermit's life!
        Would, amid wild confusion,
          I led the battle-strife!

       "O would the lot were mine,
          In bower or field,
        To which my lady fair
          Her smile would yield!"


At this time it happened that a man who held himself to be very
wise, and who filled the office of secretary to the aged guardian of
Hildegardis, came to the two knightly friends to propose a scheme to
them. His proposal, in few words, was this, that as Froda could gain no
advantage from his victory, he might in the approaching combat suffer
himself to be thrown from his steed, and thus secure the lady for his
comrade, at the same time fulfilling the wish of the Emperor, which
might turn to his advantage hereafter in many ways.

At this the two friends at first laughed heartily; but then Froda
advanced gravely towards the secretary, and said, "Thou trifler,
doubtless the old duke would drive thee from his service did he know
of thy folly, and teach thee to talk of the Emperor. Good-night, worthy
sir, and trust me that when Edwald and I meet each other, it will be
with all our heart and strength."

The secretary hastened out of the room with all speed, and was seen next
morning to look unusually pale.


Soon after this Froda recovered from his wounds; the course was again
prepared as before, but crowded by a still greater number of spectators;
and in the freshness of a dewy morning the two knights advanced solemnly
together to the combat.

"Beloved Edwald," said Froda, in a low voice, as they went, "take good
heed to yourself, for neither this time can the victory be yours--on
that rose-coloured cloud appears Aslauga."

"It may be so," answered Edwald, with a quiet smile; "but under the
arches of that golden bower shines Hildegardis, and this time she has
not been waited for."

The knights took their places--the trumpets sounded, the course began,
and Froda's prophecy seemed to be near its fulfilment, for Edwald
staggered under the stroke of his lance, so that he let go the bridle,
seized the mane with both hands, and thus hardly recovered his seat,
whilst his high-mettled snow-white steed bore him wildly around the
lists without control. Hildegardis also seemed to shrink at this sight,
but the youth at length reined-in his steed, and the second course was
run.

Froda shot like lightning along the plain, and it seemed as if the
success of the young duke were now hopeless; but in the shock of their
meeting, the bold Danish steed reared, starting aside as if in fear;
the rider staggered, his stroke passed harmless by, and both steed and
knight fell clanging to the ground before the steadfast spear of Edwald,
and lay motionless upon the field.

Edwald did now as Froda had done before. In knightly wise he stood still
a while upon the spot, as if waiting to see whether any other adversary
were there to dispute his victory; then he sprang from his steed, and
flew to the assistance of his fallen friend.

He strove with all his might to release him from the weight of his
horse, and presently Froda came to himself, rose on his feet, and
raised up his charger also. Then he lifted up his vizor, and greeted his
conqueror with a friendly smile, though his countenance was pale.
The victor bowed humbly, almost timidly, and said, "You, my knight,
overthrown--and by me! I understand it not."

"It was her own will," answered Froda, smiling. "Come now to your gentle
bride."

The multitude around shouted aloud, each lady and knight bowed low, when
the aged duke pointed out to them the lovely pair, and at his bidding,
the betrothed, with soft blushes, embraced each other beneath the green
garlands of the golden bower.

That very day were they solemnly united in the chapel of the castle, for
so had Froda earnestly desired. A journey into a far-distant land, he
said, lay before him, and much he wished to celebrate the marriage of
his friend before his departure.




CHAPTER VIII.



The torches were burning clear in the vaulted halls of the castle,
Hildegardis had just left the arm of her lover to begin a stately dance
of ceremony with the aged duke, when Edwald beckoned to his companion,
and they went forth together into the moonlit gardens of the castle.

"Ah, Froda, my noble, lofty hero," exclaimed Edwald, after a silence,
"were you as happy as I am! But your eyes rest gravely and thoughtfully
on the ground, or kindle almost impatiently heavenwards. It would
be dreadful, indeed, had the secret wish of your heart been to win
Hildegardis--and I, foolish boy, so strangely favoured, had stood in
your way."

"Be at rest, Edchen," answered, the Danish hero, with a smile. "On
the word of a knight, my thoughts and yearnings concern not your fair
Hildegardis. Far brighter than ever does Aslauga's radiant image shine
into my heart: but now hear what I am going to relate to you.

"At the very moment when we met together in the course--oh, had I words
to express it to you!--I was enwrapped, encircled, dazzled, by Aslauga's
golden tresses, which were waving all around me. Even my noble steed
must have beheld the apparition, for I felt him start and rear under
me. I saw you no more--the world no more--I saw only the angel-face of
Aslauga close before me, smiling, blooming like a flower in a sea of
sunshine which floated round her. My senses failed me. Not till you
raised me from beneath my horse did my consciousness return, and then I
knew, with exceeding joy, that her own gracious pleasure had struck me
down. But I felt a strange weariness, far greater than my fall alone
could have caused, and I felt assured at the same time that my lady was
about to send me on a far-distant mission. I hastened to repose myself
in my chamber, and a deep sleep immediately fell upon me. Then came
Aslauga in a dream to me, more royally adorned than ever; she placed
herself at the head of my couch, and said, 'Haste to array thyself
in all the splendour of thy silver armour, for thou art not the
wedding-guest alone, thou art also the--'

"And before she could speak the word my dream had melted away, and I
felt a longing desire to fulfil her gracious command, and rejoiced in my
heart. But in the midst of the festival I seemed to myself more lonely
than in all my life before, and I cannot cease to ponder what that
unspoken word of my lady could be intended to announce."

"You are of a far loftier spirit than I am, Froda," said Edwald, after
a silence, "and I cannot soar with you into the sphere of your joys. But
tell me, has it never awakened a deep pang within you that you serve a
lady so withdrawn from you--alas! a lady who is almost ever invisible?"

"No, Edwald, not so," answered Froda, his eyes sparkling with happiness.
"For well I know that she scorns not my service; she has even deigned
sometimes to appear to me. Oh, I am in truth a happy knight and
minstrel!"

"And yet your silence to-day--your troubled yearnings?"

"Not troubled, dear Edchen; only so heartfelt, so fervent in the depth
of my heart--and so strangely mysterious to myself withal. But this,
with all belonging to me, springs alike from the words and commands of
Aslauga. How, then, can it be otherwise than something good and fair,
and tending to a high and noble aim?"

A squire, who had hastened after them, announced that the knightly
bridegroom was expected for the torch-dance, and as they returned,
Edwald entreated his friend to take his place in the solemn dance next
to him and Hildegardis. Froda inclined his head in token of friendly
assent.


The horns and hautboys had already sounded their solemn invitation;
Edwald hastened to give his hand to his fair bride; and while he
advanced with her to the midst of the stately hall, Froda offered his
hand for the torch-dance to a noble lady who stood the nearest to him,
without farther observing her, and took with her the next place to the
wedded pair.

But how was it when a light began to beam from his companion, before
which the torch in his left hand lost all its brightness? Hardly dared
he, in sweet and trembling hope, to raise his eyes to the lady; and when
at last he ventured, all his boldest wishes and longings were fulfilled.
Adorned with a radiant bridal crown of emeralds, Aslauga moved in solemn
loveliness beside him, and beamed on him from amid the sunny light of
her golden hair, blessing him with her heavenly countenance. The amazed
spectators could not withdraw their eyes from the mysterious pair--the
knight in his light silver mail, with the torch raised on high in his
hand, earnest and joyful, moving with a measured step, as if engaged in
a ceremony of deep and mysterious meaning. His lady beside him, rather
floating than dancing, beaming light from her golden hair, so that you
would have thought the day was shining into the night; and when a look
could reach through all the surrounding splendour to her face, rejoicing
heart and sense with the unspeakably sweet smile of her eyes and lips.

Near the end of the dance she inclined towards Froda, and whispered to
him with an air of tender confidence, and with the last sound of the
horns and hautboys she had disappeared.

The most curious spectator dared not question Froda about his partner.
Hildegardis did not seem to have been conscious of her presence, but
shortly before the end of the festival Edwald approached his friend, and
asked in a whisper, "Was it?"

"Yes, dear youth," answered Froda; "your marriage-dance has been
honoured by the presence of the most exalted beauty which has been ever
beheld in any land. Ah! and if I rightly understood her meaning, you
will never more see me stand sighing and gazing upon the ground. But
hardly dare I hope it. Now good-night, dear Edchen, good-night. As soon
as I may I will tell you all."




CHAPTER IX.



The light and joyous dreams of morning still played round Edwald's head
when it seemed as though a clear light encompassed him. He remembered
Aslauga, but it was Froda, the golden locks of whose helmet shone now
with no less sunny brightness than the flowing hair of his lady. "Ah!"
thought Edwald in his dream, "how beautiful has my brother-in-arms
become!" And Froda said to him, "I will sing something to you, Edchen;
but softly, softly, so that it may not awaken Hildegardis. Listen to me.


      "'She glided in, bright as the day,
        There where her knight in slumber lay;
        And in her lily hand was seen
        A band that seemed of the moonlight sheen.
        "We are one," she sang, as about his hair
        She twined it, and over her tresses fair.
        Beneath them the world lay dark and drear:
        But he felt the touch of her hand so dear,
        Uplifting him far above mortals' sight,
        While around him were shed her locks of light,
        Till a garden fair lay about him spread--
        And this was Paradise, angels said.'"


"Never in your life did you sing so sweetly," said the dreaming Edwald.

"That may well be, Edchen," said Froda, with a smile, and vanished.

But Edwald dreamed on and on, and many other visions passed before him,
all of a pleasing kind, although he could not recall them when, in the
full light of morning, he unclosed his eyes with a smile. Froda alone,
and his mysterious song, stood clear in his memory. He now knew full
well that his friend was dead; but the thought gave him no pain, for he
felt sure that the pure spirit of that minstrel-warrior could only find
its proper joy in the gardens of Paradise, and in blissful solace with
the lofty spirits of the ancient times. He glided softly from the side
of the sleeping Hildegardis to the chamber of the departed. He lay upon
his bed of rest, almost as beautiful as he had appeared in the dream,
and his golden helmet was entwined with a wondrously-shining lock of
hair. Then Edwald made a fair and shady grave in consecrated ground,
summoned the chaplain of the castle, and with his assistance laid his
beloved Froda therein.

He came back just as Hildegardis awoke; she beheld, with wonder and
humility, his mien of chastened joy, and asked him whither he had been
so early, to which he replied, with a smile, "I have just buried the
corpse of my dearly-loved Froda, who, this very night, has passed away
to his golden-haired mistress." Then he related the whole history of
Aslauga's Knight, and lived on in subdued, unruffled happiness, though
for some time he was even more silent and thoughtful than before. He
was often found sitting on the grave of his friend, and singing the
following song to his lute:--


       "Listening to celestial lays,
        Bending thy unclouded gaze
        On the pure and living light,
        Thou art blest, Aslauga'a Knight!

       "Send us from thy bower on high
        Many an angel-melody,
        Many a vision soft and bright,
        Aslauga's dear and faithful Knight!"





End of Project Gutenberg's Aslauga's Knight, by Fredrich de la Motte-Fouque

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ASLAUGA'S KNIGHT ***

***** This file should be named 2827.txt or 2827.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/8/2/2827/

Produced by Sandra Laythorpe

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
