The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Naturewoman, by Upton Sinclair

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Naturewoman

Author: Upton Sinclair

Posting Date: February 15, 2009 [EBook #3301]
Release Date: July, 2002

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE NATUREWOMAN ***




Produced by Charles Franks and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team





THE NATUREWOMAN

By Upton Sinclair




CHARACTERS

     Oceana:                   the Naturewoman.
     Mrs. Sophronia Masterson: of Beacon Street, Boston.
     Quincy Masterson, M.D.:   her husband.
     Freddy Masterson:         her son.
     Ethel Masterson:          her younger daughter.
     Mrs. Letitia Selden:      her elder daughter.
     Henry Selden:             Letitia's husband.
     Remson:                   a butler.



                                  ACT I
  Drawing-room of the Masterson home; afternoon in winter.


                                 ACT II
  The same; the next afternoon.


                                 ACT III
  A portion of the parlor, as a stage; the same evening.

                                 ACT IV
  Henry Selden's camp in the White Mountains; afternoon, a week later.





THE NATUREWOMAN




ACT I



[Scene shows a luxuriously furnished drawing-room. Double doors, centre,
opening to hall and stairway. Grand piano at right, fireplace next to
it, with large easy-chair in front. Centre table; windows left, and
chairs.]

[At rise: ETHEL standing by table; a beautiful but rather frail girl of
sixteen; opening a package containing photograph in frame.]


ETHEL. Oceana! Oceana! [She gazes at it in rapture.] Oh, I wonder if
she'll be as good as she is beautiful! She must be! Oceana! [To REMSON,
an old, white-haired family servant, who enters with flowers in vase.]
No message from my brother yet?

REMSON. Nothing, Miss Ethel.

ETHEL. Look at this, Remson.

REMSON. [Takes photograph.] Is that your cousin, Miss Ethel?

ETHEL. That's she. Isn't she lovely?

REMSON. Yes, miss. Is that the way they dress in those parts?

ETHEL. The natives don't even wear that much, Remson.

REMSON. It must be right warm there, I fancy.

ETHEL. Oh, yes... they never know what cold weather is.

REMSON. What is the name of it, Miss Ethel?

ETHEL. Maukuri--it's in the South Seas.

REMSON. It seems like I've heard of cannibals in those parts, somewhere.

ETHEL, Yes, in some of the groups. But this is just one little island by
itself... nothing else for a hundred miles and more.

REMSON. And she's lived there all this time, Miss Ethel?

ETHEL. Fifteen years, Remson.

REMSON. And no folks at all there?

ETHEL. Not since her father died.

REMSON. [Shakes his head.] Humph! She'd ought to be glad to get home,
Miss Ethel.

ETHEL. She didn't seem to feel that way. [Takes book and seats herself
by fireplace.] But we'll try to make her change her mind. Just think of
it... she's been forty-six days on the steamer!

REMSON. Can it be possible, miss?

ETHEL. Wasn't that the street door just now, Remson?

REMSON. I thought so, Miss Ethel. [Moves to door.] Oh! Mrs. Masterson.

MRS. MASTERSON. [In doorway; a Boston Brahman, aged fifty, wearing
street costume, black.] Any news yet, Remson?

REMSON. None, madam.

MRS. MASTERSON. Master Frederick is at the dock?

REMSON. Yes, madam.

DR. MASTERSON. [Enters; slightly younger than his wife, a dapper little
man, bald and henpecked.] No news from the steamer, my dear?

MRS. MASTERSON. None.

REMSON. Anything further, madam?

MRS. MASTERSON. Nothing.

[Exit REMSON.]

DR. MASTERSON. It'll be too bad if Oceana has to spend this evening on
the steamer.

MRS. MASTERSON. Have you taken to calling her by that ridiculous name
also?

DR. MASTERSON. Surely she has a right to select her name!

MRS. MASTERSON. I was present when she was christened; and so were you,
Quincy. For ME she will remain Anna Talbot until the day she dies.

DR. MASTERSON. Anna or Oceana... there's not much difference, it seems.
[Takes paper and sits by window; they do not see ETHEL.] Weren't Letitia
and Henry to be here?

MRS. MASTERSON. Letitia was... but she's never on time. There's the
bell now. [Looks at photograph.] Humph! So Ethel's had it framed! I
declare... people ought not to be shown a photograph like that.. . it's
not decent.

DR. MASTERSON. My dear! It's the South Sea Islands!

MRS. MASTERSON. [Severely.] This is Back Bay. Oh! Letitia!

LETITIA. [Enters; aged about twenty-eight, prim and decorous, Patterned
after her mother; black street costume, with furs.] No news from the
steamer, it seems! Dear me, such weather!

MRS. MASTERSON. You didn't walk, I hope?

LETITIA. No, but even getting into the stores! I'm exhausted.

DR. MASTERSON. [Looking from paper.] Henry coming?

LETITIA. He said he might drop in. He's curious to see the lady.

DR. MASTERSON. Humph! No doubt!

LETITIA. Mother, I wish you'd try to do something with Henry. He's so
restless and discontented... he's getting to be simply impossible.

MRS. MASTERSON. I'm going to talk to him to-day, my dear.

LETITIA. Fancy my going out and burying myself in the country! And he
means it... he's at me all the time about it!

MRS. MASTERSON. Well, don't go, my dear!

LETITIA. Don't worry yourself... I've not the least intention of going.
Such things as we modern women have to endure! Only fancy, he's got an
idea he wants to be where he can work with his hands!

MRS. MASTERSON. Henry ought to have discovered these yearnings before he
married one of the Mastersons. As my daughter, you have certain social
obligations to fill... your friends have a claim upon you, quite as much
as your husband.

LETITIA. He says he wants to take the bungalow and make it over... wants
to plan it and work at it himself. And with me and the children sitting
out on the mountain-top in the snow until he finishes, I suppose!

MRS. MASTERSON. Quincy, do you know anything about this whim of Henry's
for a day-laborer's life?

DR. MASTERSON. My dear, Henry's a big, active man, and he wants
something to do.

MRS. MASTERSON. But hasn't he his business?

DR. MASTERSON. I dare say there are things more thrilling to a man than
commercial law-cases. And Henry's been thinking for himself... he says
the law's a cheat.

MRS. MASTERSON. Yes, I know... I've heard all that. And here we are,
just at this critical moment, when the girl is coming, and when he ought
to be advising us about that will.

DR. MASTERSON. It seems to me, my dear, you've managed to choose your
course without his aid. [A pause.] I hope we shan't have to get into any
quarrel with Oceana.

MRS. MASTERSON. We shall not if _I_ can help it, Quincy.

LETITIA. We simply intend to be firm, father.

MRS. MASTERSON. We intend to make it clear that we are going to stand by
our legal rights. With no hard feelings for her personally...

ETHEL. [Rising from chair.] Mother!

MRS. MASTERSON. Ethel!

ETHEL. Mother, this has gone just as far as it can go! I've felt all
along that something like this was preparing.

MRS. MASTERSON. My dear...

ETHEL. Mother, this concerns me as much as it concerns any one of you.
And I tell you, you have simply got to let me know about that will.

MRS. MASTERSON. My dear...

ETHEL. Do I understand that it is your intention to threaten to go to
law, unless Oceana gives us a part of grandfather's property?

MRS. MASTERSON. Ethel, I refuse...

DR. MASTERSON. You might as well tell the child, Sophronia. It's
perfectly certain, Ethel, that your grandfather was not of sound mind
when he made the will.

ETHEL. It's perfectly certain that he hated you and mother and Aunt
Letitia and me and Freddy... every one of us; and that he had hated us
for years and years; and that he left his money to Oceana to spite us
all.

MRS. MASTERSON. That's precisely it, Ethel...

ETHEL. And I, for one, knowing that he hated me, don't want his money.
And what is more, I refuse to touch his money.

DR. MASTERSON. Not being of age, my dear, you can't...

ETHEL. I am near enough of age to possess my self-respect. And I shall
refuse to touch one penny.

DR. MASTERSON. My child, there are a good many pennies in a half million
dollars.

MRS. MASTERSON. And when you are of age, Ethel, you'll appreciate..

ETHEL. I shall be of age two years from now, and then I shall return to
Oceana every penny of grandfather's money that may have been gotten for
me.

LETITIA. Ethel!

MRS. MASTERSON. It seems to me this is a strange way for a young girl to
be speaking to her parents!

ETHEL. I can't help it, mother. I am meek and patient... I try to
let you have your way with me in everything. But this is a matter of
principle, and I can't let myself be sat on.

MRS. MASTERSON. Sat on! Is that your view of your mother's attitude
towards you?

ETHEL. You know, perfectly well, mother; that it's impossible for
anybody to preserve any individuality in contact with you... that as a
matter of fact, neither father nor Letitia nor Freddy nor myself have
preserved a shred of it. Grandfather said that to you himself, the
last time you ever saw him... I know it, for I've heard father say it a
hundred times.

DR. MASTERSON. Well!

MRS. MASTERSON. It seems to me there's more than a trace of
individuality in this present outburst, Ethel.

ETHEL. Yes, but it's the first time, mother.

LETITIA. Some one is coming. [Turns to door.] Oh! Henry!

HENRY. [Enters; a handsome, powerfully-built man; smooth shaven,
immaculate, reserved in manner.] Well, has the sea-witch arrived?

MRS. MASTERSON. Not yet.

DR. MASTERSON. Freddy's gone to meet her with the limousine.

HENRY. I see. And the steamer?

MRS. MASTERSON. It was to have docked two hours ago.

HENRY. Well, that means that I won't see her till tomorrow evening. I've
got to run down to Providence to-night.

LETITIA. What's the matter?

HENRY. Nothing important... just a business matter that requires my
presence. Make my apologies; and goodbye, my dear.

[Kisses LETITIA.]

LETITIA. Henry, I wish you'd wait a moment.

HENRY. What for, my dear?

LETITIA. Mother has something to say...

MRS. MASTERSON. I want to talk to you about this idea of going to the
country in the winter-time.

HENRY. Oh! There's no use talking about that, Mrs. Masterson. I see I
can't have my way, so there's no more to be said. I'm not the sort of
man to sulk.

MRS. MASTERSON. But such an idea, Henry! For a delicate woman like
Letitia...

HENRY. I know... I know. I'd have taken care of her... but that doesn't
interest her. And, of course, I can't take the children away from her,
and there's not much fun in the country alone. So what's the use? I give
up... as I give up everything. Good-bye, all.

[Exit.]

LETITIA. I declare--such a trial! A husband who's lost his interest in
life!

MRS. MASTERSON. It's that new cook of yours, Letitia.

LETITIA. Every cook is worse.

MRS. MASTERSON. What he needs is some liver-pills. Quincy, you should
attend to it! [Rises.] Well, I'm going upstairs. You'll stay to dinner,
Letitia?

LETITIA. Yes, I want to lie down for a while.

DR. MASTERSON. And I'll beat myself a game of billiards.

[Exit With LETITIA and MRS. MASTERSON.]

ETHEL. [Drops her book to floor, springs up and paces the room.] Oh!
If only I might change places with Oceana! If I could get away to some
South Sea island, and be my own mistress and live my own life. [Takes
photograph.] Oceana! I'm wild to see you! I want to see you dancing.
Your Sunrise Dance... and to your own music! [Begins to hum the Sunrise
Dance.] Oceana! Oceana!

[A step in the hall, she turns.]

FREDDY. [Enters briskly; a college boy, about twenty-one, overgrown,
narrow-chested, good-natured and slangy.] Ethel!

ETHEL. [Starts.] Freddy! Where's Oceana?

FREDDY. She won't get here till morning.

ETHEL. Oh, Freddy!

FREDDY. They can't dock the steamer to-night... there's some tangle at
the pier.

ETHEL. Did you go and see?

FREDDY. I telephoned about it. I didn't want to wait in this blizzard.

ETHEL. I'm so sorry!

FREDDY. Me, too. But there's no help for it.

ETHEL. So long as she doesn't miss to-morrow night! Did I read you what
she said about that, Freddy? [Takes letter from pocket.] "I'll pray
for fair weather, so that I may get there to see the beautiful dancing.
There is nothing in all the world that I love more... my whole being
seems to flow into the dance. I send you the music of my Sunrise Dance,
that father composed for me. You can learn it, and I'll do it for you. I
don't know, of course; but father used to think that I was wonderful in
it.. and he had known all the great dances in Europe. It was the last
thing I heard him play, before he went out in the boat, and I saw him
perish before my eyes." Don't you think that she writes beautifully,
Freddy?

FREDDY. Yes; it's surprising.

ETHEL, Oh, yes. Her father was an extraordinary man, Henry says... a
musician and a poet. They had books and everything, apparently. You'd
think she's been living in Europe.

FREDDY. I see.

ETHEL. Listen to this: [Reads.] "About my name... I forgot to explain.
You see, Anna sounds like England... or New England... and I am not the
least like those places. Father used to see me, as a little tot, diving
through the breakers, and floating out in the sea, with the snow-white
frigate-birds flashing by overhead; and he said I was the very spirit
of the island and the wild, lonely ocean. So he called me Oceana, and
that's the name I've always borne."

FREDDY. It just fits my idea of her.

ETHEL. She goes on: "You mustn't be surprised at what I am. You may
think it's dreadful... even wicked. But at least don't expect anything
like you've ever known before. Fifteen years with only cocoa-palms and
naked savages... the Boston varnish rubs off one. But I'm going to try
to behave. I expect to feel quite at home... I have pictures of all of
you, and a picture of the house... I even have father's keys, to let
myself in with!"

FREDDY. Can you play her music, Ethel?

ETHEL. Play it? I could play it in my sleep. [Opens piano.] The Sunrise
Dance! [She sits and plays.] Listen!

[She plunges into the ecstatic part of the music. FREDDY leans by the
piano, watching her; she plays, more and more enthralled. The door opens
softly.]

[OCEANA enters; a girl of twenty-two, superbly formed, dark-skinned,
a picture of glowing health. She is clad in a short skirt and a rough
sailor's reefer with cap to match; underneath this a knitted garment,
tight-fitting and soft--no corsets. She carries two extremely heavy
suitcases, and with no apparent effort. She sets these down and stands
listening to the music, completely absorbed in it. There is the faintest
suggestion of the Sunrise Dance in her attitude.]

[OCEANA is trusting, and yet with power of reserve. Throughout the
action, however vehemently she speaks, she seldom really grows angry;
she does not take the game seriously enough. On the other hand her
enjoyment, however keen, never becomes boisterous. Her actions proceed
from a continual overflow of animal health. She is like a little child,
in that she cannot remain physically still for very long at a time; she
moves about the room like an animal in a cage. Her speech proceeds from
an overwhelming interest in the truth, regardless of all personality.
She never conceals anything, and she never represses anything.]

ETHEL. [Finishes the music, then turns, and leaps up.] Oceana!

FREDDY. [Turns.] Oceana!

OCEANA. Ethel! [Embraces her.] Oh, my dear! How glad I am to see you!

ETHEL. Oceana! But how did you get here?

OCEANA. I came on the steamer.

FREDDY. But it isn't docked

OCEANA. They took us to another dock.

ETHEL. [Holds her at arm's length.] Oh, how fine you are!

OCEANA. And you--you can play my father's music! I'm so glad!

ETHEL. You liked the way I played it?

OCEANA. I liked it! And so I know I shall like you! And I'm so happy
about it--I wanted to like you!

ETHEL. But how big you are!

OCEANA. [Laughing.] Oh, that's the clothes. I got them in Rio. They're
queer, I guess, but I only had a couple of hours. And this is Freddy!
[They shake hands.] It's so good to be here!

FREDDY. How did you get from the dock?

OCEANA. I walked.

ETHEL. Walked all the way?

OCEANA. Of course... I enjoyed it.

ETHEL. But in the storm!

OCEANA. I didn't mind that. It's all new to me, you see. My dear, think
of it... I've never seen snow before. I was fairly crazy.

[She pulls off the coat and throws it on one of the suitcases.]

ETHEL. I must tell mother. And Letitia! [Opens door and calls.] Mother!
Letitia! Oceana's here!

FREDDY. [Stoops to pick up the suitcases.] Why...

OCEANA. What is it?

FREDDY. [He moves them against the wall with a great effort.] You don't
mean you CARRIED those!

OCEANA. Why, yes.

FREDDY. From the docks?

OCEANA. [Laughs.] Oh, dear me! I didn't mind that.

FREDDY. Well... I'll be blowed!

[He has fallen head over heels in love with her, and whenever he is in
her presence he follows her about with his eyes, like one bewitched.]

OCEANA. You aren't strong as you ought to be! You stay too much in the
house!

ETHEL. Here's mother!

OCEANA. Aunt Sophronia!

MRS. MASTERSON. [Enters.] My dear Anna! [Kisses her upon the cheek.] I
am delighted to see you safe.

ETHEL. And Letitia!

OCEANA. Cousin Letitia!

LETITIA. [Enters.] My dear cousin! So glad you are here!

OCEANA. [Looking from one to the other, as they eye her critically.] Oh,
are you really glad to see me? You must be, you know... for I've come so
far. And you've no idea how homesick I've been.

MRS. MASTERSON. Homesick, my dear? For that wild place you left?

OCEANA. But Aunt Sophronia, that's my home! And it's God's own dream of
beauty!

MRS. MASTERSON. Yes, my dear... I dare say...

OCEANA. Ah, you've never been there, or you wouldn't feel that way!
Picture it as it is at this moment... the broad white beach... the sun
setting and the clouds aflame... the great green breakers rolling in...
the frigate-birds calling... the palm trees rustling in the wind! And
you don't have to wrap yourself up in clothes... you don't have to shut
yourself up in houses! You plunge through the surf, you dance upon the
beach... naked...

MRS. MASTERSON. [Aghast.] My dear girl!

OCEANA. Oh, oh! That's so! I beg your pardon!

MRS. MASTERSON. [Coldly.] It will take you, a little while to get used
to civilized ways...

OCEANA. Oh, no, no, no! I know about that... I know how it is. Father
told me about Boston.

MRS. MASTERSON. My dear...

OCEANA. Don't worry about me. I'm really going to try to behave myself
... in every way. I want to get the right sort of clothes, you know. I
couldn't get them on my trip...

MRS. MASTERSON. It's just as well, my dear. You'd best have us attend to
that. You will need mourning for quite a while, you understand.

OCEANA. Mourning!

MRS. MASTERSON. Yes... for your grandfather.

OCEANA. But, my dear Aunt Sophronia, I couldn't possibly wear mourning!
No, no! I couldn't do that!

MRS. MASTERSON. [Astonished.] Why not?

OCEANA. In the first place, I never mourn.

MRS. MASTERSON. But your own grandfather, my dear!

OCEANA. But I never knew him. Aunt Sophronia... I never saw him in my
life!

MRS. MASTERSON. Even so, my dear! Hasn't he left you all his fortune?

OCEANA. But am I supposed to mourn over that? Why, I'd naturally be
happy about that!

LETITIA. Oceana!

OCEANA. But surely.. wouldn't you be happy about it?

MRS. MASTERSON. My child, one is not supposed to set so much store by
mere money...

OCEANA. But Aunt Sophronia, money is power! And isn't anybody glad to
have power? What else did I come here for?

MRS. MASTERSON. I had hoped you had come home for some other things. ..
to see your relatives, for instance.

ETHEL. Here's father!

OCEANA. Uncle Quincy!

DR. MASTERSON. [Enters.] My dear girl! You have come! [Embraces her.]
Why, what a picture you are! A very storm from the tropics! My dear
Oceana!

OCEANA. I'm so glad to get here.

DR. MASTERSON. Yes, indeed! I can believe it! And a strange experience
it must have been... your first plunge into civilization!

OCEANA. Yes, Uncle Quincy! It's been horrible!

DR. MASTERSON. Horrible, my dear? In what way?

OCEANA. It's been almost too much for me. Really... I could understand
how it might feel to be sick!

DR. MASTERSON. Why, what did you see?

OCEANA. Everything! It rushed over me, all at once! The people... their
dreadful faces! And such noises and odors and sights!

DR. MASTERSON. I hadn't realized...

OCEANA. And then the saloons! Rows and rows of them! It is ghastly!

LETITIA. My dear cousin, mother and I contribute regularly to a
temperance society.

OCEANA. But that hasn't helped, has it? I'm almost wild about such
things--they were the real reason I came home, you know.

MRS. MASTERSON. How do you mean?

OCEANA. They had got to my island! They are turning it into a hell!

DR. MASTERSON. In what way?

OCEANA. Why, it's a long story. I didn't write... it would have taken
too long. Two years ago there was a ship laid up... and the crew found,
quite by accident, that our island rock is all phosphate; something
very valuable... for fertilizer, it seems. So they bought land from the
natives, and now there's a company, and a trading-post, and all that.
And oh, my people are going all to pieces!

MRS. MASTERSON. The natives, you mean?

OCEANA. Yes... the people I have loved all my life. And I've tried so
hard... I've pleaded with them, I've wept and prayed with them! But
they're lost!

LETITIA. You mean rum?

OCEANA. I mean everything. Rum, and cocaine, and sugar, and canned food,
and clothes, and missionaries... all civilization! And worse yet, Aunt
Sophronia... ah, I can't bear to think of it!

MRS. MASTERSON. What?

OCEANA. You wouldn't let me tell you what. [In a low voice.] Imagine
my people, my beautiful people, with the soft, brown skins and the big
black eyes, and hair like the curtains of night. They are not savages,
you understand... they are gentle and kindly. They ride the rushing
breakers in their frail canoes, they fish and gather fruits in the
forests, they dream in the soft, warm sunshine... they are happy,
they are care-free, their whole life is a song. And they are trusting,
hospitable... the wonderful white strangers come, and they take them
into their homes, and open their hearts to them. And the strangers go
away and leave them a ghastly disease, that rages like a fire in their
palm-thatched cabins, that sweeps through their villages like a tornado.
And the women's hair falls out... they wither up... they're old hags
in a year or two. And the babies... I've helped bring them into the
world... and they had no lips... their noses were gone! They were
idiots... blind...

MRS. MASTERSON. [Wildly.] Anna Talbot! I must beg you to have a little
discretion!

LETITIA. Why should we hear about these things, Oceana?

OCEANA. My dear, it comes from America. The ships came from here! There
was one of them I saw... "The Mary Jane, of Boston, Mass."

MRS. MASTERSON. No doubt, among such low men... men of vile life. ..
sailors...

OCEANA. No, Aunt Sophronia... you're mistaken! It's everywhere. Isn't
it, Uncle Quincy? You're a doctor... YOU must know!

DR. MASTERSON. Why, to tell the truth...

OCEANA. TELL the truth! Am I not right?

FREDDY. Of course you're right!

MRS. MASTERSON. Freddy!

OCEANA. Ah! You know!

MRS. MASTERSON. This is outrageous!

OCEANA. You mean you don't teach your children about it? Why...

[She stares at them, perplexed.]

MRS. MASTERSON. You don't understand our ways, Anna...

OCEANA. No, no... I don't. I don't think I ever can. You'd let some man
come and make love to Ethel... and you'd never warn her?

ETHEL. They warned me to turn my toes out when I walked, and not to eat
fish with a knife.

MRS. MASTERSON. If this conversation is to go on, I insist that the
children shall leave the room.

OCEANA. Oh, I'm awfully sorry, Aunt Sophronia! Why, I didn't mean any
harm. It's all so real to me. [She gazes from one to the other, hoping
for some sign of a thaw.] Just think... these were the people that I'd
loved... that I'd grown up with all my life. I'd fished in their canoes,
I'd hunted with them and basked on the beach with them. I'd watched the
young men and girls dancing their love-dances in the moonlit glades...
[She pauses again.] Oughtn't I to talk about THAT?

DR. MASTERSON. My dear girl...

OCEANA. [Stares at them; a sudden idea occurs to her.] Perhaps I ought
to explain to you... you're no doubt wondering. I'm a virgin myself, you
know.

MRS. MASTERSON. [Starting up.] OH!

LETITIA. Oceana!

OCEANA. But weren't you thinking of that?

MRS. MASTERSON. Why, of course not!

OCEANA. But Aunt Sophronia! You know you were!

MRS. MASTERSON. [Sputters.] Oh! OH!

OCEANA. You were thinking to yourself, this girl's been playing around
on the beaches with savages... and what's been happening to her?

DR. MASTERSON. My dear niece, I'm afraid you'll have to take some
account of our civilized prejudices. We simply don't say everything that
we think.

OCEANA. [Springing up.] Oh, dear me! I'm so sorry! I didn't mean to make
you unhappy! I was going to be so good. I was going to try to conform to
everything. Why, just think of it, Aunt Sophronia... in Rio I actually
bought a pair of corsets. And I tried to wear them. I. .. Oceana!
Around my waist! Think of it! [She looks for sympathy.] I couldn't stand
them... I climbed to the topmast and threw them to the sharks. But now
it seems that you all wear corsets on your minds and souls. [A pause.]
Never mind... let's talk about something else. I'm getting restless. You
see... I'm not used to being in a room... it seems like a box to me...
I can hardly breathe. The air in here is dreadful... hadn't any of you
noticed? [Silence. Apparently nobody had.] Would you mind if I opened a
window?

MRS. MASTERSON. It is storming outside, Anna.

OCEANA. Yes, but one can exercise and keep warm. just a minute...
please. [She flings up a window; a gale blows in.] Ah, feel that!

[MRS. MASTERSON, LETITIA and DR. MASTERSON draw away from the window.]

MRS. MASTERSON. This is simply outrageous!

LETITIA. It is beyond all words!

DR. MASTERSON. My dear, consider...

MRS. MASTERSON. I won't have that creature in my house a minute longer.

DR. MASTERSON. My dear, be reasonable!

LETITIA. REASONABLE?

DR. MASTERSON. Consider what is at stake!

MRS. MASTERSON. But what hope have we to get anything out of such a
woman?

DR. MASTERSON. We have some hope, I'm sure. If we...

MRS. MASTERSON. Didn't you hear her say she'd come home for nothing but
the money?

DR. MASTERSON. Yes... but at least she's honest enough to say it,
Sophronia. And she's here as our guest... she wants to be friendly ...
don't let it come to an open break with her!

LETITIA. But how can we HELP it, father?

DR. MASTERSON. It's just a matter of letting her talk. And what harm
will that do us?

MRS. MASTERSON. But we can't lock her up in the house. And can we
introduce her to our friends? Tomorrow night, for instance!

DR. MASTERSON. We must manage it somehow. When we've once had an
understanding with her, it won't take long to get the papers signed, and
after that we won't care. Control yourself, Sophronia, I implore you!
Don't let your prejudices ruin us!

ETHEL. [Steals to them, in agitation.] Mother, CAN'T you be good to her?
You don't understand her at all.

MRS. MASTERSON. [Coldly.] Thank you, Ethel...

ETHEL. [To FREDDY, who joins them.] Can't you say something to them,
Freddy? They treat her so badly.

FREDDY. They hate her, Ethel! They couldn't understand her.

[OCEANA takes deep breaths, expelling them in short, sharp puffs.]

LETITIA. What in the world are you doing?

OCEANA. That's one of the Yogi exercises. Haven't any of you studied the
Vedantas?

LETITIA. We are all Episcopalians here, Oceana.

OCEANA. Oh, I see!

[She takes a deep breath and then pounds her chest like a gorilla.]

MRS. MASTERSON. And pray, what is THAT?

OCEANA. I'm just getting some of the civilization out of my lungs.

[A furious gale blows.]

MRS. MASTERSON. Really, my dear, we shall have to leave the room. We'll
all catch our death of cold.

OCEANA. My dear Aunt Sophronia, nobody ever caught a cold from winter
air. Colds come from over-eating and bad ventilation. [She closes the
window.] However, there you are! [Eagerly.] Now, let's have something
beautiful--so that I can forget my blunders. Let's have some music. Will
you play for me, Cousin Letitia?

LETITIA. I don't play, my dear.

OCEANA. What? Why, father told me you played all the time!

LETITIA. That was before my marriage.

OCEANA. Oh, I see! [Laughs.] The music has accomplished its purpose!
[Stops, alarmed.] Oh! I've done it again! [Goes to LETITIA.] My dear
cousin, believe me, I meant no offense. I'm never personal. I was simply
formulating a principle of sociology!

MRS. MASTERSON. You have strange ways, my dear niece.

DR. MASTERSON. Are you always so direct, so ruthless?

OCEANA. That's the word, isn't it? That's what father taught me. Never
to think about personalities... to go after the truth! He used to quote
that saying of Nietzsche's: "To hunger after knowledge as the lion for
his food!"

MRS. MASTERSON. Oh, you read Nietzsche, do you? How could you get such
books?

OCEANA. We had a government steamer from New Zealand three times a year,
you know. That brought our mail.

MRS. MASTERSON. And your father permitted you to read these improper
things?

OCEANA. My father taught me to face the facts of my being. My father was
a fighter, you know.

MRS. MASTERSON. [Grimly.] Yes, I knew that.

OCEANA. Life had hurt him. Some day you must tell me about it... what it
was that happened to him here in Boston. He never would talk about it,
but I've often wondered. It must have been my mother. What did she do to
him before she died? [She pauses, expecting an answer.] Was it that she
was just conventional like you? [She pauses again.] It must have been
something dreadful... he felt so keenly about it. He burned it into my
very soul... his fear of civilization. And here I am... right in the
midst of it... I'm letting it get its claws into me! I'm wearing its
clothes... [She tears at them.] I'm breathing its air! I don't believe
I can stand it! [She paces the room restlessly.] My soul is suffocating,
as well as my body. I must have something to remind me of the sky, and
the open sea, and the great spaces. I must go back again to my home, to
my island! [Stretches out her arms to them appealingly.] Ah, can't some
of you understand about it? Can't some of you take pity on me? It's so
strange to me... so different from everything I've been used to! Aunt
Sophronia!

MRS. MASTERSON. [Takes a step reluctantly.] My dear!

ETHEL. [Springing forward.] No! No! They don't understand! They don't
really care.

MRS. MASTERSON. Ethel!

OCEANA. But you! Ethel!

ETHEL. [Rushes and flings herself at OCEANA'S feet, clutching her
dress.] Take me with you! Take me away to your island!

OCEANA. [Turning to FREDDY.] And you... won't you be my friend?

FREDDY. [Goes to her.] I will! [She holds out her hand to him; he
hesitates, gazing at her awe-stricken.] May I... may I take your hand?

OCEANA. Why certainly!

FREDDY. [With fervor.] Oceana!

[CURTAIN]




ACT II


SCENE: Same as Act I.


[At rise: DR. MASTERSON in easy-chair near the window; opens newspaper,
sighs, wipes glasses, prepares to read.]


MRS. MASTERSON. [Enters with LETITIA.] Well!

DR. MASTERSON. Home, are you?

MRS. MASTERSON. Yes! And such a day!

LETITIA. Shopping with Oceana!

DR. MASTERSON. Humph!

MRS. MASTERSON. Imagine buying clothes for a woman who won't squeeze her
waist, and won't let her skirts touch the ground!

DR. MASTERSON. Why didn't you take her to the men's department?

LETITIA. Don't make a joke of it, father.

DR. MASTERSON. How did you make out?

MRS. MASTERSON. Well, we've got her so the police won't molest her.

LETITIA. We told Madame Clarice her trunks had been misplaced in the
steamer hold.

DR. MASTERSON. Ingenious!

MRS. MASTERSON. Yes! Only she spoiled it all by telling the truth!

DR. MASTERSON. Where is she now?

MRS. MASTERSON. She's walking... she says she must have exercise.

LETITIA. The air in the limousine is close, it seems.

DR. MASTERSON. You got something she could wear to-night?

MRS. MASTERSON. Oh, yes, that part's all right. If I could only have
selected the things she's going to SAY to-night!

[A pause.]

DR. MASTERSON. Well, and what are the signs?

MRS. MASTERSON. I don't know. I can't read her at all.

DR. MASTERSON. You haven't broached the subject yet?

MRS. MASTERSON. Not definitely. I've hinted at it. I said we were
worried about the future of Freddy and Ethel.

DR. MASTERSON. And what did she say to that?

MRS. MASTERSON. She said that she'd take care of them, if I'd let her.

DR. MASTERSON. Why... that's promising.

MRS. MASTERSON. So I thought... till I found she meant taking them off
to the South Seas!

DR. MASTERSON. Oh!

MRS. MASTERSON. I thought I'd wait till to-night... after the dancing.
You see, she'll have met some company, and I thought she might be
feeling more... more genial.

DR. MASTERSON. I understand. A good idea.

LETITIA. Miss Pilkington ought to put her in a good mood.

MRS. MASTERSON. She's passionately fond of fancy dancing, it seems. And
Ethel's been writing her about to-night, so she's quite excited about
it.

DR. MASTERSON. I see.

LETITIA. People are wildly jealous of us because we got Miss Pilkington
to come here. Everybody's talking about it.

MRS. MASTERSON. You haven't heard any criticisms, I hope?

LETITIA. Nothing that amounts to anything.

MRS. MASTERSON. I wish I could feel comfortable about it. It seems so
very daring. It's been only seven months since the funeral. To be sure
... father and I hadn't spoken for ten years.

DR. MASTERSON. And everybody knows the entertainment is for charity.

LETITIA. And we've only asked the very best people.

DR. MASTERSON. And the date was arranged over a year ago.

LETITIA. And it isn't as if we were going to dance ourselves, mother.
And then they are "Biblical Dances," too.

MRS. MASTERSON. I know--I know. But then, the world is so quick to
gossip. They might say we were doing it because he left his fortune to a
girl in the Cannibal Islands!

DR. MASTERSON. Perhaps it's just as well the girl's to be here.

MRS. MASTERSON. Yes, if we can keep her within bounds. I shall be on
pins and needles till it's over.

LETITIA. Such a white elephant in one's home!

MRS. MASTERSON. And then the way Freddy and Ethel are behaving!

LETITIA. Freddy wanted to stay from college and Ethel from her music
lesson--both of them to go and sit around in the stores while Oceana
bought clothes!

DR. MASTERSON. Well, of all things!

MRS. MASTERSON. I hardly know Ethel any more!

LETITIA. And Freddy sits around and stares at her like a man out of his
wits!

MRS. MASTERSON. That'll be the next thing, I suppose... she'll run off
and marry him!

DR. MASTERSON. Well, mightn't that be a good way to solve the problem?
To keep the money in the family?

MRS. MASTERSON. Ouincy!

LETITIA. Besides--she mightn't marry him.

MRS. MASTERSON. Letitia!

LETITIA. Why not, mother?

MRS. MASTERSON. I'm sure, my child, you have no reason for saying
anything like THAT.

LETITIA. I don't trust the minx!

[A pause.]

DR. MASTERSON. Has Henry got home?

LETITIA. He's probably there now.

MRS. MASTERSON. Is he coming here to dinner?

LETITIA. I'm not sure.

MRS. MASTERSON. You'd better take my advice and not let him.

LETITIA. Why not?

MRS. MASTERSON. Because, the first thing you know, we'll have Henry in
love with her, too.

LETITIA. [Horrified.] MOTHER!

MRS. MASTERSON. I mean it, my dear--quite seriously. What's the meaning
of all this discontent of Henry's? I know him well enough.. . he's just
the man to be taken in by the tricks of such a woman! SHE'D give him
plenty of outdoor exercise! SHE'D go live in the country with him!

LETITIA. [Springing up.] Mother! How horrible!

MRS. MASTERSON. Forewarned is forearmed, Letitia. You listen to me, and
let Henry see just as little of Anna Talbot as you can. And when he's
with her, you be there, too.

LETITIA. [In great agitation.] I'll go home right now and see to him!

[Exit.]

DR. MASTERSON. [Sighs.] Oh, dear! And I was waiting for Henry to play
billiards with!

MRS. MASTERSON. You might get Anna to play billiards with you. No doubt
she's an expert.

[Exit right.]

[DR. MASTERSON sighs, shakes his head, and resumes reading.]

OCEANA. [Enters, radiant, clad in an ermine cloak.] Well, Uncle Quincy!

DR. MASTERSON. Oceana! Bless me! How gorgeous!

OCEANA. [Takes it off and throws it on the chair.] It's really too warm
for walking.

DR. MASTERSON. I should have thought, coming from a tropical climate. ..

OCEANA. Ah, but my blood circulates, you see. [Sits opposite him.] Uncle
Quincy, I want to have a talk with you.

DR. MASTERSON. Yes, my dear?

OCEANA. Uncle Quincy, why do you let Aunt Sophronia and Letitia frighten
you the way they do?

DR. MASTERSON. My dear girl!

OCEANA. Take yesterday afternoon, for instance--what I said about
syphilis. You know I was right, and yet you didn't dare say so.

DR. MASTERSON. Really, Oceana...

OCEANA. You are an educated man--a man of science. You know what modern
ideas are. And yet you consent to be walked all over!

DR. MASTERSON. My dear...

OCEANA. Here are these women... they have leisure and opportunity. ..
they ought to be doing some good in the world. And yet they haven't an
idea except to act as other people think they ought to act!

DR. MASTERSON. Dear me! Dear me!

[Rises and begins to pace the room.]

OCEANA. Don't run away from me.

DR. MASTERSON. I'm not running away. But you are so disconcerting,
Oceana...

OCEANA. I know; but that's only because you know that what I say is
true, and you don't like to feel that anybody else knows it.

FREDDY. [Off.] Oceana!

OCEANA. Freddy!

FREDDY. [Enters.] Oh! Father's here!

OCEANA. Yes; we were having a chat.

FREDDY. [Hesitates.] Father, will you excuse me, please... I have
something very important to say to Oceana. I've been waiting for her.

DR. MASTERSON. Why... what...

FREDDY. Don't ask me, please. I must have a talk with her right away.
Please come, Oceana.

OCEANA. All right.

DR. MASTERSON. I was going to the billiard-room, anyway. Pray excuse me.

[Exit centre.]

OCEANA. [Smiles.] See him run! Well, Freddy, what is it?

FREDDY. [Intensely.] Oceana!

OCEANA. What's the matter?

FREDDY. You mustn't stay here!

OCEANA. Why not?

FREDDY. They'll ruin you, Oceana! They'll crush you, they'll spoil you
forever! You must go away!

OCEANA. Why, my dear boy, how can they hurt me?

FREDDY. They will, they will! I've been thinking about it all day! I
didn't go to college... I spent the whole day pacing the streets.

OCEANA. Why, Freddy!

FREDDY. And I want you to come away! Come away with me! I want you.. .
[Wildly.]... I want you to marry me!

OCEANA. [Aghast.] Why, Freddy!

FREDDY. Oh, I know it's a fool way... to blurt it out at you like that.
I thought up a hundred ways to say it to you. I had a fine speech all
by heart, but I can't remember a word of it. When I see you I can't even
think straight. I'm simply beside myself... I can't rest, I can't
sleep, I can't do anything. I used to laugh at such ideas, but now I'm
frightened at myself. Can't you understand me, Oceana? Oceana... I love
you!

OCEANA. [Whispers.] My poor boy!

FREDDY. I don't ask you to say yes... I just ask you to give me a
chance... a hope. If I thought I might win you, I'd do anything.. .
anything! I'd wait for you... I'd work for you... I'd worship you!
Oceana! [He stops.] May I... May I take your hand? [She does not give
it.] Ah, no! I have no right! Oceana, listen to me! I have thought that
I was in love before... but it was just childish, it was nothing like
this. This has been a revelation to me... it makes all the world seem
different to me. And just see how suddenly it's come... why, yesterday
I was a boy! Yesterday I thought some things were interesting... and
to-day I wonder how I could have cared about them. Nothing seems the
same to me. And it all happened at once, it was like an explosion... the
first instant I laid eyes on you I knew that you were the one woman I
could ever love. And I said to myself, she will laugh at you.

[He hesitates.]

OCEANA. No, I won't laugh at you.

FREDDY. I tried to keep it to myself, but I couldn't... not if I were
to be hanged for it. I'm just... just torn out of myself. I'm trembling
with delight, and then I'm plunged into despair, and then I stop to
think and I'm terrified. For I don't know what I can do. Everything in
my life is gone--I won't know how to live if you send me away.

OCEANA. [Gravely.] Freddy, come sit down here. Be rational now.

FREDDY. Yes.

[He sits watching her, in a kind of daze.]

OCEANA. In the first place, Freddy... you must understand, it isn't the
first time this has happened to me.

FREDDY. No, I suppose not.

OCEANA. The officers of the ships always used to fall in love with me.
There were three on this last steamer.

FREDDY. Yes.

OCEANA. You say to marry you. But it's difficult for me to imagine
myself marrying any man, no matter how much I loved him. One has to make
so many promises, you know.

FREDDY. How do you mean?

OCEANA. You have to "love, honor and obey."

FREDDY. But, Oceana! That's a mere form.

OCEANA. No, no. It's written in the laws. All kinds of things... people
don't realize it.

FREDDY. But surely... if you love a man... a decent man...

OCEANA. No decent man ought to ask a woman to sign away her
self-respect.

FREDDY. [Bewildered.] But then... then... what would you do?

OCEANA. [Watches him, then laughs to herself.] Boston is such a funny
place!

FREDDY. Hey?

OCEANA. Let us leave marriage out now... let us talk of love. Realize
how much more serious it is to a woman than it is to a man. A man meets
a woman and he finds her beautiful, and his blood begins to boil, and he
says: "I adore you." And so she gives herself to him; and then, the next
morning, he goes off and forgets all about it.

FREDDY. No, no!

OCEANA. I don't say you, Freddy. But it's happened that way. The woman,
though... she doesn't forget. She carries a reminder. And it's not only
that she has the burden of the child... the anguish of the birth... the
task of suckling and rearing it. It's that she has a miniature of the
man with her all the rest of her days. She has his soul there... blended
with the thing she loves most of all in the world. And so, don't you
see how careful she has to be, how desperately important the thing is to
her? [She sits lost in thought.] I have never been in love, Freddy, not
the least little bit. I have never felt that call in my blood. But some
day I shall feel it; and when I do, I shall take that man as if before a
court of judgment. I shall take him away with me. I shall ask myself not
merely, "Is he beautiful and strong of body?" but, "Is he beautiful
and strong in soul?" I would not ask that he be learned... he might not
chance to be a cultured man. But he would be a man of power, he would be
a man who could rule himself, he would be a soul without base alloy. And
when I had satisfied myself as to that, I would have found my mate. I
would say to him, "I wish you to be the father of my child." [She sits
again, brooding.] I would not exact pledges of him. I would say to him,
"I do not ask you to take care of me; I do not ask you to take care of
my child. You may go away when you wish... that rests with you; but _I_
wish the child." [She pauses.] Do you see?

FREDDY. Yes, I see. [He gazes at her, frightened.] And you... you do not
feel that way about me?

OCEANA. Not the least little bit, Freddy.

FREDDY. And if I waited ever so long?

OCEANA. I do not believe that I should ever feel it, [She puts her hand
upon his arm.] My dear, dear boy! Learn to look at it as I do. Face it
like a man. It is one of those things that we cannot help.. . that we
do not even understand. It is the chemistry of sex; it is Nature's voice
speaking to us. It means no disgrace to you that I do not love you... it
means no inferiority, no defeat. It is the signal that Nature gives
us, that we wait for, and dare not disregard. You dare not ask me to
disregard it! [He is gazing into her eyes like one entranced.] You must
let me teach you... you must let me help you. You must not let this mean
misery and despair. Take hold of yourself. Perhaps you and Ethel can go
back with me to my island... for I think that I am going. [He continues
to gaze at her, speechless with admiration. She presses his arm.] Now
promise me.

FREDDY. What?

OCEANA. That you will be a man.

[They gaze into each other's eyes.]

ETHEL. [Off.] Oceana!

OCEANA. Here is your sister. Let us not trouble her. [Aloud.] Ethel!

ETHEL. [Enters in street costume.] Oh, here you are! And your new
clothes!

OCEANA. Do you like me?

ETHEL. No, they don't belong to you!

OCEANA. [Laughs.] Well, I shan't wear them long.

ETHEL. What are you going to do?

OCEANA. I'm going to design some for myself.

ETHEL. What kind?

OCEANA. I don't know yet. But it'll be something that will leave my legs
outside.

ETHEL. And did you get something beautiful for tonight?

OCEANA. I got something that will do.

ETHEL. Oceana, when am I to see the dance?

OCEANA. I told you, when I have my costume.

ETHEL. But when will that be?

OCEANA. When my trunks have come.

FREDDY. They came this afternoon.

OCEANA. Oh! Then we'll have it to-morrow morning! And I'll show you my
beautiful bridal-robe.

FREDDY. Bridal-robe?

OCEANA. Yes. Didn't I tell you? It was made for me by one of our King's
sons. His name was Paukopi... that means, in our language, "Child of the
Sea Foam." And he was in love with me.

ETHEL. Oh!

OCEANA. He was very sad and went away by himself. But he was a man.. .
he did not go to pieces. [She looks at FREDDY.] He went into the forest
and spent his time hunting wild birds; and he gathered their feathers
and made them into this gorgeous robe... purple and gold and green and
scarlet. He brought it and laid it at my feet, and said that it was my
bridal-robe, that I must wear it at my feast.

ETHEL. Oh, how lovely!

FREDDY. [Rises and turns away in despair.] Oh!

ETHEL. Tell me a little about the Sunrise Dance.

OCEANA. It represents the worship of Nature. It portrays an awakening
from slumber... you know the soft part of the music at the beginning...

ETHEL. Yes.

OCEANA. Then gradually I rise to my feet and gaze towards the light.
There is the sun shining upon the waves of the sea, and upon the palm
branches. All life is awakening and singing for joy... and so the music
rises to an ecstasy.

ETHEL. And do you dance other things?

OCEANA. Oh, yes--lots of things.

ETHEL. Oh, Oceana! I'm just wild to see you!

OCEANA. And I'm wild to dance. I must have some vent pretty soon. You
see, at home I was out of doors all the time. I hunted and fished, I
swam and dived, I danced on the beach. And here... why, I walk down the
street, and I daren't even so much as sing out loud. I have to remember
that I'm a young lady, and have an ermine cloak on! Truly, I don't see
how you ever stand it!

ETHEL. We were brought up that way.

OCEANA. Yes; and that's why you're undeveloped and frail. But tell
me, don't you ever have an impulse to play? That beautiful snow out
there--don't you want to tumble round in it and pelt each other with
snowballs?

FREDDY. We did that when we were children.

OCEANA. Yes, that's the way. But I, you see... I'm a child still; and I
expect to be always.

ETHEL. And are you always happy, Oceana?

OCEANA. Always.

ETHEL. You never... you never even start to feel sad?

OCEANA. Why yes, now and then. But I don't permit such moods. You see,
I have the conviction that there is nothing beautiful or right about
sorrow--never, under any circumstances.

ETHEL. You mean you would not mourn, even if some one you loved were to
die?

OCEANA. I mean that I did not. [She pauses.] Yes, exactly... my father.
He had been my life's companion, and they brought him home drowned; and
yet I did not mourn.

ETHEL. Oceana!

OCEANA. I had trained myself... for just that. We had made ourselves
what you might call soul-exercises; little ceremonies to remind
ourselves of things we wished to hold by. The Sunrise Dance was one of
those. And then, on the last day of each month, at sunset, we would
sit and watch the shadows fade, and contemplate death. [She pauses,
gravely.] We would say to ourselves that we, too, were shadows ...
rainbows in the sea-mist; that we held our life as a gift... we carried
it in our hands, ready to give it up when we heard the call. [A pause.]

HENRY. [Opens door centre and enters. Sees OCEANA and halts.] Oh!

OCEANA. [Turns and sees him.] Why! Here's a man! [They gaze at each
other, transfixed.] Ethel! Who is he?

ETHEL. Why, this is Henry. Letitia's husband.

OCEANA. Oh! Letitia's husband! [With a sudden, frank gesture, putting
out her hand.] Henry!

HENRY. Oceana!

[As their hands meet, they stand looking into each other's faces.]

OCEANA. [Gripping his hand tightly.] You are strong! [Looks at his
hand.] And you do not smoke, either! Let me see your eyes.

HENRY. [Perplexed.] My eyes?

OCEANA. Your eyes. [Turns him toward the light; studies his eyes.] They
dosed you with quinine! Malaria, I suppose?

HENRY. Why... yes. But how can you tell?

OCEANA. I can tell many things. Let me see your tongue.

HENRY. [Bewildered.] My tongue?

OCEANA. Your tongue.

HENRY. But what for?

OCEANA. I can tell more about a man by looking at his tongue for a
minute than by listening to it for a week.

HENRY. But, Oceana--

OCEANA. I am in earnest.

HENRY. [Laughs.] Why... really...

OCEANA. Are you afraid?

HENRY. Good heavens, no!

OCEANA. Put it out. [He pats his tongue out and she examines it.] So! A
man with a red tongue! And in a civilized city!

HENRY. Oughtn't it to be red?

OCEANA. And he doesn't know what it ought to be! How delicious! [She
steps back from him.] And so you are Letitia's husband. Tell me, are you
happy with her?

HENRY. [Startled; stares at her intently.] No, no... you ought not to
ask me that.

OCEANA. Why not?

HENRY. [In a low voice.] Because you know.

OCEANA. Yes, that's true. [A pause; she changes the subject.] I have
heard my father speak of you often.

HENRY. He remembered me, did he? I was only twenty when he went away.

OCEANA. He said that he taught you to play single-stick.

HENRY. Ah yes, to be sure!

OCEANA. He taught me also.

HENRY. You?

OCEANA. It was our favorite game.

HENRY. It's a rather rough game for a woman.

OCEANA. I love it. We'll have a bout.

HENRY. I'm afraid... I don't think I could.

OCEANA. Why not?

HENRY. [Laughs.] I should find it a psychical impossibility to hit a
woman.

OCEANA. You might find it a physical impossibility in this case. [With
sudden excitement.] Why, my trunks have come! We could have a go before
dinner. Couldn't we, Freddy?

FREDDY. I suppose so.

OCEANA. Oh, it's just what I'm pining for! To get my blood stirring
again! And you, too... surely you must be chafing, out of patience! [She
stops abruptly.] Oh!

MRS. MASTERSON. [Enters left.] Henry!

HENRY. Yes?

MRS. MASTERSON. When did you get here?

HENRY. Just a minute ago.

MRS. MASTERSON. You've met Anna, I see.

OCEANA. Yes, Aunt Sophronia... we're getting along famously.

MRS. MASTERSON. Letitia's looking for you, Henry.

HENRY. Where is she?

MRS. MASTERSON. She went home to find you.

HENRY. Humph! I came here for her.

MRS. MASTERSON. She wants you at once.

HENRY. All right. Good-bye, Oceana.

OCEANA. Until later.

HENRY [exit centre with MRS. MASTERSON.]

OCEANA. So that is Henry! Tell me, Ethel, have they any children?

ETHEL. Yes... two.

OCEANA. How long have they been married?

ETHEL. Six years.

OCEANA. Six years! And is he really happy?

ETHEL. Why... you know Letitia.

OCEANA. Yes, but I don't know Henry.

ETHEL. [Laughs.] I guess he's so-so. Like most of us.

OCEANA. [Half to herself.] I'll find out for myself. ['Phone rings;
FREDDY rises.] What's that? It's the 'phone. [Rises.] I hadn't noticed
it before! How interesting!

ETHEL. That's so! You never saw one?

FREDDY. [At 'phone.] Hello! Yes, this is Mrs. Masterson's. This is her
son. Can't I take the message? Oh, from Miss Pilkington. Oh! Why, that's
too bad! Why no, of course not. Tell Miss Pilkington we're as sorry as
can be! No, I'll attend to it. Good-bye. [Turns.] Miss Pilkington can't
come!

ETHEL. What?

FREDDY. She's slipped in the snow and hurt her ankle.

ETHEL. Oh, Freddy!

OCEANA. What a shame!

[They stare at one another.]

ETHEL. Was that she at the 'phone?

FREDDY. No, her maid. She's laid up.

ETHEL. What in the world will we do?

FREDDY. It's too late to notify people.

ETHEL. How perfectly beastly!

FREDDY. I'll go tell mother.

OCEANA. No, wait!

FREDDY. What is it?

OCEANA. I've an idea.

FREDDY. What?

OCEANA. Why not let ME take her place?

ETHEL. How do you mean?

OCEANA. Let me dance!

ETHEL. Oh!

OCEANA. Why not? I'd love to do it.

ETHEL. Oceana! You'd do the Sunrise Dance?

OCEANA. Yes; and then if they liked it, I could do some others.

ETHEL. Oh, Oceana! How perfectly lovely! But... but I wonder if it would
be all right. I mean... it wouldn't shock them?

OCEANA. Why should it, my dear?

ETHEL. Is it what they'd call proper?

OCEANA. Why, of course, Ethel. How ridiculous! It isn't a sex-dance.
It's religious.

FREDDY. And the costume?

OCEANA. Oh, the costume is beautiful.

ETHEL. Then I'll ask mother.

[Starts to go.]

OCEANA. Wait. Will Henry be there?

ETHEL. Of course.

OCEANA. Are you sure?

ETHEL. Of course.

OCEANA. [Eagerly.] Why ask your mother at all? Why not just go ahead and
do it?

ETHEL. Oceana!

OCEANA. Why not? She'd only worry meantime. So let's just wait, and I'll
go ahead.

ETHEL. Oh, would you dare?

OCEANA. Why, of course! She needn't know until almost time. Is this Miss
Pilkington known here?

ETHEL. No, she's never been in Boston before.

FREDDY. Mother met her in London. She promised she'd do her famous
Biblical Dances for mother's pet foundling asylum.

OCEANA. Well, don't you see? Most of the people wouldn't know till it
was all over! And oh, Ethel, it would be such a lark! [ETHEL and
FREDDY gaze at each other dubiously.] Who was going to play for Miss
Pilkington?

ETHEL. I was.

OCEANA. Well, then, you can play for me! You see, Ethel, I'm afraid to
tell your mother... she mightn't be willing. She wants to suppress me,
and oh, I just can't be suppressed! I must have something to do or I'll
jump out of my skin, Ethel. Truly, my dear, if this goes on much longer,
I'll go out and climb the telegraph pole in front of the house! And if I
can only make an impression with my dancing, then I may choose that
for my career. I've been thinking of it seriously... it's one way, that
people might let me preach joy and health to them. If I can't do that,
I'll go off and turn into a suffragette, or join the Anarchists, or
something worse!

ETHEL. Freddy, what do you say?

FREDDY. I'll stand my share of the racket.

OCEANA. Oh, come on! I'm just wild for some kind of mischief! I could
dance like the grandmother of all the witches! Come, let's practice
some. Play for me, Ethel! Play! [Pushes her toward the piano; raises her
hands in triumph; whispers.] Henry!

CURTAIN




ACT III


[Front part of stage shows an ante-room, with folding doors opening to
rear part, which represents a portion of the Masterson parlor, curtained
off to form a stage for the dance. Entrances down stage right and left.
Up stage, at the left, are the curtains, which part in the middle; they
are held by a cord which is fastened by the wall. OCEANA'S trunk stands
near entrance, right. Also a couple of chairs.]

[At rise: FREDDY stands left, holding curtain cord. OCEANA lies up
centre, covered with the "Bridal-robe," asleep. Music of Sunrise Dance
begins softly. FREDDY draws back curtains, revealing part of audience,
left. He steals off. OCEANA gradually awakens, raises her head, lifts
herself to her knees, stretches out her hands in worship to the Sun-god.
Then slowly she rises, rapt in wonder. The robe falls back, revealing
a filmy costume, primitive, elemental, naive. She begins to sway, and
gradually glides into an ecstatic dance, which portrays the joyful
awakening of morning.]


MRS. MASTERSON. [Enters, left, in great agitation, stares at OCEANA,
wrings her hands, paces about, signals to her frantically.] Oh! Oh!

[Rushes left and releases curtains, which fall.]

OCEANA. [Turns in consternation.] Why! What... [Sees MRS. MASTERSON.]
Aunt Sophronia!

MRS. MASTERSON. How dare you! How dare you!

OCEANA. Why, what's the matter?

MRS. MASTERSON. You ask me? Oh, oh!

OCEANA. Aunt Sophronia, you stopped my dance!

MRS. MASTERSON. Hussy! Shameless wanton! You have disgraced me before
all the world!

OCEANA. [Stares at her, slowly comprehending.] Oh! I see! [Goes to her
with signs of distress.] Oh, Aunt Sophronia, I'm so sorry! I didn't mean
to displease you!

MRS. MASTERSON. Such a humiliation!

OCEANA. Aunt Sophronia, you must believe me... I had a reason!

MRS. MASTERSON. A what?

OCEANA. A reason for doing it! I couldn't help it... believe me, believe
me!

MRS. MASTERSON. But what... what reason? What do you mean?

OCEANA. I can't tell you, Aunt Sophronia. But truly... if you knew, you
would understand. I simply had to do it.

MRS. MASTERSON. [Bewildered.] Is the girl mad?

OCEANA. Yes, I believe that is it! I am mad!

DR. MASTERSON. [Opens door and enters left.] Oceana!

MRS. MASTERSON. [Hurries to him.] Quincy! Don't come in here! It's not
decent! [Pushes him towards door; to OCEANA.] Put something on you,
girl!

OCEANA. Of course. [Puts on robe.]

MRS. MASTERSON. I can't comprehend you! Have you no sense of shame
whatever?

OCEANA. I had a sense of shame.

MRS. MASTERSON. Naked! Almost naked! And in my home!

ETHEL. [Enters left.] Mother, what's the matter?

MRS. MASTERSON. Ethel! You knew of this outrageous plot...

OCEANA. One moment, Aunt Sophronia. The blame for this rests upon me
alone. I told Ethel that the dance was all right.

MRS. MASTERSON. Ethel, leave the room. This is no place for you.

ETHEL. Mother! The people are waiting...

MRS. MASTERSON. Go at once! [To DR. MASTERSON.] Quincy, go out and make
some apology to our guests. Explain to them that we had no idea... we
were imposed upon...

[Applause heard off left.]

OCEANA. Perhaps if your guests were consulted...

DR. MASTERSON. My dear Sophronia...

MRS. MASTERSON. [Pushes him off.] Go! Quickly! [Turns to OCEANA.] And as
for you, Anna Talbot, there is no more to be said. You have overwhelmed
me with shame.

OCEANA. Perhaps, Aunt Sophronia, you would prefer I should leave your
house?

MRS. MASTERSON. [Stiffly.] I would make no objection.

OCEANA. I will go as soon as I dress.

MRS. MASTERSON. Very well. [Starts towards the door.] I will do what I
can to atone for your wantonness.

OCEANA. One moment, Aunt Sophronia.

MRS. MASTERSON. Well?

OCEANA. Ethel tells me that you had something to say to me about
grandfather's will.

MRS. MASTERSON. Oh! Ethel told you, did she?

OCEANA. Yes... she wished you to know that she had told me. Of course,
feeling towards me as you do, you would hardly expect me to give up any
rights that I may have.

MRS. MASTERSON. We will be content with what rights the law allows us.

OCEANA. What I wished to say was that I would be willing to give Ethel
part of my inheritance.

MRS. MASTERSON. Oh!

OCEANA. I would not give it to Freddy, for he is a man, and I should be
breaking the mainspring of his life. But I will give half my money to
Ethel, provided that you will consent to let her go with me.

MRS. MASTERSON. Oh! So that is your idea! You have already weaned the
child from me... you have made her a traitor to me; and now you wish to
buy her altogether.

OCEANA. Aunt Sophronia!

MRS. MASTERSON. Your offer is declined. I have no more to say to you.

[She sweeps out.]

OCEANA. [Stands lost in thought; a smile grows upon her face.] Poor Aunt
Sophronia!

[Begins to hum, and to sway as in the Sunrise Dance. She completes the
dance from where she was interrupted, from an impulse of inner delight.]

FREDDY. [Steals in right; watches her, enraptured, as she stands with
arms outstretched in ecstasy. He rushes towards her and flings himself
at her feet, clasping her hand.] Oceana!

OCEANA. Freddy!

FREDDY. [Sobbing incoherently.] Oceana! I can't stand it!

OCEANA. Why... what's the matter?

FREDDY. I love you! I love you! I can't live without you! I can't give
you up... Oceana, have mercy on me!

OCEANA. [Gravely.] Freddy! This won't do! No... let go of me, please!
You must control yourself.

FREDDY. Don't send me away! How can you be so cruel to me?

OCEANA. But, Freddy, I have told you that I don't love you. [She stands,
thinking.] Give me my robe. Now, come sit down here, and listen to me.
I am going away, Freddy, and you won't see me any more. And that is
for the best... for you must get me out of your mind. I don't love you,
Freddy.

FREDDY. And you never would love me?

OCEANA. Never.

FREDDY. But why not... why not?

OCEANA. I can't tell you that.

FREDDY. Oh, you are pitiless to me!

OCEANA. One does not give love out of pity. That is a cowardly thing
to ask. [She pauses.] I must be frank with you, Freddy. You have got to
face the facts. When I give my love, it will be to a man; and you are
not a man.

FREDDY. But I am growing up!

OCEANA. No; you don't understand me. You should have grown up years ago.
You have been stunted. [She takes his hand.] Look! See the stains!

FREDDY. Why...

OCEANA. Cigarettes! And you want to be a man!

FREDDY. Is that so unforgivable?

OCEANA. It is only one thing of many, my dear cousin.

FREDDY. Oceana, you don't know what men are!

OCEANA. Oh, don't I! My dear boy, there is nothing about men that I
don't know. I have read Krafft-Ebing and Havelock Ellis... I know it
all. I know it as a physician knows it. I can read a man's diseases in
his complexion... I can read his vices in his eyes. Don't you see?

FREDDY. [Drops his eyes.] I see!

OCEANA. Don't think that I am despising you, dear boy. I know the world
you have lived in.

FREDDY. But what can I do?

OCEANA. You can go away, and make a man of yourself. Go West, get out
into the open. Learn to ride and hunt... harden your muscles and expand
your chest. Until then you're not fit to be the father of any woman's
child!

FREDDY. Drop college, you mean?

OCEANA. Be your own college! The idea of trying to build a brain in a
body that's decaying! How could you stand it? Don't you ever feel that
you are boiling over... that you must have something upon which you can
wreak yourself? Don't you feel that you'd like to tame a horse, or to
sail a boat in a storm? Don't you ever read about adventures?

FREDDY. Yes, I read about them.

OCEANA. And don't you ever feel that you must experience them? That you
must face some kind of danger... do something that you can look back
on with pride? Why, see... six years ago there came to our island three
war-canoes full of savages... cannibals they were. If father and I
hadn't been there, they'd have wiped our people out. And do you think
I'd give up the memory of that struggle?

FREDDY. What happened?

OCEANA. Fortunately they came in the daytime, so we soon drove them back
to their boats. See... I'll show you. [She goes to trunk.] Here's one of
them.

[She lifts up a human skull.]

FREDDY. Good Lord!

OCEANA. Notice that crack. That was done with a spear... by my prince,
the one who made me this robe, you know. He cleaned the skull out for
me.

FREDDY. Rather a ghastly sort of souvenir.

OCEANA. Oh, I don't mind that. Father and I found it useful... a sort of
memento mori.

FREDDY. [Looking into trunk.] And what are those things?

OCEANA. They are some of my arrows. And these are what we used for
bowls... turtle-shells, you see.

FREDDY. [Pointing.] But those?

OCEANA. Oh, my single-sticks. [Lifts them.] That's the game Henry and I
were talking about. You ought to get him to teach it to you.

FREDDY. What's it like?

OCEANA. I'll show you. [She takes from the trunk two leather helmets and
gloves.] Here you are! It's an old English game... didn't you ever read
"Robin Hood"?

FREDDY. Oh, it's that? Why, they used to crack each other's heads!

OCEANA. The object was to draw first blood. But we used to wear these
helmets. You see how we've dented them up? And these old cudgels... how
they remind me of father!

FREDDY. Humph! They're heavy.

OCEANA. You take the stick this way; it's a kind of fencing. [She gives
him a stick and illustrates the play.] No, so!

MRS. MASTERSON. [Enters.] What's this? Is this the way you get ready to
leave?

OCEANA. [Imploring.] Oh, Aunt Sophronia, I beg your pardon! I got so
interested...

MRS. MASTERSON. Is there no limit to your indiscretion?

DR. MASTERSON. [Enters hurriedly.] Sophronia, I beg of you...

MRS. MASTERSON. I will hear no more of this! I have spoken, once for
all...

DR. MASTERSON. But, my dear...

MRS. MASTERSON. No more!

DR. MASTERSON. But, Sophronia, the people don't understand why....

MRS. MASTERSON. It was outrageous!

DR. MASTERSON. I know. But since it was begun... it's so difficult to
explain...

MRS. MASTERSON. No more of this! I won't hear it!

HENRY. [Enters; stares about.] Mrs. Masterson, what have you done here?

MRS. MASTERSON. There is no reason why you should concern yourself with
it.

HENRY. But I wish to know.

MRS. MASTERSON. What do you wish to know?

HENRY. Did you stop Oceana's dance?

MRS. MASTERSON. I did.

HENRY. And why?

MRS. MASTERSON. Because I saw fit to.

HENRY. But your guests...

MRS. MASTERSON. I will attend to my guests.

HENRY. But what is Oceana going to do?

MRS. MASTERSON. She is going to leave our house.

HENRY. This is a shame. Most of the people enjoyed the dance. They would
like to see more...

MRS. MASTERSON. Henry, you will permit me to decide about what goes on
in my home.

HENRY. You may decide for yourself. But if Oceana leaves tonight, I will
leave also... and I will never return.

MRS. MASTERSON. Very well, Sir; as you please.

OCEANA. Henry, let me have a say. I am obliged to you, but I don't want
to stay. It's absurd for me to be here... I don't belong here. I've
lived all my life under the open sky; I've been free. I've swum several
miles every day and run several more; I've hunted and fished and danced
and played; and here they dress me up in long skirts and sit me in a
corner and tell me I'm a lady! I can stand it just so long ... I've
stood it twenty-four hours, and I feel like a wild animal in a cage.
If I don't find something to do... something real... something that is
thrilling... truly, I'll murder some one. [She paces the room; DR. and
MRS. Masterson shrink away from her.] Yes, I mean it! [With increasing
vehemence.] Picture me at home. When I was hungry, I went out for game;
and unless I got the game, I stayed hungry. Or I went fishing, and I had
to get my canoe through the surf. I had the zest of danger... I had
real struggle. But here I have nothing. They bring me my food on silver
platters; they get up and give me their seats, they even push the doors
open in front of me! And so I'm panting for something to do... for some
opposition, some competition, some conflict. I'm spoiling for a fight!
You, Henry, don't you know what I mean? A fight! [With a sharp, swift
gesture.] I want to meet some wild animal again! Is there a wild animal
in you? [They stare at each other; suddenly she springs and takes the
other single-stick from FREDDY.] Here! You know this game! My father
taught you! [She holds out one to him.] Come on!

HENRY. [Bewildered.] Oceana! This is not the place.

OCEANA. It's the place for me! Take it! [She forces it on him.] Now!
Forget that I'm a woman! Ready!

HENRY. Oceana! No!

OCEANA. Are you afraid of your mother-in-law?

HENRY. Good heavens!

OCEANA. If you're not, you're the only man in the family that isn't.
[She drops her robe.] Now!

MRS. MASTERSON. This is disgraceful!

DR. MASTERSON. Oceana, I beg of you...

OCEANA. Defend yourself! [She makes a feint at Henry's head, causing him
to raise his stick.] Lay on!

[She attacks him briskly. He defends himself. There is a swift rattle of
the sticks and a vivid conflict.]

HENRY. [Laughing.] Oceana, for God's sake, stop!

MRS. MASTERSON. Oh, stop them!

DR. MASTERSON. Are you mad?

FREDDY. Oceana!

OCEANA. [Wild with the excitement of the struggle.] Lay on! Ha, ha! Well
played! Guard! Once again! Ah, this is what I like! This is what I've
been looking for! [They leap here and there; the others dodge out of the
way, protesting; the conflict grows more and more strenuous.]

LETITIA. [Enters left; screams in terror.] Henry! [They stop; a long
pause.] Henry! What does this mean?

HENRY. My dear...

[Stops for lack of breath.]

OCEANA. Freddy, my robe.

[Wraps herself and sits in chair, smiling.]

LETITIA. What does this mean?

MRS. MASTERSON. Of all the shameless and insane procedures!

LETITIA. Are you mad, Henry?

OCEANA. No, no, Letitia. We know just what we're about. You see, your
husband and I are considering whether or not we shall fall in love with
each other.

LETITIA. [Wildly.] Oh!

MRS. MASTERSON. Monstrous!

DR. MASTERSON. Oceana!

LETITIA. How dare you?

OCEANA. He's interested, you know. I've got hold of him.

LETITIA. [Furiously.] Henry, you stand there and permit her to insult
me...

HENRY. My dear, believe me...

OCEANA. [Sharply.] Stop, Henry! [A pause.] Look at me!

HENRY. Well?

OCEANA. Don't tell her a lie. A lie is the thing I never pardon.

HENRY. Why... why...

[Falls silent.]

MRS. MASTERSON. Henry!

FREDDY. Gee whiz!

LETITIA. Henry, I demand that you come home with me instantly.

OCEANA. Don't go.

LETITIA. [Almost speechless.] If you stay here, you stay alone!

OCEANA. [Rises, casts aside her robe, stretches wide her arms.] Letitia!
Look at me! Am I the sort of woman that you can safely leave your
husband alone with?

LETITIA. [Stares at her terrified, then bursts into tears and flings
herself into HENRY'S arms.] Henry!

OCEANA. Ah, yes! That is safer!

HENRY. [Supports LETITIA.] My dear! My dear!

LETITIA. Come home with me!

OCEANA. God, man, how I pity you! Bound in chains to a woman like that!
And with all the world conspiring to hold you fast! How can you bear it?
Do you expect to bear it forever? What will become of your soul? Oh, I
pity you! I pity you!

LETITIA. [Hysterically.] Henry, take me home! Take me home at once!

HENRY. Yes, my dear, yes!

OCEANA. What is the spell they've laid upon you? You make me think of
Gulliver... a giant stretched out upon the ground, impotent, bound fast
with a million tiny threads! Wake up, man... wake up! You've only one
life to live. You act as if you had a thousand.

LETITIA. Mother!

MRS. MASTERSON. How long is this to continue?

LETITIA. Henry, won't you stop listening to her?

OCEANA. He's not listening to me, Letitia. He's listening to the voice
of the universe, calling to him. The voice of unborn generations,
clamoring, agonizing! What do you suppose it means, man... this storm
that has shaken us? It is Nature's trumpet-call... it is the shout of
discovery of the powers within us! For ages upon ages life has been
preparing it... and now suddenly we meet... the barriers are shattered
and flung down, the tides of being sweep us together!

MRS. MASTERSON. Oh! This is outrageous!

DR. MASTERSON. Oceana, Henry is married!

OCEANA. Married! Married! That is the sorcery with which you bind him!
No longer a man at all, but some aborted thing... a relic! An eunuch!
They mumble their incantations over you... the spell is done, and you
sink back, cowed and whimpering! You are a machine, a domestic utensil!
Never again are you to love and to dare to create No, there are other
things in life for you... bread and butter, cooks and dinner parties,
billiards and bridge-whist... that is your portion! A married man!

LETITIA. [Terrified.] Henry! For God's sake!

[He no longer returns her embraces, but stares at Oceana, fascinated.]

OCEANA. Don't you see, man? It's a dream! A nightmare! Rouse yourself,
lift your head... and it's gone! Life is calling! Come away!

LETITIA. [Frantically.] Mother! Mother!

MRS. MASTERSON. Quincy, if you can't stop this outrage, I will! Call the
servants.

[She starts toward Oceana.]

OCEANA. Call the police! Call your guests! Anything... bring the world
down on him. Terrify him with conventions, beat him into subjection
again!

MRS. MASTERSON. Wanton!

OCEANA. Wanton! Oh, how well you understand me! I, with my hunger for
righteousness... I, who have disciplined myself as an anchorite, who
have served as a priestess of life! And you, with your formulas and your
superstitions... you pass judgment upon me! [With terrific energy.] See!
This man and I, we are the gateway to the future! And you seek to
bar it! By what right do you stand in the path of posterity... you
tormentors of the ideal, you assassins of human hope!

MRS. MASTERSON. [Almost striking her.] Oh! Oh! And my children have to
listen to this! [She whirls about.] Ethel! Freddy! Go out of the room!

ETHEL. I am going with Oceana.

MRS. MASTERSON. What?

ETHEL. Some day... if not now. She's perfectly right. Letitia has no
business to keep him. She never would have got him if she hadn't played
a part.

MRS. MASTERSON. Ethel Masterson!

LETITIA. Little vixen!

FREDDY. [Rushes to OCEANA and seizes her hand.] Oceana! Let me go with
you, too!

DR. MASTERSON. What next!

OCEANA. No, Freddy... no! [She withdraws her hand and holds it out to
Henry.] Henry! Come!

[A tense pause; all stare at Henry. He never takes his eyes from Oceana.
Slowly, like one hypnotized, he draws away from his wife's embrace,
and moves towards Oceana. He seizes her hand. All stand transfixed.
Silence.]

[CURTAIN]




ACT IV


[The scene shows the living-room of a bungalow. Large stone fireplace
centre; windows and window seats on each side; French windows leading
to piazza right; piano between them; door left to another room; large
mirror beside it. Centre table, rustic chairs, deer-heads and skins,
Indian blankets, etc.]

[At rise: The stage is empty.]


OCEANA. [Laughs off.] Oh, say, but that was an adventure!

[Enters; glowing and exultant from a long mountain walk. She wears a
"Rosalind" costume, brown, with soft boots, gauntlet gloves and light
fur about the neck; carries a pair of snow-shoes, which she has taken
off and from which she knocks the snow.]

HENRY. [Follows.] You like the mountains!

OCEANA. Oh, my dear! They are marvellous! I've never imagined anything
like it... to be able to see so much of the world at once. It's the way
you think of heaven.

HENRY. You don't mind the cold?

OCEANA. I find I prefer it. I think I shall stay here forever. It tunes
you up so! It makes you quite drunk! [Looks at herself in the mirror.] I
look cute in this, don't I?

HENRY. You look like a fairy-story!

OCEANA. I ought to have had sense enough to think of a theatrical
costumer in the beginning. [Stretches her arms.] Oh, I feel so
wonderful! Ha, ha, ha! I don't know whether it's the mountain air.. . or
whether it's because I'm in love!

HENRY. [Seizes her hand.] Sweetheart!

OCEANA. [Stares at him.] How wonderful it is! Beyond all believing! I'm
stunned by it... afraid of it. Tell me, Hal, were you ever drunk?

HENRY. [Laughs.] Once or twice.

OCEANA. [Seriously.] I never was. But I've watched my people sometimes
and tried to understand it. And it's just that. Nature has made us
drunk!

HENRY. And that is what frightens you?

OCEANA. She has her purposes, Hal; and I don't want to be her blind
victim. But then, I look at you again, and wonder leaps up in me...
love, such as I never conceived of before; power... vision without end.
I seem to be a hundred times myself! It is as if barriers were broken
down within me... I see into new vistas of life. I understand... I
exult! Oh, Hal, I shall never be the same again!

HENRY. Nor I; I look back at myself as I was a week ago, and I can't
believe it.

OCEANA. With me it is like a great fountain inside. It surges up, and I
cannot be still! I want to laugh... to sing! I have to dance it out of
me! Do you know Anitra's Dance, Hal?

HENRY. Yes, of course.

OCEANA. [Begins to sing the music to herself and playfully to dance. The
enthusiasm of it takes hold of her, and she dances more quickly.] Play
it, Hal! Play!

[HENRY sits at piano and plays Anitra's Dance; she dances tumultuously,
ending in a whirlwind of excitement.] Oh!

[As Henry rises, she flies to him and he clasps her passionately.]

HENRY. Sweetheart!

OCEANA. [Panting.] Oh, Hal, I'm so happy! So happy! [She sobs upon his
shoulder, then looks at him through her tears.] Oh, if I only dared let
myself go!

HENRY. Why not, dearest?

OCEANA. It sweeps me off my feet! And I have to hold myself in.

HENRY. Why? Don't I love you?

OCEANA. Yes, I know. But I'm terrified at myself; I'm losing my
self-control. And I promised father.

HENRY. What?

OCEANA. That I would never do it. "Never feel an emotion," he would say,
"that you could not stop feeling if you wished to."

HENRY. But, sweetheart... why so much distrust? Why should we wait, when
everything in us cries out against it?

OCEANA. Don't say that to me now, Hal!

HENRY. But why not?

OCEANA. This is not the time for such a thought. You know it!

HENRY. Dearest...

OCEANA. [Passionately.] Ah, don't put it all on me! Don't make it too
hard for me!

HENRY. But if I only knew...

OCEANA. You will know before long. Ah, Hal, see how I'm situated. I've
broken all the laws. I've no precedent to help me... I have to work it
all out for myself. I shall have to bear the scorn of the world; and oh,
think if I had to bear the scorn of my own conscience! Don't you see?

HENRY. Yes, I see. But...

OCEANA. I have chosen a certain course. I have forced myself to be calm,
to think it out in the cold light of reason, to decide what is right for
me to do. And now I must keep to my resolution. You would not want our
love to lead me into shame!

HENRY. No!

OCEANA. Do you read Nietzsche, Henry?

HENRY. He is a mere name to me.

OCEANA. I will give you some lines of Nietzsche's. "Canst thou give
thyself thy good and thine evil, and hang thy will above thee as thy
law? Canst thou be thine own judge, and avenger of thy law? Fearful is
it to be alone with the judge and the avenger of thy law. So is a stone
flung out into empty space and into the icy breath of isolation."

HENRY. That's all right... but if you expect Letitia to face this
problem in any such way, you will be sadly disappointed.

OCEANA. That's none of my affair. All I have to do is to give her a
chance. If she cannot face the facts, she has passed sentence upon
herself.

HENRY. [Laughs.] All right, my dear. It will certainly be a scene to
watch!

OCEANA. You think she will come?

HENRY. Oh, she'll certainly come.

OCEANA. And she won't bring her mother?

HENRY. I can't tell about that.

OCEANA. If she does, we'll simply have to send her down to the village
... I won't talk in Aunt Sophronia's presence.

HENRY. I was perfectly explicit on that point. [Takes paper from table.]
Here's the telegram: "Come to the bungalow immediately, upon a matter of
extreme urgency. Do not bring your mother."

OCEANA. Certainly that is clear enough.

HENRY. And bewildering enough. But I suppose they are prepared for
anything by now.

OCEANA. It's past the time. [Looking from window.] We should be able to
see a sleigh.

HENRY. No, the road turns behind that hillock there.

OCEANA. But look!

HENRY. What?

OCEANA. There's some one coming afoot.

HENRY. Where?

OCEANA. Round that side! By the path! Why, it's Ethel!

HENRY. Good Lord! Ethel!

OCEANA. She's come up from the village afoot.

HENRY. Well, of all the apparitions!

OCEANA. Run help her, Henry. She's running. [Opens window and calls.]
Ethel! [HENRY exit hurriedly.] Why, the poor, dear child! I wonder if
she came in Letitia's stead! But then... why wouldn't she get a sleigh?
[Calls.] Ethel! What's the matter?

HENRY. [Off.] She says Letitia is coming!

OCEANA. Oh!

HENRY. She's just behind!

OCEANA. But, Ethel, what are you doing here?

ETHEL. [Off, breathless.] Wait!

OCEANA. Why, you poor child, you're exhausted. What in the world...

ETHEL. Wait.

[Enters, breathless, half carried by Henry.]

OCEANA. [Pounces upon her.] Ethel! Of all the surprises! You dear thing!
[Embraces her, shakes snow from her.] What in the world has happened?

ETHEL. Oceana, I ran away!

OCEANA. You ran away?

ETHEL. To you! I couldn't stand it! I must be with you, Oceana--no
matter how wicked it is, I must be with you!

OCEANA. [Breathlessly.] Ethel!

ETHEL. Yes, I'm desperate... I'll die if I have to stay at home.

OCEANA. My dear, dear girl! [Clasps her.]

ETHEL. You won't send me back?

OCEANA. Never!

ETHEL. [Wildly.] But, Oceana, Letitia is coming!

OCEANA. Yes?

ETHEL. I took a train from Boston. And when I saw her come aboard,
imagine how I felt! I hid... she didn't see me. And I got off the train
first and dodged out of sight. I ran all the way. I suppose she stopped
to get a sleigh.

HENRY. It's all right, Ethel... we knew she was coming.

ETHEL. You knew it?

OCEANA. Yes, Henry sent for her. You see, Letitia and I have to talk
things out.

ETHEL. Well, of all the...

[Stops, dazed.]

OCEANA. [Laughs.] That's all right, dear. We know what we're doing. But
it was good of you to try to save us!

HENRY. Listen!

OCEANA. Ah!

HENRY. The sleigh-bells!

OCEANA. She's here!

ETHEL. [Clasping her.] Oceana!

OCEANA. What is it, dear?

ETHEL. Don't let her take me back home?

OCEANA. But how can she take you, dear, if you won't go?

ETHEL. She might persuade you.

OCEANA. Never fear, Ethel... we'll stand by you, won't we, Hal?

HENRY. Yes.

ETHEL. She'll threaten to make me go.

OCEANA. Her mind will be taken up with other things, Ethel.

ETHEL. But mother will come! And she'll command me to return. I'm not of
age, you know.

OCEANA. But then, if you won't obey? Will she send for the police?

ETHEL. No... hardly that.

OCEANA. All right, then, dear. I'll save you... trust me. I mean to give
you a chance for life.

ETHEL. And, oh, Oceana... what do you think? Freddy's run away, too!

OCEANA. What?

HENRY. Where to?

ETHEL. He's gone out West!

OCEANA. You don't mean it!

HENRY. What for?

ETHEL. He says he's going to be a cowboy. He's going to make a man of
himself. He left a letter to father.

OCEANA. Why, the dear boy!

ETHEL. [Mysteriously.] Oceana, do you know what was the matter?

OCEANA. No... what?

ETHEL. I think I know. He was in love with you!

OCEANA. I shouldn't wonder, my dear. [Laughs.] But don't tell Henry. ..
he'll be jealous!

[Sound of sleigh-bells louder.]

ETHEL. Here she is!

OCEANA. You go into the next room now. It wouldn't be considered proper
for you to hear what we're going to say.

ETHEL. Of all the adventures!

[Exit.]

OCEANA. [Smiles at Henry.] Now then!

HENRY. You wanted it, my dear!

[They turn, gazing right. The sleigh-bells have come nearer, then
stopped. Some one is heard to step upon the piazza and stamp the snow
from the feet.]

LETITIA. [Enters right, stares at Oceana and screams.] Oceana!

OCEANA. Letitia...

LETITIA. [Gasps for breath.] Henry! How dared you bring me here to meet
that woman?

OCEANA. Letitia...

LETITIA. Don't speak to me! Don't you dare to speak to me! [She sinks
down by table and bursts into tears.] Oh, how horrible! How horrible! As
if I had not humiliations enough already!

HENRY. [Taking step toward her.] Letitia...

OCEANA. [With a swift gesture.] Wait!

LETITIA. Oh, who would have thought it possible! To bring me 'way up
here...

OCEANA. You might as well understand at the outset... the thing cannot
be done that way.

LETITIA. [With concentrated hatred.] You dare!

OCEANA. We have sent for you...

LETITIA. WE have sent for you!

OCEANA. Because we wished to talk things out with you in a sensible way.
And you'll have to make up your mind to control yourself.

LETITIA. [Sobbing.] Henry, you permit this shameful humiliation!

OCEANA. Henry has nothing to do with this affair, Letitia. It is I who
have to talk to you.

LETITIA. [Bursts into hysterical weeping again.] Oh, that I should have
lived to see this!

OCEANA. You will find out before you get through that I mean to deal
with you fairly. But you cannot accomplish anything by hysterics.

LETITIA. Oh, oh, oh!

OCEANA. And you had best believe me; you injure your case by refusing to
act rationally.

LETITIA. [Looks up, frightened.] What do you want with me?

OCEANA. [Quietly.] In the first place, Letitia, I want to convey to you
the information that your husband's relationship and mine has so far
been what you would call innocent.

LETITIA. What?

OCEANA. I was a virgin when I came to Boston, and I am a virgin still.

LETITIA, And you expect me to believe that?

OCEANA. My dear, I don't care in the least whether you believe it or
not.

LETITIA. [Faintly.] But...

OCEANA. What reason would I have to fear you? He is mine, if I want him.

LETITIA. [Dazed.] Then what... why are you here? Why...

OCEANA. I came here because I wished to get acquainted with him. And
what chance have a man and woman to get acquainted with each other in
the conventional world?

LETITIA. [Stares at her; then, faintly.] But what...

OCEANA. I wished to try him out... in body, mind and soul. I wished to
know if he was the man for me.

LETITIA. [Rushes to Henry.] Oh! Have you no decency left? Have you no
mercy on me? What has come over you?

HENRY. Letitia...

OCEANA. Let me attend to this, Hal.

LETITIA. Hal!

OCEANA. That a woman could be married to a man for six years and
continue to call him Henry, speaks volumes for the romance of their
relationship!

LETITIA. [To Henry.] Where's your sense of shame?

OCEANA. You are taking the wrong line, Letitia. No such consideration
has a moment's weight with us.

LETITIA. [Catches her breath.] Since it seems that I am here at your
mercy, I ask to know your pleasure?

OCEANA. The reason that we have sent for you is that I might assure
myself upon two points... first, as to whether your husband still loves
you, and second, as to whether you still love him.

LETITIA. You doubt that I love him?

OCEANA. So far, Letitia, your actions have proceeded, not from love of
him, but from hatred of me.

LETITIA. Oh! And if I fail to measure up to your tests of love...

OCEANA. [Triumphantly.] Then he is mine!

LETITIA. And the fact that he is my husband...

OCEANA. Is nothing!

LETITIA. The fact that he vowed to keep faith with me...

OCEANA. Is nothing!

LETITIA. That I am dependent upon him for support...

OCEANA. You have money of your own, Letitia.

LETITIA. Do you suppose I am thinking about money! I mean his
protection.

OCEANA. A person who confesses to the need of protection has written
himself down an inferior. [A pause.] You see, Letitia, times have
changed; our ideas of marriage have charged. In the beginning a woman
was a man's economic dependent; now that the man has become ashamed
of that, he is made the woman's spiritual dependent. You play upon his
sense of chivalry, his sympathy, his pity; and you prey upon him, you
devour him alive. But the time has come when that must cease, Letitia
... man will not always be a domestic appendage! And you will simply
have to face this new situation. Do you still possess your husband's
love? Do you really love him? Nothing else will count... none of your
"rights"... we are not afraid of man or devil.

LETITIA. [Gasps.] Oh! [Turns to HENRY.] Henry, will you tell me what all
this means? Can it be that you assent to these outrageous ideas?

HENRY. I assent to them, Letitia. It may be that you still love me,
but you have given me few signs of it. You have been... you are.. . a
selfish woman.

LETITIA. Henry!

HENRY. How often do you give a thought to me... to the needs of my
nature? You think of your whims and your prejudices; you think of your
social position... of your "world" and its conventions. You think of
what your mother approves, of what your father approves, of what this
person will say and what that person will say. And I follow you about...
I play my part in the hollow show that you call life; but all the time
my heart is crying out in me... I am starving... starving!

LETITIA. [Startled.] Henry!

OCEANA. Ah! She is beginning to see it!

LETITIA. [Stretches out her arms and totters towards him, weeping.]
Henry! I love you! [Wildly.] Believe me! Believe me! I love you! Don't
you remember when you were ill three years ago... how I nursed you and
watched over you? You knew that I loved you then. Why, you said I'd worn
myself to a shadow! You kissed me, and told me I'd saved your life! And
when I was ill myself, and you thought I was dying... didn't you realize
that you loved me? And the children? Have you never given a thought to
them? Are they nothing to you? And you to them? You know that you love
them, Henry... you dare not deny it. Are they to be without a father all
their lives? [Falls into his arms.] My husband!

HENRY. [Catches her, deeply moved.] Letitia!

OCEANA. [Has been watching them intently; now, startled and pained.] Ah
I thought so! [She turns away; supports herself by the table; whispers.]
That settles it!

LETITIA. Henry, if I have been selfish, I am sorry! I humble myself
before you... I beg you for forgiveness! Henry, I do love you! Don't you
believe me?

HENRY. [Faintly.] I believe you.

OCEANA. [Clenches her hands and turns resolutely.] You see, Hal, I knew
it! [He bows his head.] You can't get away from her. [She pauses.] You
understand it all now... what my instinct told me. You still love her,
you still belong to her. You would have gone away with me, and you would
still have been thinking about her--worrying about her. It would have
been tearing your soul in half. [She waits; he does not look at her; she
goes on, half to convince herself.] She is not big enough to give you
up. She could not say, "Oceana is young and needs you; you love Oceana,
and she will make you happy. Go with her." No, she would think of the
world and its conventions... she would be jealous and bitter. She would
eat her heart out... she would tear herself to pieces! And that would
tear you to pieces... you could never forget it. And there are the
children, Hal. It's true that you love them; you think about them all
the time... I know, for you speak of them. And she could take them away
from you, legally... how much chance would they ever have in life, if
she and her mother had the bringing up of them? Don't you see, Hal? What
can we do?

LETITIA. [Clinging to Henry's bosom.] Henry, I love you!

OCEANA. I want to play the game generously, Letitia; but it is all I
can do not to despise you... because he loves you, and it has meant so
little to you, you have done so little in return. That is the curse of
this thing you call marriage. You say to yourself that you've got him...
the law and the conventions will keep him for you... and so you can
treat him as you please. You'll take him off with you now, and you'll
set to work to get right back where you were before... yes, she will,
Hal. She'll try to wheedle you into backing down from this position. She
will weep and she will scold. But you stand firm... stand firm! What we
did was right... it was noble and true, and if more married people did
such things, it would be better for them.

LETITIA. [Clinging to Henry.] Henry, come home with me!

HENRY. All right, I'll come.

[He does not lift his head.]

OCEANA. Look at me. It's all right, Hal... it's all right.

[She speaks with intensity; they gaze into each other's eyes.]

HENRY. [Stretches out his hand to her.] Oceana... I'm sorry...

OCEANA. [With sudden emotion.] No, Hal! Go... go quickly! Please!

[He goes out, right, with Letitia; Oceana stands gazing straight ahead.
Sound of sleigh-bells heard. Suddenly she sinks into a chair, bows her
head upon the table, and bursts into tears.]

ETHEL. [Opens door, left, and stands gazing at Oceana in alarm, then
runs to her and sinks upon her knees before her.] Oceana!

OCEANA. [Sobbing.] He's gone! Gone!

ETHEL. He left you?

OCEANA. I gave him up! I sent him away. Oh, Ethel, Ethel... what am I
going to do?

ETHEL. Oceana!

OCEANA. Oh, how I loved him! I didn't realize how I loved him! The whole
face of the world was changed... and now, now... how shall I bear it?
[She stares ahead of her.] Oh, Ethel, tell me I did right to give him
up.

ETHEL. Why did you do it?

OCEANA. I saw he loved her, and I had to give him up. It would have been
to tear his soul in half! But now that he's gone, I don't see how I
can bear it! [A pause; she is lost in thought; she whispers with great
intensity.] There is a vision... it haunts me... it cries out in me in a
voice of agony!

ETHEL. What?

OCEANA. A little child! You have no idea... how real it was to me! It
fell out of the skies upon me! The thought never left me. I heard its
voice... its laughter; I saw its smile. It called to me all day, and it
played with me in my dreams; I felt its little hands upon me... its lips
upon my breast. And it's gone!

ETHEL. Your child!

OCEANA. And his! And think... think of the awfulness of it... it was
hovering at the gates of life! It wanted to be! And I trembled.. . I
suffered; at any moment I might have said the word, and it would have
come. But I did not say the word... and it is gone. And now it will
never come! Never... never! I have murdered the child! My child!

ETHEL. No, no, Oceana!

OCEANA. God! I can't understand it! What does it mean? Did it exist when
I thought of it? Does it exist now? Who can tell me?

ETHEL. I don't know, Oceana.

OCEANA. The strangeness of it! Sometimes my whole being rises up in
revolt... I could tear the skies apart, to wrest the secret from them!
You see, we don't know anything. We don't know what's right, we don't
know what's wrong. We're in a trap! [She rises suddenly.] No, no, I
mustn't talk that way. I've lost my self-control. I let myself go, and
I had no right to. Now, what shall I do? Wait, dear... let me think, let
me think calmly. [Stares about her.] I want to remember what father said
to me; what I promised to do. See, Ethel... the sun is setting. Look at
the sky! And it's the last day of the month, isn't it?

ETHEL. Yes.

OCEANA. If father had been here we should have sat us down to one of our
services! Look here. [She goes to trunk, and takes out a human skull.]
Ah, old friend!

ETHEL. [Shocked.] Oceana!

OCEANA. He came from the Marquesas, I think. And here's where he was hit
with the spear. You see? Sit down. [She places the skull before her.]
See, Ethel--he used to smile. And now and then he had the toothache...
see that? He took himself very seriously; he was all wrapped up in
the things that went on in this little cracked skull. But he lacked
imagination. He never foresaw that somebody would carry him off to the
New Hampshire mountains, and make him the text for a Hamlet soliloquy.
Alas, poor Yorick! He did not know that he was immortal, you see;
that life proceeded from him... unrolling itself for generation after
generation without end; that all that he did would be perpetuated...
that where he sinned we would suffer, and where he fought we would be
strong. He did not know that he was the creator, the mystic fountain of
an unexplored stream... the maker of an endless future... [She stops;
a spasm of pain crosses her face.] Oh, Ethel! [Clasps her hand.] It is
terrible to die young, is it not?

ETHEL. Yes.

OCEANA. Then how much worse is it to die before you are born! To be
strangled in the idea... to be stifled by a cowardly thought!

ETHEL. What do you mean?

OCEANA. Oh, Ethel, stay by me, will you? Promise me you will stay by me.

ETHEL. I will!

OCEANA. I'm frightened, Ethel... frightened at myself. I've done
wrong... I've committed a crime! I ought not to have let him go! I ought
not to have let him go!

ETHEL. Henry?

OCEANA. No, we mustn't speak of him again. I can't bear to hear his
name. I have failed... I have failed. I've been crushed by civilization!
[Starts up.] But there's my island! There's the white beach, shining
in the moonlight, and the great breakers rolling in, and the palm trees
rustling in the wind. Let us go together... to my island! Let us go back
and get healed, before we try to face this world again!

[CURTAIN]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Naturewoman, by Upton Sinclair

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE NATUREWOMAN ***

***** This file should be named 3301.txt or 3301.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/3/0/3301/

Produced by Charles Franks and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
