The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Machine, by Upton Sinclair

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Machine

Author: Upton Sinclair

Posting Date: February 28, 2009 [EBook #3304]
Release Date: July, 2002

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MACHINE ***




Produced by Charles Franks and the Online Distributed Proofreading team





THE MACHINE

By Upton Sinclair




CHARACTERS

     (In order of appearance)

     JULIA PATTERSON: a magazine writer.
     JACK BULLEN: a parlor Socialist.
     LAURA HEGAN: Hegan's daughter.
     ALLAN MONTAGUE: a lawyer.
     JIM HEGAN: the traction king.
     ANNIE ROBERTS: a girl of the slums.
     ROBERT GRIMES: the boss.
     ANDREWS: Hegan's secretary.
     PARKER: a clerk.

                              ACT I

 Julia Patterson's apartments in a model tenement on the lower East
 Side.

                             ACT II

 Library at "The Towers," Hegan's country place on Long Island, two
 weeks later.

                             ACT III

 Hegan's private office in Wall street, the next morning.





THE MACHINE




ACT I


[JULIA PATTERSON'S apartments in a model tenement on the lower East
Side. The scene shows the living-room, furnished very plainly, but in
the newest taste; "arts and crafts" furniture, portraits of Morris and
Ruskin on the walls; a centre table, a couple of easy-chairs, a divan
and many book-shelves. The entrance from the outer hall is at centre;
entrance to the other rooms right and left.]

[At rise: JULIA has pushed back the lamp from the table and is having a
light supper, with a cup of tea; and at the same time trying to read a
magazine, which obstinately refuses to remain open at the right place.
She is an attractive and intelligent woman of thirty. The doorbell
rings.]

JULIA. Ah, Jack! [Presses button, then goes to the door.]

JACK. [Enters, having come upstairs at a run. He is a college graduate
and volunteer revolutionist, one of the organizers of the "Society of
the Friends of Russian Freedom"; handsome and ardent, eager in manner,
and a great talker.] Hello, Julia. All alone?

JULIA. Yes. I expected a friend, but she can't come until later.

JACK. Just eating?

JULIA. I've been on the go all day. Have something.

JACK. No; I had dinner. [As she starts to clear things away.] Don't stop
on my account.

JULIA. I was just finishing up. [As he begins to help.] No; sit down.

JACK. Nonsense. Let the men be of some use in the world.

JULIA. What have you been up to to-day?

JACK. We're organizing a demonstration for the Swedish strikers.

JULIA. It's marvelous how those Swedes hold on, isn't it?

JACK. The people are getting their eyes open. And when they're once
open, they stay open.

JULIA. Yes. Did you see my article?

JACK. I should think I did! Julia, that was a dandy!

JULIA. Do you think so?

JACK. I do, indeed. You've made a hit. I heard a dozen people talking
about it.

JULIA. Indeed?

JACK. You've come to be the champion female muck-raker of the country, I
think.

[JULIA laughs.]

JACK. Why did you want to see me so specially tonight?

JULIA. I've a friend I want you to meet. Somebody I'm engaged in
educating.

JACK. You seem to have chosen me for your favorite proselytizer.

JULIA. You've seen things with your own eyes, Jack.

JACK. Yes; I suppose so.

JULIA. And you know how to tell about them. And you've such an engaging
way about you...nobody could help but take to you.

JACK. Cut out the taffy. Who's your friend?

JULIA. Her name's Hegan.

JACK. A woman?

JULIA. A girl, yes. And she's coming right along, Jack. You must take a
little trouble with her, for if we can only bring her through, she can
do a lot for us. She's got no end of money.

JACK. No relative of Jim Hegan, I hope?

JULIA. She's his daughter.

JACK. [With a bound.] What!

JULIA. His only daughter.

JACK. Good God, Julia!

JULIA. What's the matter?

JACK. You know I don't want to meet people like that.

JULIA. Why not?

JACK. I don't care to mix with them. I've nothing to say to them.

JULIA. My dear Jack, the girl can't help her father.

JACK. I know that, and I'm sorry for her. But, meantime, I've got my
work to do...

JULIA. You couldn't be doing any better work than this. If we can make a
Socialist of Laura Hegan...

JACK. Oh, stuff, Julia! I've given up chasing after will-o'-the-wisps
like that.

JULIA.--But think what she could do!

JACK. Yes. I used to think what a whole lot of people could do. You
might as well ask me to think what her father could do... if he only
wanted to do it, instead of poisoning the life-blood of the city, and
piling up his dirty millions. Go about this town and see the misery and
horror... and think that it's Jim Hegan who sits at the top and reaps
the profit of it all! It's Jim Hegan who is back of the organization...
he's the real power behind Boss Grimes. It's he who puts up the money
and makes possible this whole regime of vice and graft...

JULIA. My dear boy, don't be silly.

JACK. How do you mean? Isn't it true?

JULIA. Of course it's true... but why declaim to me about it? You forget
you are talking to the champion female muckraker of the country.

JACK. Yes, that's right. But I don't want to meet these people socially.
They mean well, a lot of them, I suppose; but they've been accustomed
all their lives to being people of importance... to have everybody stand
in awe of them, because of their stolen money, and all the wonderful
things they might do with it if they only would.

JULIA. My dear Jack, did you ever observe anything of the tuft-hunter in
me?

JACK. No, I don't know that I have. But it's never too late.

JULIA. [Laughing.] Well, until you do, have a little faith in me! Meet
Laura Hegan, and judge for yourself.

JACK. [Grumbling.] All right, I'll meet her. But let me tell you, I
don't propose to spare her feelings. She'll get things straight from me.

JULIA. That's all right, my boy. Give her the class war and the
Revolution with a capital R! Tell her you're the only original
representative of the disinherited proletariat, and that some day,
before long, you intend to plant the red flag over her daddy's palace.
[Seriously.] Of course, what you'll actually do is meet her like a
gentleman, and tell her of some of your adventures in Russia, and give
her some idea of what's going on outside of her little Fifth avenue set.
J ACK. Where did you run on to her?

JULIA. I met her at the settlement.

JACK. Good Lord! Jim Hegan's daughter! [Laughs.] They were toadying to
her there, I'll wager.

JULIA. Well, you know what settlement people are. She's been coming
there for quite a while, and seems to be interested. She's given them
quite a lot of money.

JACK. No doubt.

JULIA. I had a little talk with her one afternoon. She's a quiet,
self-contained girl, but she gave me a peculiar impression. She seemed
to be unhappy; there was a kind of troubled note in what she said. I had
felt uncomfortable about meeting her... you can imagine, after my study
of "Tammany and the Traction Trust."

JACK. Did she mention that?

JULIA. No, she never has. But I've several times had the feeling that
she was trying to get up the courage to do it. I've thought, somehow,
that she must be suffering about her father.

JACK. My God! Wouldn't it be a joke if Nemesis were to get at Jim Hegan
through his daughter?

JULIA. Yes; wouldn't it!

JACK. How do you suppose he takes her reform activities?

JULIA. I don't know, but I fancy they must have had it out. She's not
the sort of person to let herself be turned back when her mind's made
up.

JACK. A sort of chip of the old block. [After a pause.] If I'd known
what was up, I wouldn't have suggested asking anybody else to come.. .

JULIA. Oh, that's all right; it won't make any difference.

JACK. This chap, Montague, that I 'phoned to you about... he's a sort of
a convert of my own.

JULIA. I see. We'll reciprocate.

JACK. I think I've got Montague pretty well landed. You'll be interested
in him... it's quite a story. It was last election day...

[The bell rings.]

JULIA. Ah, there's somebody. [She goes to the door; calls.] Is that you,
Miss Hegan?

LAURA. [Off.] Yes, it's I.

JULIA. You found your way, did you?

LAURA. Oh, no trouble at all. [Enters, a tall, stately girl, about
twenty-three; simply but elegantly clad.] How do you do?

JULIA. I am so glad to see you. Jack, this is Miss Hegan. Mr. Bullen.

LAURA. How do you do, Mr. Bullen?

JACK. I am very glad to meet you, Miss Hegan.

JULIA. Let me take your things.

LAURA. [Looking about.] Oh, what a cozy place! I think these model
tenements are delightful.

JULIA. They're indispensable to us agitators... an oasis in a desert.

JACK. Built for the proletariat, and inhabited by cranks.

LAURA. Is that the truth?

JULIA. It's certainly the truth about this one. Below me are two
painters and a settlement worker, and next door is a blind Anarchist and
a Yiddish poet.

LAURA. What's the reason for it?

JULIA. [Going to room off left with LAURA's things.] The places are
clean and cheap; and whenever the poor can't pay their rent, we take
their homes.

JACK. The elimination of the unfit.

LAURA. It sounds like a tragic explanation; but I guess it's true.
[Looking at Jack.] And so this is Mr. Bullen. For such a famous
revolutionist, I expected to find some one more dangerous-looking.

JULIA. [Returning.] Don't make up your mind too soon about Jack. He's
liable to startle you.

LAURA. I'm not easily startled any more. I'm getting quite used to
meeting revolutionists.

JACK. You don't call them revolutionists that you meet at the
settlement, I hope?

LAURA. No; but all sorts of people come there.

JULIA. By the way, Jack 'phoned me this afternoon, and said he'd invited
a friend here. I hope you don't mind.

LAURA. Why, no; not at all. Is it one of your Russian friends?

JACK. Oh, no; he's an American. His name is Montague. I was just
starting to tell Julia about him when you came in.

LAURA. Go ahead.

JACK. It was quite an adventure. I don't know that I've ever had one
that was more exciting. And I've had quite some, you know.

LAURA. Yes; I've been told so.

JACK. It was last election day, in a polling place on the Bowery. I was
a watcher for the Socialists, and this Montague was one of the watchers
for the reform crowd. The other one was drunk, and so he had the work
all to himself. It was in the heart of Leary's district, and the crowd
there was a tough one, I can tell you. It was a close election.

LAURA. Yes; I know.

JACK. There'd been all kinds of monkey-work going on, and the box was
full of marked and defective ballots, and Montague set to work to make
them throw them out. I didn't pay much attention at first. I was only
there to see that our own ballots were counted; but pretty soon I began
to take interest. He had every one in the place against him. There was
a Tammany inspector of elections and four tally clerks... all in with
Tammany, of course. There were three or four Tammany policemen, and,
outside of the railing, the worst crowd of toughs that ever you laid
eyes on. To make matters worse, there were several men inside who had
no business to be there... one of them a Judge of the City Court, and
another a State's attorney... and all of them storming at Montague.

JULIA. What did he do?

JACK. He just made them throw out the marked ballots. They were willing
enough to put them to one side, but wanted to count them in on the tally
sheets. And, of course, Montague knew perfectly well that if they ever
counted them in they'd close up at the end, and that would be all there
was to it. He had the law with him, of course. He's a lawyer himself,
and he seemed to know it all by heart; and he'd quote it to them,
paragraph by paragraph, and they'd look it up and find that he was
right, and, of course, that only made them madder. The old Judge
would start up in his seat. "Officer!" he'd shout (he was a red-faced,
ignorant fellow... a typical barroom politician), "I demand that you put
that man out of here." And the cop actually laid his hand on Montague's
shoulder; if he'd ever been landed on the other side of that railing
the crowd would have torn him to pieces. But the man stayed as cool as
a cucumber. "Officer," he said, "you are aware that I am an election
official, here under the protection of the law; and if you refuse me
that protection you are liable to a sentence in State's prison." Then
he'd quote another paragraph.

JULIA. It's a wonder he ever held them.

JACK. He did it; he made them throw out forty-seven ballots... and
thirty-eight of them were Tammany ballots, too. There was one time
when I thought the gang was going to break loose, and I sneaked out and
telephoned for help. Then I came back and spoke up for him. I wanted
them to know there'd be one witness. You should have seen the grateful
look that Montague gave me.

LAURA. I can imagine it.

JULIA. And how did it end?

JACK. Why, you see, we kept them there till eleven o'clock at night, and
by that time everybody knew that Tammany had won, and the ballots were
not needed. So the old Judge patted us on the back and told us we were
heroes, and invited us out to get drunk with him. Montague and I walked
home together through the election din, and got acquainted. I don't know
that I ever met a man I took to more quickly.

LAURA. You are making a Socialist out of him, of course?

JACK. Oh, he's coming on. But he is not the sort of man to take his
ideas from any one else... he wants to see for himself. He hasn't
been in New York long, you know... he comes from the South... from
Mississippi.

LAURA. [Startled.] From Mississippi! What's his first name?

JACK. Allan.

LAURA. [Betraying emotion.] Allan Montague!

JACK. Do you know him?

LAURA. Yes; I know him very well, indeed. Oh... I didn't... that is... I
have not seen him for a long time. [Recovering her poise.] Is he surely
coming?

JACK. He generally keeps his engagements.

JULIA. How did you come to know him?

LAURA. He's Ollie Montague's brother.

JACK. Who's Ollie Montague?

LAURA. He's one of those pretty boys that everybody knows in society; he
brought his brother up from the South to introduce him. He was in some
business deal or other with my father. Then he seemed to drop out of
everything, and nobody sees him any more. I don't know why.

JACK. I think he was disgusted with his experiences.

LAURA. Oh!

JACK. [Realizing that he had said something awkward.] I think I was
the first Socialist he'd ever met. He had just gotten to the stage of
despair. He'd started out with a long program of reforms... and he was
going to educate the people to them... one by one, until he'd made them
all effective. I said to him: "By the time you've got the attention
of the public on reform number thirty... what do you suppose the
politicians will have been doing with reform number one?"

JULIA. We all have to go through that stage. I can remember just as
well... [A ring upon the bell.] Ah, there he is.

JACK. [Rises and goes to the door.] But I think he's most through
butting his head against the stone wall! [Calls.] Are you there, old
man?

MONTAGUE. [Off.] I'm here!

JACK. How are you?

MONTAGUE. Fine!

JACK. Come right in.

MONTAGUE. [Enters; a tall, handsome man of thirty; self-contained and
slow of speech; the dark type of a Southerner.] I'm a trifle late.
[Sees LAURA; starts.] Miss Hegan! You! [Recovers himself.] Why... an
unexpected pleasure!

LAURA. Unexpected on both sides, Mr. Montague.

MONTAGUE. I'm delighted to meet you, really!

[They shake hands.]

JACK. Julia, my friend, Mr. Montague. Miss Patterson.

MONTAGUE. I'm very glad to meet you, Miss Patterson.

JULIA. We had no idea we were bringing old friends together.

MONTAGUE. No; it was certainly a coincidence.

LAURA. It's been... let me see... a year since we've met.

MONTAGUE. It must be fully that.

LAURA. Where do you keep yourself these days?

MONTAGUE. Oh, I'm studying, in a quiet way.

LAURA. And none of your old friends ever see you?

MONTAGUE. I don't get about much.

LAURA. [Earnestly.] And friendship means so little to you as that?

MONTAGUE. I... it would be hard to explain. I have been busy with
politics...

[A pause of embarrassment.]

JULIA. Mr. Bullen has just been telling us about your heroism.

MONTAGUE. My heroism? Where?

JULIA. At the polling place.

MONTAGUE. Oh, that! It was nothing.

LAURA. It seemed like a good deal to us.

MONTAGUE. Make him tell you about some of his own adventures.

JULIA. Would you ever think, to look at his innocent countenance,
that he had helped to hold a building for six hours against Russian
artillery?

LAURA. Good heavens! Where was this?

JULIA. During the St. Petersburg uprising.

LAURA. And weren't you frightened to death?

JACK. [Laughing.] No; we were too busy taking pot-shots at the Cossacks.
It was like the hunting season in the Adirondacks.

LAURA. And how did it turn out?

JACK. Oh, they were too much for us in the end. I got away, across the
ice of the Neva... I had the heel of one shoe shot off. And yet people
tell us romance is dead! Anybody who is looking for romance, and knows
what it is, can find all he wants in Russia.

[Pause.]

LAURA. [To MONTAGUE.] Have you seen my father lately?

MONTAGUE. No; not for some time.

LAURA. You may see him this evening. He promised to call for me.

MONTAGUE. Indeed!

JACK. Oh, by the way, Julia, I forgot! How's Annie?

LAURA. Oh, yes; how is she?

JULIA. She's doing well, I think. Better every day.

LAURA. Is she still violent?

JULIA. Not so much. I can always handle her now.

LAURA. Is she in the next room?

[Looking to the right.]

JULIA. Yes. She's been asleep since afternoon.

LAURA. And you still won't let me send her to a hospital?

JULIA. Oh, no. Truly, it would kill the poor girl.

LAURA. But you... with all your work, and your engagements?

JULIA. She's very quiet. And the neighbors come in and help when I'm
out. They all sympathize.

LAURA. Talking about heroism... it seems to me that you are entitled to
mention.

JULIA. Why, nonsense!... the girl was simply thrown into my arms.

LAURA. Most people would have managed to step out of the way, just the
same. You've heard the story, have you, Mr. Montague?

MONTAGUE. Bullen has told it to me. You haven't been able to get any
justice?

JACK. From the police? Hardly! But we're keeping at it, to make the
story complete. I went to see Captain Quinn to-day. "What's this?" says
he. "Annie Rogers again? Didn't your lady frien' get her pitcher in the
papers over that case? An' what more does she want?"

JULIA. I went this afternoon to see the Tammany leader of our
district...

MONTAGUE. Leary?

JULIA. The same. I went straight into his saloon. "Lady," says he, "the
goil's nutty! You got a bughouse patient on your bands! This here talk
about the white-slave traffic, ma'am... it's all the work o' these
magazine muckrakers!" "Meaning myself, Mr. Leary?" said I, and he looked
kind of puzzled. I don't think he knew who I was.

MONTAGUE. All the work of the muckrakers! I see Boss Grimes is out to
that effect also.

JACK. And I see that half a dozen clergymen sat down to a public banquet
with him the other day. That's what we've come to in New York! Bob
Grimes, with his hands on every string of the whole infamous system...
with his paws in every filthy graft-pot in the city! Bob Grimes, the
type and symbol of it all! Every time I see a picture of that bulldog
face, it seems to me as if I were confronting all the horrors that I've
ever fought in my life!

JULIA. It's curious to note how much less denunciation of Tammany one
hears now than in the old days.

MONTAGUE. Tammany's getting respectable.

JACK. The big interests have found out how to use it. The traction gang,
especially...

[He stops abruptly; a tense pause.]

LAURA. [Leaning toward him, with great earnestness.] Mr. Bullen, is that
really true?

JACK. That is true, Miss Hegan.

LAURA. Mr. Bullen, you will understand what it means to me to hear that
statement made. I hear it made continually, and I ask if it is true, and
I am told that it is a slander. How am I to know? [A pause.] Would you
be able to tell me that you know it of your own personal knowledge?

JACK. [Weighing the words.] No; I could not say that.

LAURA. Would you say that you could prove it to a jury?

JACK. I would say, that if I had to prove it, I could get the evidence.

LAURA. What would you say, Mr. Montague?

MONTAGUE. I would rather not say, Miss Hegan.

LAURA. Please! Please! I want you to answer me.

MONTAGUE. [After a pause.] I would say that I shall be able to prove it
very shortly.

LAURA. How do you mean?

MONTAGUE. I have been giving most of my time to a study of just that
question, and I think that I shall have the evidence.

LAURA. I see.

[She sinks back, very white; a pause; the bell rings.]

JULIA. Who can that be?

JACK. [Springing up.] Let me answer it. [Presses button; then, to
MONTAGUE.] I had no idea you were going in for that, old man.

MONTAGUE. This is the first time I have ever mentioned it to any one.

JULIA. [Rising, hoping to relieve an embarrassing situation.] I hope
this isn't any more company.

JACK. [To MONTAGUE, aside.] You must let me tell you a few things that
I know. I've been running down a little story about Grimes and the
traction crowd.

MONTAGUE. Indeed! What is it?

JACK. I can't tell it to you now... it would take too long. But, gee! If
I can get the evidence, it'll make your hair stand on end! It has to do
with the Grand Avenue Railroad suit.

MONTAGUE. The one that's pending in the Court of Appeals?

JACK. Yes. You see, Jim Hegan stands to lose a fortune by it, and I've
reason to believe that there's some monkey-work being done with the
Court. It happens that one of the judges has a nephew... a dissipated
chap, who hates him. He's an old college friend of mine, and he's trying
to get some evidence for me.

MONTAGUE. Good Lord!

JACK. And think, it concerns Jim Hegan personally.

[A knock at the door.]

JULIA. I'll go.

[Opens the door.]

HEGAN. [Without.] Good evening. Is Miss Hegan here?

LAURA. [Standing up.] Father!

JULIA. Won't you come in?

HEGAN. Thank you. [Enters; a tall, powerfully built man, with a square
jaw, wide, over-arching eyebrows, and keen eyes that peer at one; a
prominent nose, the aspect of the predatory eagle; a man accustomed to
let other people talk and to read their thoughts.] Why, Mr. Montague,
you here?

MONTAGUE. Mr. Hegan! Why, how do you do?

LAURA. We stumbled on each other by chance. Father, this is Miss
Patterson.

HEGAN. I am very pleased to meet you, Miss Patterson.

JULIA. How do you do, Mr. Hegan?

[They shake hands.]

LAURA. And Mr. Bullen.

BULLEN. [Remaining where he is; stiffly.] Good evening, Mr. Hegan.

HEGAN. Good evening, sir. [Turns to LAURA.] My dear, I finished up
downtown sooner than I expected, and I have another conference at the
house. I stopped off to see if you cared to come now, or if I should
send back the car for you.

LAURA. I think you'd best send it back.

JULIA. Why, yes... she only just got here.

HEGAN. Very well.

JULIA. Won't you stop a minute?

HEGAN. No. I really can't. Mr. Grimes is waiting for me downstairs.

LAURA. [Involuntarily.] Mr. Grimes!

HEGAN. Yes.

LAURA. Robert Grimes?

HEGAN. [Surprised.] Yes. Why?

LAURA. Nothing; only we happened to be just talking about him.

HEGAN. I see.

JACK. [Aggressively.] We happen to have one of his victims in the next
room.

HEGAN. [Perplexed.] One of his victims?

JULIA. [Protesting.] Jack!

JACK. A daughter of the slums. One of the helpless girls who have to pay
the tribute that he...

[A piercing and terrifying scream is heard off right.]

JULIA. Annie!

[Runs off.]

HEGAN. What's that?

[The screams continue.]

JULIA. [Off.] Help! Help!

[Jack, who is nearest, leaps toward the door; but, before he can reach
it, it is flung violently open.]

ANNIE. [Enters, delirious, her bare arms and throat covered with
bruises, her hair loose, and her aspect wild; an Irish peasant girl,
aged twenty.] No! No! Let me go!

[Rushes into the opposite corner, and cowers in terror.]

JULIA. [Following her.] Annie! Annie!

ANNIE. [Flings her off, and stretches out her arms.] What do you want
with me? Help! Help! I won't do it! I won't stay! Let me alone!

[Wild and frantic sobbing.]

JULIA. Annie, dear! Annie! Look at me! Don't you know me? I'm Julia!
Your own Julia! No one shall hurt you... no one!

ANNIE. [Stares at her wildly.] He's after me still! He'll follow me
here! He won't let me get away from him! Oh, save me!

JULIA. [Embracing her.] Listen to me, dear. Don't think of things like
that. You are in my home... nothing can hurt you. Don't let these evil
dreams take hold of you.

ANNIE. [Stares, as if coming out of a trance.] Why didn't you help me
before?

JULIA. Come, dear... come.

ANNIE. It's too late... too late! Oh... I can't forget about it!

JULIA. Yes, dear. I know...

ANNIE. [Seeing the others.] Who?...

JULIA. They are all friends; they will help you. Come, dear... lie down
again.

ANNIE. Oh, what shall I do?

[Is led off, sobbing.]

JULIA. It will be all right, dear.

[Exit; a pause.]

HEGAN. What does this mean?

JACK. [Promptly and ruthlessly.] It means that you have been seeing the
white-slave traffic in action.

HEGAN. I don't understand.

JACK. [Quietly, but with suppressed passion.] Tens of thousands of girl
slaves are needed for the markets of our great cities... for the lumber
camps of the North, the mining camps of the West, the ditches of Panama.
And every four or five years the supply must be renewed, and so the
business of gathering these girl-slaves from our slums is one of the
great industries of the city. This girl, Annie Rogers, a decent girl
from the North of Ireland, was lured into a dance hall and drugged, and
then taken to a brothel and locked in a third-story room. They took her
clothing away from her, but she broke down her door at night and fled to
the street in her wrapper and flung herself into Miss Patterson's arms.
Two men were pursuing her... they tried to carry her off. Miss Patterson
called a policeman... but he said the girl was insane. Only by making a
disturbance and drawing a crowd was my friend able to save her. And now,
we have been the rounds... from the sergeant at the station, and the
police captain, to the Chief of Police and the Mayor himself; we have
been to the Tammany leader of the district... the real boss of the
neighborhood... and there is no justice to be had anywhere for Annie
Rogers!

HEGAN. Impossible!

JACK. You have my word for it, sir. And the reason for it is that this
hideous traffic is one of the main cogs in our political machine. The
pimps and the panders, the cadets and maquereaux... they vote the ticket
of the organization; they contribute to the campaign funds; they serve
as colonizers and repeaters at the polls. The tribute that they pay
amounts to millions; and it is shared from the lowest to the highest
in the organization... from the ward man on the street and the police
captain, up to the inner circle of the chiefs of Tammany Hall... yes,
even to your friend, Mr. Robert Grimes, himself! A thousand times, sir,
has the truth about this monstrous infamy been put before the people
of your city; and that they have not long ago risen in their wrath and
driven its agents from their midst is due to but one single fact... that
this infamous organization of crime and graft is backed at each election
time by the millions of the great public service corporations. It is
they...

MONTAGUE. [Interfering.] Bullen!

JACK. Let me go on! It is they, sir, who finance the thugs and repeaters
who desecrate our polls. It is they who suborn our press and blind the
eyes of our people. It is they who are responsible for this traffic in
the flesh of our women. It is they who have to answer for the tottering
reason of that poor peasant girl in the next room!

LAURA. [Has been listening to this speech, white with horror; as the
indictment proceeds, she covers her face with her hands; at this point
she breaks into uncontrollable weeping.] Oh! I can't stand it!

HEGAN. [Springing to her side.] My dear!

LAURA. [Clasping him.] Father! Father!

HEGAN. My child! I have begged you not to come to these places! Why
should you see such things?

LAURA. [Wildly.] Why should I not see them, so long as they exist?

HEGAN. [Angrily.] I won't have it. This is the end of it! I mean what I
say! Come home with me!... Come home at once!

LAURA. With Grimes? I won't meet that man!

HEGAN. Very well, then. You need not meet him. I'll call a cab, and take
you myself. Where are your things?

LAURA. [Looking to the left.] In that room.

HEGAN. Come, then.

[Takes her off.]

JACK. [Turns to MONTAGUE, and to JULIA, who appears in doorway at
right.] We gave it to them straight that time, all right!

[CURTAIN]




ACT II

Library of "The Towers," HEGAN's Long Island country place. A spacious
room, furnished luxuriously, but with good taste. A large table, with
lamp and books in the centre, and easy-chairs beside it. Up stage are
French windows leading to a veranda, with drive below; a writing desk
between the windows. Entrance right and left. A telephone stand left,
and a clock on wall right. [At rise: ANDREWS, standing by the table,
opening some letters.]

LAURA. [Enters from veranda.] Good afternoon, Mr. Andrews.

ANDREWS. Good afternoon, Miss Hegan.

LAURA. Has father come yet?

ANDREWS. No; he said he'd he back about five.

LAURA. Is he surely coming?

ANDREWS. Oh, yes. He has an important engagement here.

LAURA. He's working very hard these days.

ANDREWS. He has a good deal on his mind just now.

LAURA. It's this Grand Avenue Railroad business.

ANDREWS. Yes. If it should go against him, it would confuse his plans
very much.

LAURA. Is the matter never going to be decided?

ANDREWS. We're expecting the decision any day now. That's why he's so
much concerned. He has to hold the market, you see...

LAURA. The decision's liable to affect the market?

ANDREWS. Oh, yes... very much, indeed.

LAURA. I see. And then...

'Phone rings.

ANDREWS. Excuse me. Hello! Yes, this is Mr. Hegan's place. Mr. Montague?
Why, yes; I believe he's to be here this afternoon. Yes.. . wait a
moment... [To LAURA.] It's some one asking for Mr. Montague.

LAURA. Who is it?

ANDREWS. Hello! Who is this, please? [TO LAURA.] It's Mr. Bullen.

LAURA. Mr. Bullen? I'll speak to him. [Takes 'phone.] Hello, Mr. Bullen!
This is Miss Hegan. I'm glad to hear from you. How are you? Why, yes,
Mr. Montague is coming out... I expect him here any time. He was to take
the three-five... just a moment. [Looks at clock.] If the train's on
time, he's due here now. We sent to meet him. Call up again in about
five minutes. Oh, you have to see him? As soon as that? Nothing wrong,
I hope. Well, he couldn't get back to the city until after six. Oh, then
you're right near us. Why don't you come over?... That's the quickest
way. No; take the trolley and come right across. I'll be delighted to
see you. What's that? Why, Mr. Bullen! How perfectly preposterous! My
father doesn't blame you for what happened. Don't think of it. Come
right along. I'll take it ill of you if you don't... truly I will. Yes;
please do. You'll just have time to get the next trolley. Get off at the
Merrick road, and I'll see there's an auto there to meet you. Very well.
Good-bye. [TO ANDREWS.] Mr. Andrews, will you see there's a car sent
down to the trolley to meet Mr. Bullen?

ANDREWS. All right.

[Exit.]

LAURA. [Stands by table, in deep thought, takes a note from table and
studies it; shakes her head.] He didn't want to come. He doesn't want to
talk to me. But he must! Ah, there he is. [Sound of a motor heard. She
waits, then goes to the window.] Ah, Mr. Montague!

MONTAGUE. [Enters centre.] Good afternoon, Miss Hegan.

LAURA. You managed to catch the train, I see.

MONTAGUE. Yes. I just did.

LAURA. It is so good of you to come.

MONTAGUE. Not at all. I am glad to be here.

LAURA. I just had a telephone call from Mr. Bullen.

MONTAGUE. [Starting.] From Bullen?

LAURA. Yes. He said he had to see you about something.

MONTAGUE. [Eagerly.] Where was he?

LAURA. He was at his brother's place. I told him to come here.

MONTAGUE. Oh! Is he coming?

LAURA. Yes; he'll be here soon.

MONTAGUE. Thank you very much.

LAURA. He said it was something quite urgent.

MONTAGUE. Yes. He has some important papers for me.

LAURA. I see he made a speech last night that stirred up the press.

MONTAGUE. [Smiling.] Yes.

LAURA. He is surely a tireless fighter.

MONTAGUE. It's such men as Bullen who keep the world moving.

LAURA. And do you agree with him, Mr. Montague?

MONTAGUE. In what way?

LAURA. That the end of it all is to be a revolution.

MONTAGUE. I don't know, Miss Hegan. I find I am moving that way. I used
to think we could control capital. Now I am beginning to suspect that it
is in the nature of capital to have its way, and that if the people wish
to rule they must own the capital.

LAURA. [After a pause.] Mr. Montague, I had to ask you to come out and
see me, because I'd promised my father I would not go into the city
again for a while. I've not been altogether well since that evening at
Julia's.

MONTAGUE. I am sorry to hear that, Miss Hegan.

LAURA. It's nothing, but it worries my father, you know. [pause.] I
thought we should be alone this afternoon, but I find that my father is
coming and... and Mr. Baker is coming also. So I mayn't have time to say
all I wished to say to you. But I must thank you for coming.

MONTAGUE. I was very glad to come, Miss Hegan.

LAURA. I can appreciate your embarrassment at being asked to...

MONTAGUE. No!

LAURA. We must deal frankly with each other. I know that you did
not want to come. I know that you have tried to put an end to our
friendship.

MONTAGUE. [Hesitates.] Miss Hegan, let me explain my position.

LAURA. I think I understand it already. You have found evil conditions
which you wish to oppose, and you were afraid that our friendship might
stand in the way.

MONTAGUE. [In a low voice.] Miss Hegan, I came to New York an entire
stranger two years ago, and my brother introduced me to his rich
friends. By one of them I was asked to take charge of a law case. It was
a case of very great importance, which served to give me an opening into
the inner life of the city. I discovered that, in their blind struggle
for power, our great capitalists had lost all sense of the difference
between honesty and crime. I found that trust funds were being abused...
that courts and legislatures were being corrupted... the very financial
stability of the country was being wrecked. The thing shocked me to the
bottom of my soul, and I set to work to give the public some light
on the situation. Then, what happened, Miss Hegan? My newly made rich
friends cut me a deal; they began to circulate vile slanders about me...
they insulted me openly, on more than one occasion. So, don't you see?

LAURA. Yes. I see. But could you not have trusted a friendship such as
ours?

MONTAGUE. I did not dare.

LAURA. You saw that you had to fight my father, and you thought that I
would blindly take his side.

MONTAGUE. [Hesitating.] I... I couldn't suppose...

LAURA. Listen. You have told me your situation; now imagine mine.
Imagine a girl brought up in luxury, with a father whom she loves
very dearly, and who loves her more than any one else in the world.
Everything is done to make her happy... to keep her contented and
peaceful. But as she grows up, she reads and listens... and, little by
little, it dawns upon her that her father is one of the leaders in this
terrible struggle that you have spoken of. She hears about wrongdoing;
she is told that her father's enemies have slandered him. At first,
perhaps, she believes that. But time goes on... she sees suffering and
oppression... she begins to realize a little of cause and effect. She
wants to help, she wants to do right, but there is no way for her to
know. She goes to one person after another, and no one will deal frankly
with her. No one will tell her the truth... absolutely no one! [Leaning
forward with intensity.] No one! No one!

MONTAGUE. I see.

LAURA. So it was with you... and with our friendship. I knew that
you had broken it off for such reasons. I knew that there was nothing
personal... it was nothing that I had done...

MONTAGUE. No! Surely not!

LAURA. [Gazes about nervously.] And then the other night... you told
me you were investigating the traction companies of New York.. . their
connection with politics, and so on. Ever since then I have felt that
you were the one person I must talk with. Don't you see?

MONTAGUE. Yes; I see.

LAURA. I have sought for some one who will tell me the truth. Will you?

MONTAGUE. [In a low voice.] You must realize what you are asking of me,
Miss Hegan.

LAURA. I have not brought you here without realizing that. You must help
me!

MONTAGUE. Very well. I will do what I can.

LAURA. [Leaning forward.] I wish to know about my father. I wish to know
to what extent he is involved in these evils that you speak of.

MONTAGUE. Your father is in the game, and he has played it the way the
game is played.

LAURA. Has he been better than the others, or worse?

MONTAGUE. About the same, Miss Hegan.

LAURA. He has been more successful than they.

MONTAGUE. He has been very successful.

LAURA. You were concerned in some important deal with my father, were
you not?

MONTAGUE. I was.

LAURA. Then you withdrew. Was that because there was something wrong in
it?

MONTAGUE. It was, Miss Hegan.

LAURA. There were corrupt things done?

MONTAGUE. There were many kinds of corrupt things done.

LAURA. And was my father responsible for them?

MONTAGUE. Yes.

LAURA. Directly?

MONTAGUE. Yes; directly.

LAURA. Then my father is a bad man? MONTAGUE. [After a pause.] Your
father finds himself in the midst of an evil system. He is the victim of
conditions which he did not create.

LAURA. Ah, now you are trying to spare me!

MONTAGUE. No. I should say that to any one. I am at war with the
system... not with individuals. It is the old story of hating the sin
and loving the sinner. Your father's rivals are just as reckless as
he take Murdock, for instance, the man who is behind this Grand Avenue
Railroad matter. It is hard for a woman to understand that situation.

LAURA. I can understand some things very clearly. I go down into the
slums and I see all that welter of misery. I see the forces of evil that
exist there, defiant and hateful... the saloons and the gambling-houses,
and that ghastly white-slave traffic, of which Annie Rogers is the
victim. And there is the political organization, taking its toll from
all these, and using it to keep itself in power. And there is Boss
Grimes, who is at the head of all... and he is one of my father's
intimate associates. I ask about it, and I am told that it is a matter
of "business." But why should my father do business with a man whose
chief source of income is vice?

MONTAGUE. That is not quite the case, Miss Hegan.

LAURA. Doesn't the vice tribute go to him?

MONTAGUE. Part of it does, I have no doubt. But it would be a very small
part of his income.

LAURA. What then?

MONTAGUE. The vice graft serves for the police and the district leaders
and the little men; what really pays nowadays is what has come to be
called "honest graft."

LAURA. What is that?

MONTAGUE. The business deals that are trade with the public service
corporations.

LAURA. Ah! That is what I wish to know about!

MONTAGUE. For instance, I am running a street railway...

LAURA. [Quickly.] My father is running them all!

MONTAGUE. Very well. Your father is in alliance with the organization;
he is given franchises and public privileges for practically nothing;
and in return he gives the contracts for constructing the subways
and street-car lines to companies organized by the politicians. These
companies are simply paper companies... they farm out the contracts to
the real builders, skimming off a profit of twenty or thirty per cent.
One of these companies received contracts last year to the value of
thirty million dollars.

LAURA. And so that is how Grimes gets his money?

MONTAGUE. Grimes' brother is the president of the company I have
reference to.

LAURA. I see; it is a regular system.

MONTAGUE. It is a business, and there is no way to punish it... it does
not violate any law...

LAURA. And yet it is quite as bad!

MONTAGUE. It is far worse, because of its vast scope. It carries every
form of corruption in its train. It means the prostitution of our whole
system of government... the subsidizing of our newspapers, and of the
great political parties. It means that judges are chosen who will decide
in favor of the corporations; that legislators are nominated who will
protect them against attack. It means everywhere the enthronement of
ignorance and incompetence, of injustice and fraud.

LAURA. And in the end the public pays for it?

MONTAGUE. In the end the public pays for everything. The stolen
franchises are unloaded on the market for ten times what they cost, and
the people pay their nickels for a wretched, broken-down service. They
pay for it in the form of rent and taxes for a dishonest administration.
Every struggling unfortunate in the city pays for it, when he comes into
contact with the system... when he seeks for help, or even for justice.
It was that side of it that shocked me most of all... I being a lawyer,
you see. The corrupting of our courts...

LAURA. The judges are bought, Mr. Montague?

MONTAGUE. The judges are selected, Miss Hegan.

LAURA. Selected! I see.

MONTAGUE. And that system prevails from the Supreme Court of the State
down to the petty Police Magistrates, before whom the poor come to
plead.

LAURA. And that is why the white-slave traffic goes unpunished!

MONTAGUE. That is why.

LAURA. And why no one would move a hand for Annie Rogers!

MONTAGUE. That is why.

LAURA. And my father is responsible for it!

MONTAGUE. [Gravely.] Yes; I think he is, Miss Hegan.

A PAUSE.

LAURA. Have you seen Julia Patterson lately?

MONTAGUE. I saw her last night.

LAURA. And how is Annie?

MONTAGUE. She... [Hesitates.] She is dead.

LAURA. [Starting.] Oh!

MONTAGUE. She died the night before last.

LAURA. [Stares at him, then gives a wild start, and cries] She... she...

MONTAGUE. She killed herself.

LAURA. Oh!

MONTAGUE. She cut her throat.

LAURA. [Hides her face and sinks against the table, shuddering and
overcome.] Oh, the poor girl! The poor, poor girl! [Suddenly she springs
up.] Can't you see? Can't you see? It is things like that that are
driving me to distraction!

MONTAGUE. [Starting toward her.] Miss Hegan...

LAURA. [Covering her face again.] Oh! oh! It is horrible! I can't stand
it! I...

[Sound of motor heard; they listen.]

LAURA. That is my father's car... Mr. Montague, will you excuse me? I
must have a talk with my father...

MONTAGUE. Certainly. Let me go away...

LAURA. No; please wait. Just take a little stroll. I...

MONTAGUE. Certainly, I understand.

[Exit right.]

LAURA. [Seeks to compose herself; then goes to window.] Father!

HEGAN. [Off.] Yes, dear.

LAURA. Come here.

HEGAN. [Enters.] What is it?

LAURA. Father, I have just had dreadful news..

HEGAN. What?

LAURA. Annie Rogers... that poor girl, you know...

HEGAN. Yes.

LAURA. She has killed herself.

HEGAN. No!

LAURA. She cut her own throat.

HEGAN. Oh, my dear! [Starts toward her.] I am so sorry...

LAURA. [Quickly.] No, father! Listen! You must talk to me... you must
talk to me this time!

HEGAN. My child...

LAURA. You cannot put me off. You cannot, I tell you!

HEGAN. Laura, dear, you are upset...

LAURA. No! That is not so! I have perfect control of myself. There is
no use crying... the girl is dead. That can't be helped. But I mean to
understand about it. I mean to know who is responsible for her death.

HEGAN. My dear, these evils are hard to know of...

LAURA. That house to which that girl was taken... there is a law against
such places, is there not?

HEGAN. Yes, my dear.

LAURA. And why is not the law enforced?

HEGAN. It has not been found possible to enforce such laws.

LAURA. But why not?

HEGAN. Why, my dear, this evil...

LAURA. These people pay money to the police, do they not?

HEGAN. Why, yes; I imagine...

LAURA. Don't tell me what you imagine... tell me what you know! They pay
money to the police, don't they?

HEGAN. Yes.

LAURA. Then why should the police not be punished? Do those who control
the police get some of the money?

HEGAN. Some of them, my dear.

LAURA. That is, the leaders of Tammany.

HEGAN. Possibly... yes.

LAURA. And Mr. Grimes... he gets some of it?

HEGAN. Why, my dear...

LAURA. Tell me!

HEGAN. But really, Laura, I never asked him what he gets.

LAURA. [With intensity.] Father, you must understand me! I will not be
trifled with... I am in desperate earnest! I am determined to get to the
bottom of this thing! I am no longer a child, and you must not try to
deceive me! Mr. Grimes must get some of that money!

HEGAN. I think it possible, my dear.

LAURA. And do you get any?

HEGAN. Good God, Laura!

LAURA. Then what is the nature of your relationship with Grimes?

HEGAN. Really, my child, this is not fair of you. I have business
connections which you cannot possibly understand...

LAURA. I can understand everything that you are willing for me to
understand! I want to know why you must have business connections with a
man like Boss Grimes.

HEGAN. My dear, I think you might take your father's word in such a
case. It has nothing to do with vice, I can assure you. Grimes is a
business ally of mine. He is a rich man, a great power in New York...

LAURA. Do you help to keep him a power in New York?

HEGAN. Why, I don't know...

LAURA. Do you contribute to his campaign funds?

HEGAN. Why, Laura! I am a Democrat. Surely I have a right to support my
party!

LAURA. [Quickly.] Have you ever contributed to the Republican campaign
funds?

HEGAN. [Disconcerted; laughs.] Why... really...

LAURA. Please answer me.

HEGAN. I am a Gold Democrat, my dear.

LAURA. I see. [She Pauses.] You put Mr. Grimes in the way of making a
great deal of money, do you not?

HEGAN. I do that.

LAURA. He is interested in companies that you give contracts to?

HEGAN. Really! You seem to be informed about my affairs!

LAURA. I have taken some trouble to inform myself. Father, don't you
realize what it means to corrupt the government of the city in this way?

HEGAN. Corrupt the government, my dear?

LAURA. Does not Grimes have the nominating of judges and legislators?

HEGAN. Why, yes... in a way...

LAURA. And does he not consult with you?

HEGAN. Why, my dear...

LAURA. Please tell me.

HEGAN. [Realizing that he cannot make any more admissions.] No, my dear.

LAURA. Never?

HEGAN. Absolutely never.

LAURA. He has never made any attempt to influence the courts in your
favor?

HEGAN. Never.

LAURA. Not in any way, father?

HEGAN. Not in any way.

LAURA. Nor in favor of your companies?

HEGAN. No, my dear.

LAURA. You mean, you can give me your word of honor that that is the
truth?

HEGAN. I can, my dear.

LAURA. And that none of your lawyers do it? Do you mean that the courts
escape your influence...

HEGAN. [Laughing disconcertedly.] Really, my dear, this is as bad as
a Government investigation! I shall have to take refuge in a lapse of
memory.

LAURA. [Intensely.] Father! Is it nothing to you that I have the blood
of that poor girl on my conscience?

HEGAN. My child!

LAURA. Yes; just that! She was caught in the grip of this ruthless
system; it held her fast and crushed her life out. And we maintain this
system! I profit by it... all this luxury and power that I enjoy comes
from it directly! Can't you see what I mean?

HEGAN. I see, my dear, that you are frightfully overwrought, and that
you are making yourself ill. Can't you imagine what it means to me to
have you acting in this way? Here I am at one of the gravest crises of
my life; I am working day and night, under frightful strain... I have
hardly slept six hours in the past three days. And here, when I get a
chance for a moment's rest, you come and put me through such an ordeal!
You never think of that!

LAURA. It's just what I do think of! Why must you torture yourself so?
Why...

HEGAN. My dear, I, too, am in the grip of the system you speak of.

LAURA. But why? Why stay in it? Haven't we money enough yet?

HEGAN. I have duties by which I am bound... interests that I must
protect. How can I... [A knock.] Come in!

ANDREWS. [Enters.] Here are the papers, Mr. Hegan. They must be signed
now if they're to catch this mail.

HEGAN. All right.

[Sits at desk up stage and writes.]

LAURA. [Stands by table, staring before her; picks up book carelessly
from table.] "Ivanhoe"... [Fingers it idly and a slip of paper falls to
floor. She picks it up, glances at it, then starts.] Oh!.. . [Reads.]
"Memo to G., two hundred thousand on Court deal. GRIMES." Two hundred
thousand on Court deal! [Glances back at her father; then replaces slip
and lays book on table.] Father, have you read "Ivanhoe"?

HEGAN. [Without looking up.] I'm reading it now. Why? Do you want it?

LAURA. No; I just happened to notice it here.

HEGAN. [Looks up sharply, watches her, then finishes writing.] There!
[Rises; the sound of a motor heard.] What's that?

ANDREWS. [Near window.] It's Mr. Grimes.

LAURA. [Starting.] Grimes!

HEGAN. [TO ANDREWS.] Bring him in.

[ANDREWS exit.]

LAURA. Father! Why do you bring that man here?

HEGAN. I'll not do it again, dear. I didn't realize. He happened to be
in the neighborhood...

LAURA. I won't meet him!

HEGAN. [Putting his arm about her.] Very well, dear; come away. Try to
stop worrying yourself now, for the love of me...

[Leads her off left.]

ANDREWS. [At window.] This way, Mr. Grimes.

[GRIMES enters; a powerfully built, broad-shouldered man of about fifty,
with a massive jaw, covered with a scrubby beard; the face of a bulldog;
a grim, masterful man, who never speaks except when he has to. He enters
and seats himself in a chair by the table.] Will you have a cigar?
[Grimes takes a cigar, without comment, and chews on it; sits, staring
in front of him.] Mr. Hegan will be here directly, Sir.

[He nods, and ANDREWS exit. GRIMES continues to chew and stare in front
of him. He is not under the necessity of making superfluous motions.]

HEGAN. [Enters left.] Hello, Grimes!

GRIMES. Hello!

HEGAN. [Betraying anxiety.] Well?

GRIMES. It's done.

HEGAN. What?

GRIMES. It's done.

HEGAN. Good! [Grimes nods.] How did you manage it?

GRIMES. [Grimly.] I put my hand on 'em!

HEGAN. Which one? Porter? [GRIMES nods.] Oh, the old hypocrite! What did
you offer him? Cash? [GRIMES shakes his head slowly.] What?

GRIMES. Discipline!

HEGAN. [Perplexed.] But... a judge!

GRIMES. When a man's once mine, he stays mine... no matter if it's a
life job I give him.

MEGAN. But are you sure it's safe?

GRIMES. The decision comes tomorrow.

HEGAN. [Starting.] What?

GRIMES. Tomorrow noon.

HEGAN. But how can they write the decision?

GRIMES. They'll adopt the minority opinion.

HEGAN. Oh! I see!

[Chuckles.]

GRIMES. You be ready.

MEGAN. Trust me! I'll have to go in now.

GRIMES. It'll be a great killing. Old Murdock has plunged up to his
neck!

HEGAN. I know! We'll lay them flat. I'll get ready. [Rises.] Old Porter!
Think of it! When did you see him?

GRIMES. Last night.

HEGAN. I see. I'll be with you.

GRIMES. Just a moment. I'll take the money.

HEGAN. Oh, yes. Why don't you let me hold it and buy for you?

GRIMES. I'll buy for myself.

HEGAN. Very well.

[Sits at desk.]

GRIMES. It's two hundred thousand.

HEGAN. That's right. [Writes a check, rises and gives it to Grimes.]
There.

GRIMES. [Studies the check, nods, and puts it away carefully.] When's
the next train?

HEGAN. In about ten minutes. [Rings bell.] Andrews!

ANDREWS. [Enters left.] Yes, Sir.

HEGAN. I'm going into town at once. Telephone orders to the house.

ANDREWS. Yes, sir. And shall I come in this evening?

HEGAN. Yes; you'd better. And telephone Mr. Isaacson and Mr. Henry
Sterns to meet me at eight o'clock for an important conference at.. .
let me see, where?

GRIMES. At my rooms.

HEGAN. Very good. And they're not to fail on any account. It's urgent.

ANDREWS. Yes, sir.

[HEGAN and GRIMES go off centre. ANDREWS remains sorting papers. A
knock, right.]

ANDREWS. Come in!

[MONTAGUE enters.]

ANDREWS. Oh, good afternoon. I was looking for you, Mr. Montague. Mr.
Bullen has come.

MONTAGUE. Oh! Where is he?

ANDREWS. He's waiting. I'll tell him you're here.

[Exit right.]

MONTAGUE. [Stands at window and sees motor departing.] Grimes! I wonder
what that means? [Turns away.] And what a coincidence, that I should be
here! Humph! Well, it's not my doings. Ah! Bullen!

JACK. [Enters, right, in great excitement.] Montague!

MONTAGUE. Yes.

JACK. I've got 'em!

MONTAGUE. What?

JACK. I've got 'em!

MONTAGUE. You don't mean it!

JACK. Got 'em dead! Got everything! There's never been a case like it!

MONTAGUE. [Gazing about.] Ssh! Where was it?

JACK. At Judge Porter's house.

MONTAGUE. What?

JACK. Yes.... Grimes came there.

MONTAGUE. When?

JACK. Last night. My friend was in the next room... he heard everything!

MONTAGUE. And what are they going to do?

JACK. Porter is to switch over, and sign the minority opinion, and
that's to come out as the decision of the Court.

MONTAGUE. Good God! When?

JACK. Tomorrow.

MONTAGUE. Impossible!

JACK. There's to be a meeting of the judges this afternoon. See...
here's the decision! [Takes paper from pocket.] The one they mean to
kill!

MONTAGUE. [Looks at paper.] Merciful heavens!

JACK. And look here! [Unfolds a paper, which has pasted on it bits of
a torn and charred note.] He threw this in the fireplace, and it didn't
burn.

MONTAGUE. Bullen!

JACK. In Grimes' own handwriting: "My Dear Porter--I will call"... you
can see what that word was... "at eight-thirty. Very urgent." How's
that?

MONTAGUE. Man, it's ghastly! [A pause.] How did you manage to get these?

JACK. It's a long story.

MONTAGUE. How did Grimes work it? Money?

JACK. Not a dollar.

MONTAGUE. What then?

JACK. Just bluffed him. Party loyalty! What was he named for?

MONTAGUE. But in a suit like this!

JACK. Never was a better test! If Hegan lost this case, he'd be wiped
off the slate, and the organization might go down at the next election.
And what were you put in for, judge Porter? Don't you see?

MONTAGUE. I see! It takes my breath away!

JACK. [Looking about.] And what a place for us to meet in! Did you see
Grimes?

MONTAGUE. Yes.

JACK. I'll wager he came to tell Hegan about it.

MONTAGUE. No doubt of it.

JACK. God! I'd give one hand to have heard them!

MONTAGUE. Don't wish that! It's embarrassing enough as it is!

JACK. [Staring at him.] You'll see it through? You won't back out?

MONTAGUE. Oh, I'll see it through... trust me for that. But it's
devilish awkward!

JACK. Why did you come here?

MONTAGUE. I tried not to. But Miss Hegan insisted.

JACK. [Laughing.] The same here! I was fair caught!

MONTAGUE. And now she'll think we learned it here. I'll have to explain
to her...

JACK. What?

MONTAGUE. I Must!

JACK. No! [LAURA appears at windows, centre, and hears the rest, which
is in excited tones.] It is not to be thought of!

MONTAGUE. But I can't help it, man! Miss Hegan will think I've been
eavesdropping!

JACK. Do you realize what you're proposing, man? You'll ruin everything!
We've got Grimes dead... we can land him in jail! But if Hegan heard any
whisper of it, they'd balk everything!

MONTAGUE. But how?

JACK. They'd hold up the decision of the Court...

MONTAGUE. Nonsense! With all that they'd stand to lose...

LAURA. [Coming forward.] I beg pardon, Mr. Bullen.

JACK. Oh!

LAURA. I didn't wish to hear what you were saying. But I couldn't
help it. I was caught unawares. [The three stare at each other.] It is
something that involves my father. [Looking at the papers in BULLEN's
hands.] Mr. Bullen has brought you some evidence. Is that so, Mr.
Montague?

MONTAGUE. [In a low voice.] Yes, Miss Hegan.

LAURA. And you wished to take me into your confidence?

MONTAGUE. I wished to make it impossible for you to think we had
obtained this evidence in your home.

LAURA. I See.

MONTAGUE. You will do us the justice to recognize that we did not seek
admission here.

LAURA. Yes; I do that. [A pause.] All that I can say is, that if you
think it best to take me into your confidence, you may trust me to the
bitter end.

MONTAGUE. Miss Hegan, Mr. Bullen has brought me evidence which proves
that the decision of the Court, which is to be made known tomorrow, has
been... improperly affected.

LAURA. [Quickly.] By whom?

MONTAGUE. By Robert Grimes.

LAURA. [Starts wildly.] And the evidence involves my father?

MONTAGUE. Your father will be the chief one to profit from the change.

LAURA. [Sinks back against the table; stares away from them,
whispering.] To Grimes... two hundred thousand on Court deal! I see! I
see! [Faces them, weakly.] And what... what do you mean to do?

MONTAGUE. I intend to wait until the decision has been announced, which
will be tomorrow, and then to call a public meeting and present the
evidence.

LAURA. [Starts to implore him; then controls herself.] Yes, yes... that
is just. But then... see! It hasn't been done yet!

MONTAGUE. How do you mean?

LAURA. The decision hasn't come out. It could be stopped!

JACK. Why stop it?

LAURA. That would prevent the wrong! I would... oh, I see! You want to
expose Grimes! You'd rather it happened!

JACK. The crime has already been committed.

LAURA. And you, Mr. Montague... you prefer it so?

MONTAGUE. I had never thought of any other possibility.

LAURA. Listen! I don't understand the matter very clearly. The Grand
Avenue Railroad case...

MONTAGUE. It is an effort to annul a franchise which was obtained by
proven bribery.

LAURA. Then, if the public could win, it would be worth while, would it
not?

MONTAGUE. It would establish a precedent of vast importance. But how
could that be done?

LAURA. We have a hold upon these men... we could compel them to give
way!

MONTAGUE. They would never do it, Miss Hegan... they have too much at
stake.

LAURA. But... the evidence you have! Mr. Bullen said you could send
Grimes to jail.

MONTAGUE. That was just wild talk. Grimes has the district attorney and
the courts. He could never be punished for anything.

LAURA. But the exposure!

JACK. He's been exposed a hundred times. What does that matter to him?

LAURA. But then... my father is involved.

JACK. Quite true, Miss Hegan...

LAURA. And I can make him see how wrong it is.

JACK. You can make him see it! But you can't make him do anything!

LAURA. Ah, but you don't know my father... truly, you don't. He does
these evil things, but at heart he's a kind and loyal man! And he loves
me... I am his only daughter... and I can help him to see what is right.
We have always understood each other; he will listen to me as he would
not to any one else in the world.

JACK. But what can you say to him? We can't put our evidence in your
hands...

LAURA. I don't need your evidence. I must tell you that I, too, have
found out something about this case. I know that my father paid Mr.
Grimes to influence the decision of that Court. And I know how much he
paid him.

MONTAGUE. Miss Hegan!

JACK. Good God!

LAURA. You see, I am not afraid to trust you.... [A pause.] What is the
nature of your evidence against Grimes?

MONTAGUE. It comes from an eye-witness of his interview with the judge.

LAURA. And it is some one you can trust?

MONTAGUE. It's for Bullen to tell you.

JACK. The judge has a nephew, a dissipated chap, whose inheritance he is
holding back... and who hates him in consequence. The nephew happens to
be a college chum of mine. He witnessed the interview and he brought me
the evidence.

LAURA. I see. Then, certainly, I have a case. And don't you see what a
hold that gives me upon my father?

JACK. Miss Hegan, you are a brave woman, and I would like to give way to
you. But you could accomplish nothing. This suit, which is nominally in
the public interest, is really backed by Murdock and his crowd, who are
fighting your father; you must realize his position.. . the thousand
ties that bind him... all the habits of a lifetime! Think of the friends
he has to protect; you don't know...

LAURA. I know it all. And, on the other hand, I know some things that
you do not know. I know that my father is not a happy man. There is a
canker eating at his heart... the fruit of life has turned to ashes
on his lips. And he has one person in all this world that he loves.. .
myself. He has toiled and fought for me... all these years he has told
himself that he was making his money for me. And now he finds that it
brings me only misery and grief... it is as useless to me as it is to
him! And now, suppose I should go to him and say: "Father, you have
committed a crime. And I cannot stand it another hour. You must choose
here and now... you must give up this fight against the people... you
must give up this career, and come with me and help me to do good in the
world. Or else"... [her voice breaking.]... "I shall have to leave you!
I shall refuse to touch a dollar of your money; I shall refuse in any
way to share your guilt!" Don't you see? He will know that I am speaking
the truth... and that I mean every word of it. Oh, gentlemen, believe
me... my father would be as strong to atone for his injustices as he
has been to commit them! Surely, you can't refuse me this chance to save
him?

JACK. Miss Hegan...

MONTAGUE. For God's sake, Jack...

JACK. Excuse me, Montague. How long would you expect us to wait, Miss
Hegan?

LAURA. You need not wait at all. You could go right ahead with your own
plans. Meantime, I can go to my father... I will have tonight to plead
with him, and tomorrow morning you will know if I have succeeded.

JACK. Very well... I will consent to that.

LAURA. Let Mr. Montague come to my father's office tomorrow morning at
ten o'clock. I shall not give him up... even if I have to follow him
there! And now... good-bye... [Starts toward the door, breaks down and
cries.] Thank you! Thank you!

[Stretches out her hands to them.]

MONTAGUE. [Springing toward her.] Miss Hegan!

LAURA. Give me a little courage! Tell me you think I shall succeed!

MONTAGUE. [Seizing her hand.] I believe you will, Miss Hegan!

LAURA. Ah! Thank you!

MONTAGUE. [Kisses her hand; tries to speak; overcome.] Good-bye!

LAURA. [Exit.] Ah, God!

JACK. I understand, old man! If only she weren't so rich!

MONTAGUE. If only she weren't...

JACK. Yes, yes, dear boy; I know how it is. You're troubled with a
conscience, and yours must be strictly a cottage affair! But forget it
just now, old fellow... we've got work before us. Play ball!

[Takes him by the shoulder; they go off.]

[CURTAIN]




ACT III

HEGAN'S office in Wall street. A large room, furnished with severe
simplicity. At the left a large table, with half a dozen chairs about
it, and a "ticker" near the wall; at the right, a flat-topped desk and a
telephone. Entrance centre.

[At rise: ANDREWS stands by desk; takes some papers, looks them over,
makes note and replaces them.]

PARKER. [Enters.] Say, Andrews, what's the reply to these letters of the
Fourth National?

ANDREWS. Give them here; I'll see to them.

PARKER. Any orders for the brokers this morning?

ANDREWS. I'm writing them myself.

PARKER. Something special, eh? All right. [Looks at ticker.] Hello!
Listen to this: "There is a rumor, widely current, that the decision of
the Court of Appeals in the matter of the Public vs. the Grand Avenue
Railroad Company will be handed down to-day!" Gee whiz, I wonder if
that's so?

ANDREWS. I have heard the rumor.

PARKER. There was a reporter here yesterday, trying to pump me. I'll bet
they're watching the boss.

ANDREWS. Yes; no doubt of that.

PARKER. Cracky! I'd like to know which way it'll go!

ANDREWS. A good many others would like to know, I've no doubt.

PARKER. I'll bet my hat the boss knows!

ANDREWS. It may be.

[A pause; PARKER continues to read ticker.]

PARKER. I don't suppose you've heard anything, have you?

ANDREWS. I never hear, Parker.

PARKER. Oh, say... come off. Why don't you drop a fellow a hint now and
then?

ANDREWS. I can't afford to.

PARKER. It would never go beyond me. [A pause.] Say, Andrews.

ANDREWS. Well?

PARKER. Would you like to invest a bit for me now and then?

ANDREWS. I'm not hankering to, especially.

PARKER. I'll go halves with you on the profits.

ANDREWS. And how about the losses?

PARKER. There wouldn't be any losses.

ANDREWS. Cut it out, Parker... we don't want that kind of a thing in the
office. [Handing him paper.] Here... I want three copies of this. And
take my advice and live on your salary.

PARKER. Thanks. I wish the salary increased as fast as the bills do!
[Starts to door; sees LAURA.] Oh! Good morning, Miss Hegan!

LAURA. [Enters hurriedly.] Good morning.

ANDREWS. Good morning, Miss Hegan.

PARKER exit.

LAURA. Mr. Andrews, where was my father last night?

ANDREWS. He had an important conference...

LAURA. He did not come to the house.

ANDREWS. No, Miss Hegan; it was too late. He stayed downtown...

LAURA. And you were not home, either.

ANDREWS. I was with him.

LAURA. It is too bad! I have been trying all night to find either of
you.

ANDREWS. Why... your father had no idea when he left...

LAURA. I know. Something has turned up...

ANDREWS. Nothing wrong, I hope.

LAURA. I must see my father as soon as possible. Ile will be here this
morning?

ANDREWS. Any minute, Miss Hegan.

LAURA. He will surely come?

ANDREWS. Not the slightest doubt of it. Nothing could keep him away.

LAURA. I wish to see him the moment he comes. And if he should call up
or send word...

ANDREWS. I will see that he is informed, Miss Hegan.

LAURA. Thank you. [A pause.] The Court decision is expected to-day, is
it not, Mr. Andrews?

ANDREWS. [Hesitates.] There has been a rumor, Miss Hegan.

LAURA. And so there will be considerable disturbance of the market?

ANDREWS. Presumably.

LAURA. And my father has made preparations?

ANDREWS. Yes.

LAURA. That is what the conference was about?

ANDREWS. I presume so, Miss Hegan.

LAURA. By the way, Mr. Andrews, I expect Mr. Montague here at ten
o'clock. Please let me know when he comes.

ANDREWS. Yes, Miss Hegan. [Goes to the door, then turns.] Here is Mr.
Hegan now.

LAURA. [Starting up.] Ah!

ANDREWS. [Holding open door.] Good morning, Mr. Hegan.

HEGAN. [Enters.] Good morning.

LAURA. Father!

HEGAN. Why, Laura! [ANDREWS exit.] What are you doing here?

LAURA. I've come to have a talk with you.

HEGAN. To have a talk with me?

LAURA. Come in, please, father. Shut the door.

HEGAN. Yes, my dear; but...

LAURA. I came into the city on the next train after you. I have been
hunting for you ever since... I have been up all night. I have something
of the utmost urgency to talk with you about.

HEGAN. What is it?

LAURA. Come and sit down, please.

HEGAN. Yes, my dear.

LAURA. Listen, father. Yesterday afternoon, when we were talking, you
told me that you had never done anything to influence the courts in
their decisions.

HEGAN. Yes, Laura.

LAURA. And you told me that nobody else ever did it, either for you or
for your companies.

HEGAN. Yes, but...

LAURA. And, father, you told me a falsehood.

HEGAN. Laura!

LAURA. I am very sorry, but I have to say it. It was a falsehood; and it
is but one of many falsehoods that you have told me. I understand just
why you did it you think I ought not to ask about these things, because
it will make me unhappy; and so, for my own good, you do not hesitate to
tell me things that are not true.

HEGAN. My child, it is your father that you are talking to!

LAURA. It is my father, and a father who knows that I love him very
dearly, and who will realize it hurts me to say these things, fully as
much as it hurts him to hear them. But they must be said... and said
now.

HEGAN. Why now? Just at this moment...

LAURA. I know what you are going to say. At this moment you are very
busy...

HEGAN. My dear, the Exchange will open in an hour. And I am in the midst
of a big campaign. I have important orders for my brokers, and a hundred
other matters to attend to. And I expect Grimes here any minute...

LAURA. Grimes?

HEGAN. Yes, my dear.

LAURA. You are not through with him yet, then?

HEGAN. No, Laura...

LAURA. Well, even so! Mr. Grimes must wait until I have said what I have
to say to you.

HEGAN. What is it, Laura?

LAURA. You are expecting the decision of the Court of Appeals on the
Grand Avenue Railroad case at noon today.

HEGAN. Why, yes...

LAURA. The decision will be in your favor. And you and Grimes are
planning to gamble on it, and to make a great deal of money.

HEGAN. Yes, my dear.

LAURA. And you paid Grimes two hundred thousand dollars to fix the
decision of the Court.

HEGAN. [Starting violently.] Laura!

LAURA. Grimes went to judge Porter's house the night before last and
induced him to change his vote on the case.

HEGAN. Laura!

LAURA. And so, what was to have been the minority opinion of the Court
is to be given out today as the Court's decision.

HEGAN. My God!

LAURA. You do not deny that this is the truth?

HEGAN. You overheard us at the house!

LAURA. Not one word, father.

HEGAN. But you must have!

LAURA. Father, throughout this conversation, you may honor me by
assuming that I am telling you the absolute truth. And I will be glad
when you will give me the same privilege.

HEGAN. Then, how did you learn it?

LAURA. That, unfortunately, I am not at liberty to tell you.

HEGAN. Then other people know it?

LAURA. They do.

HEGAN. Good God! [Stares at her, dumbfounded.] Who are these people?

LAURA. I cannot tell you that.

HEGAN. But, Laura... you must!

LAURA. It is impossible.

HEGAN. But... how can that be?

LAURA. I cannot discuss the matter.

HEGAN. But think... my dear! I am your father, and you must trust me...
you must help me...

LAURA. Please do not ask me. I have given my word.

HEGAN. Your word! [Gazes about, distracted.] You take the part of others
against your own flesh and blood!

LAURA. Listen, father! Think of me for a minute, and how it seems to me.
Do not be so ignoble as to think only of the exposure...

HEGAN. But, my child, realize what it will mean if this comes out! Are
these people among my enemies?

LAURA. That depends upon circumstances.

HEGAN. I don't understand you.

LAURA. I will try to explain, if you will be patient with me.

HEGAN. Go on! Go on!

LAURA. Father, you know what has been happening to me during the past
few months. You know how unhappy I have been. And now you have committed
a crime... a dreadful, dreadful crime!

HEGAN. My dear!

LAURA. I wish to make it clear to you... I am in desperate earnest. I
have taken all night to think it over, and I am not making any mistake.
I have made up my mind that, come what will, and cost what it may, I
must clear myself of the responsibility for these evils.

HEGAN. In what way are you responsible?

LAURA. In every way imaginable. My whole life is based upon them...
everything that I have and enjoy is stained with the guilt of them...
the house in which I live, the clothing that I wear, the food that I
eat. And I shall never again know what it is to be happy, while I have
that fact upon my conscience. Don't you see?

HEGAN. I see.

LAURA. I tried all night to find you. I wanted to have a chance to talk
with you, quietly. And, now, instead, I have to do it here, amid all the
rush and strain of this dreadful Wall Street. But so it is.. . I must
say it here. Father, I have come to plead with you, to plead with you
upon my knees. Listen to me... don't turn me away!

HEGAN. What do you wish me to do?

LAURA. First of all, I wish you to give up this illegal advantage that
you have gained. I wish you to stop this decision, and give the people
the victory to which they are entitled.

HEGAN. But, my dear, that is madness! How can I...

LAURA. You compelled Grimes to do this thing... you can compel him to
undo it!

HEGAN. But, my dear, it would ruin me!

LAURA. If you do what I ask you to do, ruin will not matter.

HEGAN. What do you ask me?

LAURA. I wish you to stop this mad career... to give up this money
game... to drop it utterly! To stop selling stocks and manipulating
markets; to stop buying politicians and franchises... to sell out
everything... to withdraw. I want you to do it now... today.. . this
very hour!

HEGAN. But, my dear...

LAURA. I want you to come with me, and help me to find happiness again,
by doing some good in the world. I want you to use your power and your
talents to help people, instead of to destroy them.

HEGAN. My child! That is something very easy to talk about, but not so
easy to do!

LAURA. We will work together, and find ways to do it.

HEGAN. It seems possible, from your point of view... with your noble
ideals, and your sheltered life...

LAURA. My sheltered life! That is just what I can no longer endure! That
I should have ease and comfort, while others suffer... that my father
should take part in this mad struggle for money and power, in order
to give me a sheltered life! I must make it impossible for that to
continue! I must make you understand that all your money is powerless to
bring me happiness... that it is poisoning my life as well as your own!

HEGAN. [Gravely.] Laura, I have tried to protect you... that is the
natural instinct of a father... to keep evil things from his daughter's
knowledge. If I have told you untruths, as you say, that has been the
one reason. But since you will not have it so... since you must face the
facts of the world...

LAURA. I Must!

HEGAN. Very well, then... you shall face them. You tell me to give up
this case... to change back the Court's decision, so that the public
may reap the advantage. Do you realize that the public has nothing to do
with this suit?... That it is a covert attack upon me by an unscrupulous
enemy?

LAURA. You mean Murdock?

HEGAN. Murdock. You know something of his career, perhaps... something
of his private life, too. And if I should turn back, as you ask, the
public would gain nothing... he would be the only one to profit. He
would raid my securities; he would throw my companies into bankruptcy;
he would draw my associates away from me... in the end, he would take my
place in the traction field. Is that what you wish to bring about?

LAURA. It is not that that I am thinking of. It is the corrupting of the
Court...

HEGAN. The Court! Do you know why Grimes and I had to do what we did?

LAURA. No.

HEGAN. And yet you have judged me! What would you say if I told you that
we had information that one of the judges had received a thousand shares
of Grand Avenue stock from Murdock? And that another had been promised a
seat in the United States Supreme Court by that eminent Republican?

LAURA. Oh! Horrible!

HEGAN. You see what the game is?

LAURA. But, father! The buying and selling of the powers of the
Government...

HEGAN. The "Government" consisting of politicians who have gotten
themselves elected for the purpose of selling out to the highest bidder.
For ten years now I have been in charge of these properties. .. I have
had the interests of thousands of investors in my keeping... and all
the while I have been like a man surrounded by a pack of wolves. I
defended myself as I could... in the end, I found that the best way to
defend was by attacking. In other words, I had to go into politics, to
make the control of the "Government" a part of my business. Don't you
see?

LAURA. Yes, I see. But why play such a game?

HEGAN. Why? Because it is the only game I have ever known... the only
game there is to play. That is the way I have lived my life... the way
I have risen to power and command. I played it for myself, and for my
friends, and for those I loved.

LAURA. You played it for me! And, oh! father! father!... Can't you see
what that means to me? To realize that all my life has been based upon
such things! Don't you see how I can't let it go on... how, if you
refuse to do what I ask you to, it will be impossible for me to touch a
dollar of your money?

HEGAN. Laura!

LAURA. Just that, father! I should never again be able to face my
conscience!

HEGAN. [After a pause.] Listen to me, dear. You know that I have always
meant to withdraw...

LAURA. I know that. And that has been a confession! You know that you
are wrecking your life-wrecking everything! And if you mean to stop, why
not stop?

HEGAN. But, my dear, at this moment... in the midst of the battle. ..

LAURA. At this moment you are on the point of doing something that will
put a brand upon your conscience for the balance of your career. And at
this moment you are confronted with the realization that you are ruining
your daughter's life. You see her before you, desperate... frantic with
shame and grief. And you have to make up your mind, either to drive her
from you, heart-broken... or else to turn your face from these evils,
and to take up a new way of life.

HEGAN. [Broken and crushed, sits staring at her.] Laura!

LAURA. [Stretching out her arms to him.] Father! A knock at the door;
they start.

GRIMES. [Enters.] Oh! Beg pardon!

HEGAN. Come in.

LAURA. [Starting up.] No!

HEGAN. Come in! You must know it!

GRIMES. What is it?

HEGAN. Shut the door! Grimes, the game is up!

GRIMES. How d'ye mean?

HEGAN. We've been betrayed. Somebody knows all about the Court
decision... about what passed between you and Porter, and between you
and me!

GRIMES. The hell you say!

HEGAN. We're threatened with exposure!

GRIMES. Who is it?

HEGAN. I don't know.

GRIMES. But, then...

HEGAN. My daughter tells me. But she is not at liberty to give the
names.

GRIMES. Well, I'll be damned! [He stares from HEGAN to LAURA; then comes
and sits, very deliberately, where he can gaze at them. A long pause;
then, nodding toward them.] What's her game?

HEGAN. [Weakly.] She will tell you.

GRIMES. [Looking at her.] Well?

LAURA. I am here to plead with my father to turn back from this
wickedness.

GRIMES. [Stares.] And do what, ma'am?

LAURA. Quit Wall Street, and devote himself to some useful work.

GRIMES. [After a pause.] And if he won't?

LAURA. I have told him he must choose between his present career and his
daughter's love.

GRIMES. [Gazes at LAURA, then in front of him; slowly shakes his head.]
I can't make out our young people. When I was a boy, young women looked
up to their parents. What's your father done to you, that you should
turn against him?

LAURA. I have not turned against him, Mr. Grimes.

GRIMES. [Indicating HEGAN, who sits in an attitude of despair.] Look at
him!

[A pause.]

LAURA. I am pleading with him for his own good... to give up this cruel
struggle...

GRIMES. To turn tail and run from his enemies?

LAURA. It is of my duty to the public that I am thinking, Mr. Grimes.

GRIMES. You owe no duty to this world higher than your duty to your
father.

LAURA. You think that?

GRIMES. I think it.

LAURA. [Hesitates a moment, then turns.] Father! What do you say? Is
that true?

HEGAN. [Crushed.] I don't know, my dear.

GRIMES. God Almighty! And this is Jim Hegan! [To LAURA.] Where'd you get
onto these ideas, ma'am?

LAURA. [In a low voice.] I think, Mr. Grimes, it might be best if you
did not ask me to discuss this question. Our points of view are too
different.

GRIMES. [Shrugs his shoulders.] As you please, ma'am. But you needn't
mind me... I ain't easy to offend. And I'm only trying to understand
you.

LAURA. [After a silence.] Mr. Grimes, I had the good fortune to be
brought up in a beautiful and luxurious home; but not long ago I began
to go down into the slums and see the homes of the people. I saw sights
that made me sick with horror.

GRIMES. No doubt, ma'am.

LAURA. I found the people in the grip of a predatory organization that
had bound them hand and foot, and was devouring them alive.

GRIMES. You've been listening to tales, ma'am. We do a lot for the
people.

LAURA. You treat them to free coal and free picnics and free beer, and
so you get their votes; and then you sell them out to capitalists like
my father.

GRIMES. Humph!

LAURA. You sell them out to any one, high or low, who will pay for the
privilege of exploiting them. You sell them to the rum-dealer and the
dive-keeper and the gambler. You sell them to the white-slave trader.

GRIMES. There's no such person, Miss Hegan.

LAURA. You offer an insult to my intelligence, Mr. Grimes. I have met
with him and his work. There was a girl of the slums... her name was
Annie Rogers. She was a decent girl; and she was lured into a dive and
drugged and shut up in a brothel, a prisoner. She escaped to the street,
pursued, and a friend of mine saved her. And, high and low, among the
authorities of this city, we sought for justice for that girl, and there
was no justice to be had. Yesterday afternoon I learned that she cut her
own throat.

GRIMES. I see.

LAURA. And that happened, Mr. Grimes! It happened in the City of New
York! I saw it with my own eyes!

GRIMES. Such things have been, ma'am.

LAURA. And you permit them.

GRIMES. I?

LAURA. You permit them

GRIMES. I can't attempt to discuss prostitution with a lady. Such things
existed long before I was born.

LAURA. You could use your power to drive the traffic from the city.

GRIMES. Yes, ma'am; I suppose I could. But if I'd been that sort of a
man, do you think I'd ever had the power?

LAURA. How neatly parried! What sort of a man are you, anyway?

GRIMES. [Looks at hey fixedly.] I'll tell you the sort of man I am,
ma'am. [A pause.] I wasn't brought up in a beautiful, luxurious home.
I was brought up with five brothers, in two rooms on the top floor of a
rear tenement on Avenue B; I was a little street "mick," and then I was
a prize "scrapper," and the leader of a gang. When a policeman chased
me upstairs, my mother stood at the head and fought him off with a
rolling-pin. That was the way we stood by our children, ma'am; and we
looked to them to stand by us. Once, when I was older, my enemies tried
to do me... they charged me with a murder that I never done, ma'am. But
d'ye think my old father ever stopped to ask if I done it or not, ma'am?
Not much. "Don't mention that, Bob, my boy," says he... "it's all part
of the fight, an' we're wid yer." [A pause.] I looked about me at the
world, ma'am, and I found it was full of all sorts of pleasant things,
that I'd never had, and never stood a chance of havin'. They were for
the rich... the people on top. And they looked on with scorn... I was
poor and I was low, and I wasn't fit for anything. And so I set to
climb, ma'am. I shouldered my way up. I met men that fought me; I fought
them back, and I won out. That's the sort of man I am.

LAURA. I see. A selfish man, bent upon power at any price! A brutal man,
profiting by the weakness of others! An unscrupulous man, trading upon
fear and greed! A man who has stopped at no evil to gain his purpose!

GRIMES. I am what the game has made me.

LAURA. Not so! Not so! Many another man has been born to a fate like
yours, and has fought his way up from the pit... to be a tower of
strength for goodness and service, an honor to his people and himself.

GRIMES. I've not met any such, ma'am.

LAURA. No; you've not sought for them. You did not need them in your
business. The men you needed were the thugs and the criminals, who could
stuff ballot-boxes for you... the dive-keepers and the vice-sellers, who
would contribute to your campaign funds! And you have dealt with them...
you have built up the power they gave you into a mighty engine of
corruption and wrong! And you are master of it... you use it to
wring tribute from high and low! Selling immunity to dive-keepers and
betraying helpless young girls! Naming legislators and judges, and
receiving bribes to corrupt the highest Court in the State.

HEGAN. Laura...

LAURA. Father, I did not seek this discussion! He challenged me... and
he shall hear the truth! For all these months the thing that has been
driving me to desperation has been the knowledge that my father was the
business associate and ally of a master of infamy like Robert Grimes!

GRIMES. Thanks, ma'am! And so now he's to break with me!

[A knock at the door.]

ANDREWS. [Enters, centre.] Mr. Hegan, these orders for your brokers must
be signed.

HEGAN. I won't sign them!

ANDREWS. Sir?

HEGAN. Never mind them.

GRIMES. [Springing to his feet.] Jim Hegan, you're mad! [TO ANDREWS.] Go
out, will you? [ANDREWS exit.] Hegan, man... surely you don't mean this?

HEGAN. Yes... I'm sick of it!

GRIMES. But, man, think of the rest of us!... What are we to do?

HEGAN. You can buy just the same.

GRIMES. But without you? Why, we won't be able to corner Murdock! And if
he gets out of this hole, it'll be worse than ever! There'll be hell to
pay!

HEGAN. I don't care.

GRIMES. But, man, you've pledged yourself! Look at what Harris has
done!... What excuse will you be able to make to him? And what will you
tell Henry Stevens?

HEGAN. I'll tell them I've quit.

GRIMES. But you told them last night you were going in with every dollar
you could raise! You told Isaacson he could break with Murdock! And now
you'll tell them you've turned tail and run! Why, Hegan, it's treason!

HEGAN. Listen to me...

GRIMES. I don't want to listen to you! Half an hour from now you'll
be ashamed of yourself... wishing that nobody had heard you! You'll be
begging me not to mention it! You... Jim Hegan... the traction king!
To lose your nerve over a little thing like this! What's come over you,
anyhow... after all the things we've been through together? Why, man...

[The 'phone rings.]

HEGAN. Hello! Who is it? Oh, Isaacson. Yes; I'll speak with him. Hello,
Isaacson! Yes. No; I've not forgotten. I'll do whatever I said I'd do.
Er... yes; that's all right. I've been delayed. Yes. I'll get the
money to you. Right away. Oh, certainly, that's all right. [Hangs up
receiver.] Ah, God!

GRIMES. Hegan, listen here. You're in the midst of a battle. And you're
the general. Everything depends on you this morning. And you've a right
to be afraid.. but you've no right to let others see it. You've no
right... do you understand me? And, by God, I won't let you!... I'll be
a man for two of you! Shake yourself together now! [Seizes him.] Come,
man! Shake yourself together!

HEGAN. But think of the exposure!

GRIMES. The exposure! And this is Jim Hegan talking! How many times have
you been exposed already? And how many times have I been?

HEGAN. But this is different.

GRIMES. How different? We've got the police, and we've got the district
attorney, and we've got the courts. What more do we want? What can they
do but talk in the newspapers? And is there anything they haven't said
about us already? [Takes HEGAN by the arm, and laughs.] Come, old man!
As my friend Leary says: "Dis is a nine-day town. If yez kin stand de
gaff for nine days, ye're all right!" We'll stand the gaff!

HEGAN. I'm tired of standing it.

GRIMES. Yes, we all get tired now and then. But this afternoon it'll be
Murdock that's tired. Think of him, Hegan... try to realize him a bit!
You've got him where you want him at last! Remember what he did to you
in the Brooklyn Ferry case! Remember how he lied to you in the Third
Avenue case! And he told Isaacson, only last week, that he'd never let
up on you till he'd driven you out of the traction field!

HEGAN. Did he say that?

GRIMES. He did that! And only yesterday he said he was getting ready to
finish you! He's as sure of this Court decision as I am of the sunrise!
I'm told he's short already over a quarter of a million shares!

HEGAN. But his judges'll get word to him... he'll buy!

GRIMES. Of course! But that's just why you ought to be busy! Buy first,
and make him pay... damn his soul!

ANDREWS. [Knocks and enters.] Mr. Stevens is here, Mr. Hegan.

GRIMES. Henry Stevens? We'll see him. [ANDREWS exit.] Come on, man!
We'll go over to your brokers and take the orders. It'll give you a
smell of the powder smoke.

LAURA. [AS HEGAN Starts to follow.] Father, you are going with him?

HEGAN. My dear child, what can I do?

LAURA. But think of the disgrace... the shame of it! You will carry it
with you all your life!

HEGAN. I can't help it. I am bound hand and foot.

LAURA. Father! [She rushes to him, and flings her arms about him.] Do
you realize what you are doing? You are driving me away from you!.. .
You are casting me off! And all for a few more dollars!

HEGAN. My dear, it is not that. My word is pledged.

LAURA. You are trampling me in the dust. You are spurning all that is
best in your life!

GRIMES. Come, come, man! The game is called

HEGAN. Let me go, my dear.

LAURA. Father!

HEGAN. No! No! [He gently, but firmly, puts her arms from him.]
Good-bye, dear.

LAURA. Father! [HEGAN and GRIMES go out centre; she sinks by the
table, and buries her face in her arms, sobbing; after a considerable,
interval, a knock on the door, centre.] Come in!

MONTAGUE. [Enters.] Well?

LAURA. I have failed. [Rises and stretches out her arms.] Failed! He has
gone with Grimes!

MONTAGUE. I saw him go, Miss Hegan.

LAURA. [Swiftly.] And yet... I have not failed utterly. I have failed
to turn back the decision... to save him from this disgrace. But that is
not all.

MONTAGUE: How do you mean?

LAURA. I shall not give him up... and, in the end, I shall have my way;
I can see that quite clearly. Ah, how I hurt him! I almost broke his
heart! And just now he is in the midst of the battle... the rage of it
is on him. But, afterwards, he will recollect... he will be overwhelmed
with grief! And then he will see! He will do what I have begged him to!

MONTAGUE. Yes... perhaps that is so.

LAURA. I know what my love means to him! I know what he is at heart! And
when he sees that I mean to carry out my threat, to go by myself and
to refuse to touch his money... that will be more than he can bear, Mr.
Montague!

MONTAGUE. You mean to do that?

LAURA. I mean to do it! I mean to do it today; and I will never yield to
him... never until he has atoned for this wrong he has done! And don't
you see that I will win in the end?

MONTAGUE. Yes; I see.

LAURA. [Quickly.] Understand, that has nothing to do with your course.
I am not asking you to spare him. You must go ahead and do your duty...
you must do just what you would have done if I had never stood in the
way.

MONTAGUE. It is a terrible thing to me, Miss Hegan. I cannot turn
back...

LAURA. You must not! You must not think of it! It will be a part of my
father's punishment... and he has deserved it. He has prepared that cup,
and he must drink it... to the dregs!

MONTAGUE. You can bear it?

LAURA. It is not any question of what I can bear. It is a question of
the rights of the people. I saw that quite clearly, as my father talked
with me. Whether it is he who wins, or whether it is Murdock, it is
always the people that lose. And, let it hurt whom it may, the people
must have the truth!

MONTAGUE. And then... you will be able to forgive me! Ah, what a weight
you lift from me! I hardly dared to face the thought of what I had to
do! [Hesitating.] And then, the thought that you mean to renounce your
father's wealth... that you are going out into the world... alone...

LAURA. It will not be hard for me. You cannot know how I have hated my
past life. To know that my father has plundered the public... and then
to give his money, and call it charity. To be flattered and fawned
upon... to be celebrated and admired... and never for anything that I
am, but always for my money!

MONTAGUE. I understand what you feel! And see what your decision means
to me... it sets me free at last!

LAURA. Free!

MONTAGUE. Free to speak! Miss Hegan, I came to New York, and I met these
rich people, and I saw how their fortunes were poisoning their lives. I
saw men who could not have a real friend in the world, because of their
money. I saw young girls whose souls were utterly dead in them
because they had been brought up to think of themselves as keepers of
money-bags, and to guard against men who sought to prey upon them. I
hated the thing... I fled from it as I would from a plague. In that
world I had met a woman I might have loved... a woman who was noble and
beautiful and true; and yet I dared not speak to her... I dared not even
permit myself to know her... because I was a poor man, and she was rich.
But now she is to be poor also! And so I may speak!

LAURA. [Starting.] Oh!

MONTAGUE. Miss Hegan, from the first time I met you I felt that you were
the woman I should love. But then, as fate would have it, I found myself
preparing to attack your father; so I said that we must never meet
again. But now you see how it has happened. I have come to know you as I
never hoped to know you, and I know that I love you.

LAURA. I had no idea...

MONTAGUE. You say that you are going away alone. Let us go together. We
have the same purpose... we have the same battle to fight. We can go out
to the people and help to teach them.

LAURA. You... you know that you love me?

MONTAGUE. I love you! I want nothing so much as the chance to serve you
and help you. The chance to tell you so is more than I had ever ventured
to hope for. To find you free and alone... to be able to speak to you,
with no thought of wealth or position! To tell you that I love you...
just you! You!

LAURA. I hardly dare to think of it... now... here...

MONTAGUE. We can put all the past behind us... we can take a new start
and win our own way. If only you love me!

LAURA. Ah, to let myself be happy again. How can I?

MONTAGUE. If you love me, then we have the key to happiness... then
everything is clear before us. We can face the world together! Do you
love me? [Stretches out his arms to her.] Laura!

LAURA. [Sways toward him.] I love you.

MONTAGUE. [Embraces her.] My love!

CURTAIN





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Machine, by Upton Sinclair

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MACHINE ***

***** This file should be named 3304.txt or 3304.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/3/0/3304/

Produced by Charles Franks and the Online Distributed Proofreading team

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
