The Project Gutenberg EBook of Rebecca Mary, by Annie Hamilton Donnell

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Rebecca Mary

Author: Annie Hamilton Donnell

Posting Date: February 22, 2009 [EBook #3419]
Release Date: September, 2002

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK REBECCA MARY ***




Produced by An Anonymous Volunteer





REBECCA MARY

By Annie Hamilton Donnell



Contents

I. THE HUNDRED AND ONETH

II. THE THOUSAND QUILT

III. THE BIBLE DREAM

IV. THE COOK-BOOK DIARY

V. THE BEREAVEMENT

VI. THE FEEL DOLL

VII. THE PLUMMER KIND

VIII. ARTICLE SEVEN

IX. UN-PLUMMERED





The Hundred and Oneth



Rebecca Mary took another stitch. Then another. "Ninety-sevvun,
ninety-eight," she counted aloud, her little pointed face gravely
intent. She waited the briefest possible space before she took
ninety-nine. It was getting very close to the Time now. "At the hundred
an' oneth," Rebecca Mary whispered. "It's almost it." Her breath came
quicker under her tight little dress. Between her thin, light eyebrows a
crease deepened anxiously.

"Ninety--n-i-n-e," she counted, "one hun-der-ed"--it was so very close
now! The next stitch would be the hundred and oneth. Rebecca Mary's face
suddenly grew quite white.

"I'll wait a m-minute," she decided; "I'm just a little scared. When
you've been lookin' head to the hundred and oneth so LONG and you get
the very next door to it, it scares you a little. I'll wait until--oh,
until Thomas Jefferson crows, before I sew the hundred and oneth."

Thomas Jefferson was prospecting under the currant bushes. Rebecca Mary
could see him distinctly, even with her nearsighted little eyes, for
Thomas Jefferson was snow-white. Once in a while he stalked dignifiedly
out of the bushes and crowed. He might do it again any minute now.

The great sheet billowed and floated round Rebecca Mary, scarcely whiter
than her face. She held her needle poised, waiting the signal of Thomas
Jefferson. At any minute.... He was coming out now! A fleck of
snow-white was pricking the green of the currant leaves.

"He's out. Any minute he'll begin to cr--" He was already beginning! The
warning signals were out--chest expanding, neck elongating, and great
white wing aflap.

"I'm just a little scared," breathed the child in the foam of the sheet.
Then Thomas Jefferson crowed.

"Hundred and one!" Rebecca Mary cried out, clearly, courage born within
her at the crucial instant. The Time--the Time--had come. She had taken
her last stitch.

"It's over," she panted. "It always was a-coming, and it's come. I knew
it would. When it's come, you don't feel quite so scared. I'm glad it's
over."

She folded up the great sheet carefully, making all the edges meet with
painful precision. It took time. She had left the needle sticking in the
unfinished seam--in the hundred-and-oneth stitch--and close beside it
was a tiny dot of red to "keep the place."

"Rebecca! Rebecca Mary!" Aunt Olivia always called like that. If there
had been still another name--Rebecca Mary Something Else--she would have
called: "Rebecca! Rebecca Mary! Rebecca Mary Something Else!"

"Yes'm; I'm here."

"Where's 'here'?" sharply.

"HERE--the grape-arbor, I mean."

"Have you got your sheet?"

"I--yes'm."

"Is your stent 'most done?"

Rebecca Mary rose slowly to her reluctant little feet, and with the
heavy sheet across her arm went to meet the sharp voice. At last the
Time had come.

"Well?" Aunt Olivia was waiting for her answer. Rebecca Mary groaned.
Aunt Olivia would not think it was "well."

"Well, Rebecca Mary Plummer, you came to fetch my answer, did you? You
got your stent 'most done?" Aunt Olivia's hands were extended for the
folded sheet.

"I've got it DONE, Aunt 'Livia," answered little Rebecca Mary, steadily.
Her slender figure, in its quaint, scant dress, looked braced as if to
meet a shock. But Rebecca Mary was terribly afraid.

"Every mite o' that seam? Then I guess you can't have done it very well;
that's what I guess! If it ain't done well, you'll have to take it--"

"Wait--please, won't you wait, Aunt 'Livia? I've got to say something.
I mean, I've got all the over-'n'-overing I'm ever going to do done.
THAT'S what's done. The hundred-and-oneth stitch was my stent, and it's
done. I'm not ever going to take the hundred and twoth. I've decided."

Understanding filtered drop by drop into Aunt Olivia's bewildered brain.
She gasped at the final drop.

"Not ever going to take another stitch?" she repeated, with a calmness
that was awfuler than storm.

"No'm."

"You've decided?"

"Yes'm."

"May I ask when this--this state of mind began?"

Rebecca Mary girded herself afresh. She had such need of recruiting
strength.

"It's been coming on," she said. "I've felt it. I knew all the time it
was a-coming--and then it came."

It seemed to be all there. Why must she say any more? But still Aunt
Olivia waited, and Rebecca Mary read grim displeasure in capitals across
the gray field of her face. The little figure stiffened more and more.

"I've over-'n'-overed 'leven sheets," the steady little voice went on,
because Aunt Olivia was waiting, and it must, "and you said I did 'em
pretty well. I tried to. I was going to do the other one well, till you
said there was going to be another dozen. I couldn't BEAR another dozen,
Aunt Olivia, so I decided to stop. When Thomas Jefferson crowed I sewed
the hundred-and-oneth stitch. That's all there's ever a-going to be."

Rebecca Mary stepped back a step or two, as if finishing a speech and
retiring from her audience. There was even the effect of a bow in the
sudden collapse of the stiff little body. It was Aunt Olivia's turn now
to respond--and Aunt Olivia responded:

"You've had your say; now I'll have mine. Listen to me, Rebecca Mary
Plummer! Here's this sheet, and here's this needle in it. When you get
good and ready you can go on sewing. You won't have anything to eat till
you do. I've got through."

The grim figure swept right-about face and tramped into the house as
though to the battle-roll of drums. Rebecca Mary stayed behind, face to
face with her fate.

"She's a Plummer, so it'll be SO," Rebecca Mary thought, with the dull
little thud of a weight falling into her heart. Rebecca Mary was a
Plummer too, but she did not think of that, unless the un-swerving
determination in her stout little heart was the unconscious recognition
of it.

"I wonder"--her gaze wandered out towards the currant-bushes and came
to rest absently on Thomas Jefferson's big, white bulk--"I wonder if it
hurts very much." She meant, to starve. A long vista of food-less days
opened before her, and in their contemplation the weight in her heart
grew very heavy indeed.

"We were GOING to have layer-cake for supper. I'm VERY fond of
layer-cake," Rebecca Mary sighed, "I suppose, though, after a few
weeks"--she shuddered--"I shall be glad to have ANYTHING--just common
things, like crackers and skim-milk. Perhaps I shall want to eat
a--horse. I've heard of folks--You get very unparticular when you're
starving."

It was five o'clock. They WERE going to have supper at half past. She
could hear the tea things clinking in the house. She stole up to a
window. There was Aunt Olivia setting the layer-cake on the table. It
looked plump and rich, and it was sugared on top.

"There's strawberry jam in between it," mused Rebecca Mary, regretfully.
"I wish it was apple jelly. I could bear it better if it was apple
jelly." But it was jam. And there was honey, too, to eat with Aunt
Olivia's little fluffy biscuits. How very fond Rebecca Mary was of
honey!

Aunt Olivia stood in the kitchen doorway and rang the supper bell in
long, steady clangs just as usual. But no one responded just as usual,
and by the token she knew Rebecca Mary had not taken the other stitch
that lay between her and supper.

"She's a Plummer," sighed Aunt Olivia, inwardly, unrealizing her own
Plummership, as little Rebecca Mary had unrealized hers. Each recognized
only the other's. The pity that both must be Plummers!

Rebecca Mary stayed out of doors until bedtime. She made but one
confidant.

"I've done it, Thomas Jefferson," she said, sadly. "You ought to be
sorry for me, because if you hadn't crowed I shouldn't have sewed the
hundred and oneth. But you're not really to BLAME," she added, hastily,
mindful of Thomas Jefferson's feelings. "I should have done it sometime
if you hadn't crowed. I knew it was coming. I suppose now I shall have
to starve. You'd think it was pretty hard to starve, I guess, Thomas
Jefferson."

Thomas Jefferson made certain gloomy responses in his throat to the
effect that he was always starving; that any contributions on the
spot in the way of corn kernels, wheat grains, angleworms--any
little delicacies of the kind--would be welcome. And Rebecca Mary,
understanding, led the way to the corn bin. In the dark hours that
followed, the intimacy between the great white rooster and the little
white girl took on tenderer tones.

At breakfast next morning--at dinner time--at supper--Rebecca Mary
absented herself from the house. Aunt Olivia set on the meals regularly
and waited with tightening heartstrings. It did not seem to occur to her
to eat her own portions. She tasted no morsel of all the dainties she
got together wistfully. At nightfall the second day she began to feel
real alarm. She put on her bonnet and went to the minister's. He was
rather a new minister, and the Plummers had always required a good deal
of time to make acquaintance. But in the present stress of her need Aunt
Olivia did not stop to think of that.

"You must come over and--and do something," she said, at the conclusion
of her strange little story. "It seems to me it's time for the minister
to step in."

"What can I do, Miss Plummer?" the embarrassed young man ejaculated,
with a feeling of helplessness.

"Talk to her," groaned Aunt Olivia, in her agony. "Tell her what her
duty is. Rebecca Mary might listen to the minister. All she's got to do
is to take just one stitch to show her submission. It won't take but an
instant. I've got supper all out on the kitchen table--I don't care if
it's ten o'clock at night!"

"It isn't a case for the minister. It's a case for the Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Children!" fumed the minister's kind little
wife inwardly. And she stole away in the twilight to deal with little
Rebecca Mary herself. She came back to the minister by and by, red-eyed
and fierce.

"You needn't go over; I've been. It won't do any good, Robert. That
poor, stiff-willed, set little thing is starving by inches!"

"I think her aunt is, too!"

"Well, perhaps--I can't help it, Robert, perhaps the--aunt--ought--to."

"My dear!--Felicia!"

"I told you I couldn't help it. She is so hungry, Robert! If you had
seen her--What do you think she was doing when I got there?"

"Crying?"

"Crying! She was laughing. _I_ cried. She sat there under some
grapevines watching a great white rooster eat his supper. His name, I
think, is Thomas Jefferson."

"Yes, Thomas Jefferson," agreed the minister, with the assurance of
acquaintance. For Thomas Jefferson was one of his parishioners.

"Well, she was laughing at him in the shakiest, hungriest little voice
you ever heard. 'Is it good?' she says. 'It LOOKS good.' He was eating
raw corn. 'If I could, I'd eat supper with you when you're VERY hungry,
you don't mind eating things raw.' Then she saw me."

"Well?"

"Well, I coaxed her, Robert. It didn't do any good. Tomorrow somebody
must go there and interfere."

"She must be a remarkably strange child," the minister mused. He was
thinking of the holding-out powers of the three children he had a
half-ownership in.

"I don't think Rebecca Mary IS a child, Robert. She must be fifty years
old, at the least. She and her aunt are about the same age. Perhaps if
her mother had lived, or she hadn't made so many sheets, or learned to
knit and darn and cook--" The minister's kind little wife finished out
her sentence with a sigh. She took up a little garment in dire straits
to be mended. It suggested things to the minister.

"Can Rhoda darn?"

"RHODA!"

"Or make sheets and bread and things?"

"Robert, don't you feel well? Where is the pain?" But the laugh in the
pleasant blue eyes died out suddenly. Little Rebecca Mary lay too heavy
on the minister's wife's heart for mirth.

Aunt Olivia went into Rebecca Mary's room in the middle of the night.
She had been in three times before.

"She looks thinner than she did last time," Aunt Olivia murmured,
distressedly. "Tomorrow night--how long do children live without eating?
It's four meals now--four meals is a great many for a little thin thing
to go without!" Aunt Olivia had been without four meals too; she would
have been able to judge how it felt--if she had remembered that part.
She stood in her scant, long nightgown, gazing down at the little
sleeper. The veil was down and her heart was in her eyes.

Rebecca Mary threw out her arm and sighed. "It LOOKS good, Thomas
Jefferson," she murmured. "When you're VERY hungry you can eat things
raw." Suddenly the child sat up in bed, wide-eyed and wild. She did not
seem to see Aunt Olivia at all.

"Once I ate a pie!" she cried. "It wasn't a whole one, but I should eat
a whole one now--I think I should eat the PLATE now." She swayed back
and forth weakly, awake and not awake.

"Once I ate a layer-cake. There was jam in it. I wouldn't care if it
was apple jelly in it now--I'd LIKE apple jelly in it now. Once I ate
a pudding and a doughnut a-n-d--a--a--I think it was a horse. I'd eat
a horse now. Hush! Don't tell Aunt Olivia, but I'm going to
eat--to--e-at--Thom-as--Jeffer--" She swayed back on the pillows again.
Aunt Olivia shook her in an agony of fear--she was so white--she lay so
still.

"Rebecca! Rebecca Mary! Rebecca Mary PLUMMER!" Aunt Olivia shrilled in
her ear. "You get right out o' bed this minute and come downstairs and
eat your supper! It's high time you had something in your stomach--I
don't care if it's twelve o'clock. You get right out o' bed REBECCA
MARY!"

Aunt Olivia had the limp little figure in her arms, shaking it gently
again and again. Rebecca's startled eyes flew open. In that instant was
born inspiration in the brain of Aunt Olivia. She thought of an appeal
to make.

"Do you want ME to starve, too? Right here before your face and eyes? I
haven't eat a mouthful since you did, and I shan't till you DO."

Rebecca Mary slid to the floor with a soft thud of little brown, bare
feet. Slow comprehension dawned in her eyes. "Are your---- did you say
YOU was starving, too?"

"Yes"--grimly.

"Does it hurt you--too?"

"Yes"--unsteadily.

"VERY much?"

"YES."

"Why don't you eat something?"

"Because you don't. I'm waiting for you to."

"Shan't you ever?"

"Not if you don't."

Rebecca Mary caught her breath in a sob. "Shall I be--to blame?" She was
moving towards the door now. With an irresistible impulse Aunt Olivia
gathered her in her arms, and covered her lean little face with kisses.

"You poor little thing! You poor little thing! You poor little thing!"
over and over.

Rebecca Mary gazed up into the softened face and read something there.
It took her breath away. She could not believe it without further proof.

"You don't--I don't suppose you LOVE me?" panted Rebecca Mary. But Aunt
Olivia was gone out of the room in a swirl of white nightgown.

"Everything's on the table," she called back from the stairs. "I'm going
to light a fire. You come right down. I think it's high time--" her
voice trailing out thinly.

"She does," murmured Rebecca Mary, radiant of face.

At half past twelve o'clock they both ate supper, both in their scant,
white nightgowns, both very hungry indeed. But before she sat down in
her old place at the table, Rebecca Mary went round to Aunt Olivia's
place and whispered something rather shyly in her ear. She had been by
herself in a corner of the room for a moment.

"I've sewed the hundred and twoth," Rebecca Mary whispered.




The Thousand Quilt


"Good afternoon," Rebecca Mary said, politely.

The minister's wife was cutting little trousers out of big ones--the
minister's big ones. It was the old puzzle of how to steer clear of the
thin places.

"Boys grow so!" sighed, tenderly, the minister's wife, over her work.
She had not heard the voice from the doorway.

"Good afternoon"--again.

It was a quaint little figure in tight red calico standing there.
It might easily have stepped down from some old picture on the wall.
Rebecca Mary had a bundle in her arms. It was so large that it obscured
breast and face, and only a pair of grave blue eyes, presided over by
thin, light brows, seemed visible to the minister's wife. The trousers
puzzle merged into this one. Now who could--

"Oh! Oh, it's Miss Plummer's little girl Rebecca," she said, cordially.

"Rebecca Mary her NIECE," came, a little muffled, from behind the great
bundle.

"Rebecca Mary's niece---- Oh, you mean Miss Plummer's niece, and your
whole name is that! But I suppose she calls you Rebecca or Becky, for
short? Walk in, Rebecca."

But Rebecca Mary was struggling with the paralyzing vision of Aunt
Olivia calling her Becky. She had passed by the lesser wonder of being
called Rebecca without the Mary.

"Oh no'm, indeed; Aunt 'Livia never shortens me," gently gasped the
child. And the minister's wife, measuring from the bundle down, smiled
to herself. There did not seem much room for shortening.

"But walk in, dear--you're going to walk in? I hope you have come to
make me a little call?"

Rebecca Mary struggled out of her paralysis. Here was occasion for new
embarrassment. For Rebecca Mary was honest.

"N-o'm I mean, not a LITTLE call. I've come to spend the afternoon," she
said, slowly, "and I've brought my work."

The bundle--the great bundle--was her work! She advanced into the room
and began carefully to unroll it. It was the turn of the minister's wife
to be paralyzed. She pushed forward a chair, and the child sat down in
it.

"It's my Thousand Quilt that I'm making for Aunt 'Livia," explained
Rebecca Mary. "It's 'most done. There's a thousand pieces in it, and I'm
on the nine hundred and ninety-oneth. I thought proberly you'd have some
work, so I brought mine."

"Yes, I see--" The minister's wife stood looking down at the tight
little red figure among the gorgeous waves of the Thousand Quilt. They
eddied and surged around it in dizzy reds and purples and greens. She
was conscious of being a little seasick, and for relief she turned back
to the puzzle of the little trousers. It had been in her mind at first
to express sorrow at Rhoda's being unfortunately away--and the boys. Now
she was glad she hadn't, for it was quite plain enough that the visitor
had not come to spend the afternoon with the minister's children, but
with the minister's wife.

"It isn't she that's young--it's I," thought the minister's wife, with
kind, laughing eyes. "She's old enough to be my mother." "How old are
you, dear?" she added, aloud.

"Me? I guess you mean Aunt 'Livia, don't you? It's Aunt 'Livia's
birthday I'm making it for, it's going to be a present. Once she gave me
a present on my birthday."

Once!--the minister's wife remembered Rhoda's birthdays and the boys'.
Taken altogether, such a host of little birthdays! But this little old,
old visitor seemed to have had but one.

"My birthday is two days quicker than Aunt 'Livia's is," volunteered
the visitor, sociably. "We're 'most twins, you see. Aunt 'Livia
was fifty-six that time she gave me the present. She's agoing to be
fifty-nine when I give her this quilt--it's taken me ever since to make
it."

The minister's wife looked up from her cutting. So Rebecca Mary was only
fifty-nine!

"It's quite a long quilt," sighed Rebecca Mary. But pride woke in her
eyes as she gazed out on the splendors of the green and purple sea.
"A Thousand Quilt has so many stitches in it, but when you sew'em all
yourself--when you sew every single stitch--" The pride in Rebecca
Mary's grave blue eyes grew and grew.

"Robert," the minister's wife said that night to the minister, "it's an
awful quilt, but you ought to have seen her eyes! It's taken her three
years to make it--maybe you wouldn't be proud yourself!"

"Maybe YOU wouldn't, if Rhoda had made it."

"RHODA! Robert, she sewed one square of patchwork once and it made
her sick. I had to put her to bed. Speaking of 'once' reminds me--once
Rebecca Mary had a birthday present, Robert." She waited a little
anxiously for him to understand. The minister always understood, but
sometimes he made her wait.

"Felicia, are you trying to make me cry?" he said, and she was
satisfied. She went across to him, as she always did when she wanted
to cry herself. The floor was strewn with the tiniest boy's engine and
cars, and she remembered, as she zigzagged among them, that they had
been one of his very last birthday presents.

"It was--Robert, what do you think the present was? I'll give you three
guesses, but I advise you to guess a rooster."

"Thomas Jefferson," murmured the minister, as one who was acquainted.

"Yes, that is his name. How did you remember? She is very fond of
him--he is her intimatest friend, she says. So she is under great
obligations to her aunt. It's a large quilt, but it's none too large to
'cover' Thomas Jefferson. I'm going to help her buy a lining and cotton
batting."

"Cracked corn will make a good lining, but cotton bat--"

"Robert, this is not a comedy! If you'd seen Rebecca Mary, and the
quilt, you'd call it a tragedy. You couldn't surprise me any if you told
me she'd quilted it herself!"

Down the road from Aunt Olivia's farm, across its southern boundary
fence, romped and shouted all day long the Tony Trumbullses. No one,
except possibly their mother, was quite certain how many of them there
were; it was a dizzy process to take their census. They were never
still, in little brown bare limbs nor shrill voices. From sunup to
sundown the Tony Trumbullses raced and laughed. Certainly they were
happy.

The minister's wife had not dared to tell her Caller of the afternoon
that the minister's children were down there shouting and racing with
the little Tony Trumbullses. Dear, no!--not after Rebecca Mary in the
course of conversation had said that Aunt Olivia did not countenance the
Tony Trumbullses. Rebecca Mary did not say "countenance," but it meant
that.

"Her aunt won't let her play with them, Robert. And she'd like to--you
needn't tell me Rebecca Mary wouldn't like to! I saw it in her poor
little solemn eyes. Besides, she said she asked her aunt once to
let her. Robert, aunts are cruel; I never knew it before. They've no
business bringing up little Rebecca Marys!"

"My dear! Felicia!" But in the minister's eyes was agreement.

Aunt Olivia took afternoon naps with punctilious regularity--Aunt Olivia
herself was punctilious regularity. At half past one, day upon day,
she hung out the dish towel, hung up her kitchen apron, and walked with
unswerving course into her bedroom. There, disposed upon the dainty bed
in rigid lines of unrest, she rested. The naps were often long ones.

A little after the afternoon that Rebecca Mary spent at the minister's
the birthday quilt was finished. The thousandth tiny piece was neatly
over-'n'-overed to its gorgeous expanse. But Rebecca Mary was not
content. She longed to make it complete. She wanted to surprise Aunt
'Livia with it, as Aunt 'Livia on that momentous birthday of her own had
surprised her with the little fluff-ball of yellow down that had grown
into Thomas Jefferson. That had been such a beautiful surprise, but
this--Aunt 'Livia had seen the quilt so many, many times! She had taught
Rebecca Mary's stiff little fingers to set the first stitches in it; she
had made her rip out this purple square and that pink-checked one, and
this one and that one and that. Oh, Aunt 'Livia was ACQUAINTED with the
quilt! It would not be much of a surprise.

But Rebecca Mary set her little pointed chin between her little brown
palms and pondered, and out of the pondering grew a plan so ambitious
and so daring that Rebecca Mary gasped in the throes of it. But she
held her ground and entertained it intrepidly. She even grew on friendly
terms with it in the end. Here was a way to surprise Aunt 'Livia;
Rebecca Mary would do it! That it would entail an almost endless amount
of work did not daunt her: Rebecca Mary was a Plummer, and Plummers were
not to be daunted. The long vista of patient hours of trying labor that
the plan opened up before her set her blood tingling like a warrior's on
the eve of battle. What were long, patient hours to a Plummer? Rebecca
Mary girded up her loins and went to meet them.

Thereafter at Aunt Olivia's nap times Rebecca Mary disappeared. Day
upon day, week upon week, she stole quietly away when the door of Aunt
Olivia's bedroom shut. The first time she went oddly loaded down with
what would have appeared--if there had been any one for it to "appear"
to be a bundle of long sticks. She made two trips into the unknown that
first day. The second time the bundle looked much like that one over
which her grave blue eyes had peered at the minister's wife when she
went to spend the afternoon with her.

It was spring when the mysterious disappearances began. It was summer
before Aunt Olivia woke up--not from her nap, but from her inattention.
Quite suddenly she came upon the realization that Rebecca Mary was
not about the house; nor about the grounds, for she instituted prompt
search. She went to all the child's odd little haunts--the grapery,
the orchard, the corn-house, even to her own beloved back yard, full of
sweet-scented hiding-nooks dear to a child, but sacred ground to Aunt
Olivia. Rebecca Mary sometimes did her "stents" there as a special
privilege; she might be there now, unprivileged. Aunt Olivia's back yard
was almost as full of flowery delights to Rebecca Mary as it was to Aunt
Olivia.

The child was not there--not anywhere. Aunt Olivia sought for Thomas
Jefferson to inquire of him, but Thomas Jefferson was missing too. She
went the rounds again. Where could the child be?

It was a hot, stinging day in late June when Aunt Olivia's suspicions
awoke. They had been long in rousing, but, once alert, they developed
rapidly into certainties. Her pale eyes glistened, her thin nostrils
dilated--Aunt Olivia's whole lean, sharp, unemotional person put on
suspicion. The child had gone to see the Tony Trumbullses.

"My land!" ejaculated Aunt Olivia, "after all my forbidding! And she a
Plummer!" She sat down suddenly as though a little faint. She had never
known a Plummer to disobey before; it was a new experience. It took time
to get used to it, and she sat still a long time, rigid and grim, on the
edge of the chair. Then as suddenly as she had sat down she got up. It
could not be--she refused to entertain the suspicion longer. Rebecca
Mary had NOT gone there to that forbidden place; she was in the garden
somewhere. Aunt Olivia, a little stiff as if from a chill, went once
more in search of the child.

"Rebecca! Rebecca Mary!" she called, at regular intervals. Then sharply,
"Rebecca Mary Plummer!" Her voice had thin cadences of suspicion lurking
in it against its will.

But there seemed really no doubt. One by one incriminating
circumstances occurred to Aunt Olivia. Rebecca Mary had longed to go so
much; the Tony Trumbullses, one at a time or in a tumultuous body, had
urged her so often; she herself had more than once caught the child
gazing wistfully, in passing by, at the bewildering, deafening, frolics
of the little Tony Trumbullses. Once Rebecca Mary had asked to go
barefoot, as they went. Once she had let out the tight little braids
in her neck and rumpled her thin little hair. Once Aunt Olivia had come
upon her PLAYING. The remembrance of it now tightened the lines around
Aunt Olivia's lips. The child had been running wildly about the yard,
shouting in a strange, excited, ridiculous way. When Aunt Olivia in
stern displeasure had demanded explanations, she had run on recklessly,
calling back over her shoulder: "Don't stop me! I'm a Tony Trumbull!"

"My land!" breathed Aunt Olivia, taking back the suspicion to her
breast. "After all my forbidding she's gone down there. She's BEEN going
down there dear knows how long. She's waited till I took my naps an'
then went. A PLUMMER!"

There was really nowhere else she could have gone. She had never wanted
to go anywhere else, except to the minister's, and Rebecca Mary was
punctilious and would not think of going THERE again till the minister's
wife had returned her visit.

But Aunt Olivia waited. As usual, she went to her room next day at nap
time and closed the door behind her. But when a little figure slipped
down the road towards the forbidden place a moment later, she was
watching behind her blinds. She was groaning as if in pain.

The little figure began to run staidly. Aunt Olivia groaned again. The
child was in a hurry to get there--she couldn't wait to walk! There was
guilt in every motion of the little figure.

"And she runs like a Plummer," groaned Aunt Olivia.

The next day, and the next, Aunt Olivia watched behind her blinds. The
fourth day she put on her afternoon dress and followed the hurrying
little figure. Not at once--Aunt Olivia did not hurry. There was a sad
reluctance in every movement. It seemed a terrible thing to be following
Rebecca Mary--Rebecca Mary Plummer to a forbidden place.

Afar off Aunt Olivia heard faintly the shoutings that always heralded an
approach to the Tony Trumbullses, and shuddered. The tumult kept growing
clearer; she thought she detected a wild, excited little shout that
might be Rebecca Mary's. Her thin lips set into a stern, straight line.

A splash of red caught Aunt Olivia's eye as she drew nearer the joyous
whirl of little children. Rebecca Mary wore a little tight red dress.
The coil seemed closing in about the child.

Close to the southern boundary fence of Aunt Olivia's land stood an
old empty barn. It had been a place for storing surplus hay, once, when
there had been surplus hay. For many years now it had been empty. As
Aunt Olivia approached it she noticed that its great sliding door was
open. Strange, when for so long it had been shut!

"If that old barn door ain't open!" breathed Aunt Olivia, stopping in
her astonishment. "I ain't seen it open before in these ten years. Now,
what I want to know is, who opened it? Likely as not those screeching
little wild Injuns." She strode across the stubby grass-ground to the
barn and peered into its cool, dim depths. Then Aunt Olivia uttered
a little, bewildered cry. Gradually the dimness took on light and the
whole startling picture within unfolded itself to her astonished eyes.

Rebecca Mary was quilting. She was stooping earnestly over a gay expanse
of purples and reds and greens. Her little tight red back was towards
Aunt Olivia; it looked bent and strained. Rebecca Mary's eyes were very
close to the gay expanse.

Suddenly Rebecca Mary began to speak, and Aunt Olivia's widened eyes
discovered a great, white rooster pecking about under the quilt. His
big, snowy bulk stood out distinct in the shadow of it.

"I'm glad we're 'most through. Aren't you, Thomas Jefferson? It's been a
pretty LONG quilt. You get sort of tired when you quilt a LONG quilt. It
makes your back creak when you unbend it; and when you quilt in a barn,
of course you can't see without squinching, and it hurts your eyes to
squinch."

Silence again, except for the industrious peck-peck of the great white
rooster. Aunt Olivia stood very still.

"You've been a great help, Thomas Jefferson," began again the voice of
Rebecca Mary, after a little. "I'm very much obliged to you, as I've
said before. I don't know what I should have done without you. No, you
needn't answer. I couldn't hear a word you said. You can't hear with
cotton in both o' your ears," Rebecca Mary sighed. There was no cotton
in Aunt Olivia's ears to shut out the soft little sound. "But of course
you have to wear it in, on account o' your conscience. It's conscience
cotton, Thomas Jefferson. I've explained before, but I don't know's you
understood. It seems a little unpolite to wear it in my ears, with you
here keeping me comp'ny. I s'pose you think it's un--unsociable. But
Aunt Olivia doesn't allow me to 'sociate with the Tony Trumbullses. Oh,
Thomas Jefferson, I wish she'd allow me to 'sociate!"

Aunt Olivia found herself wishing she had conscience cotton in both o'
her ears.

"They're such nice, cheerful little children! It makes you want to
go right over their fence and hollow too." Rebecca Mary pronounced
it "hollow" with careful precision. Aunt Olivia would not approve
of "holler." "And when you can't, you like to listen. But I s'posed
listening to them hollow would be 'sociating. So I put the cotton in."

The joyous "hollowing" broke in waves of glee on Aunt Olivia's eardrums.
It seemed to be assaulting her heart. Oddly, now it did not sound
unmannerly and dreadful. It sounded nice and cheerful. A Plummer, even,
might be happy like that.

"Cotton is a very strange ex--exper'ence, Thomas Jefferson," ran on the
little voice. "At first you 'most can't stand it, but you get over the
worst of it bymeby. Besides, we're getting 'most through now. Ain't that
splendid, Thomas Jefferson? And it's pretty lucky, too, because Aunt
'Livia's birthday is getting very near. It--it almost scares me. Doesn't
it you? For I don't know how Aunt 'Livia looks when she's pleased--you
think she'll look pleased, don't you, Thomas Jefferson? It's such a long
quilt, and when you've sewed every stitch yourself--"

If Rebecca Mary had turned round then she would have seen how Aunt
Olivia looked when she was pleased. But the little figure at the
quilting-frame bent steadily to its task, only another soft sigh
stealing into Aunt Olivia's uncottoned ears. Thomas Jefferson pecked
his way towards the open door, and the lean figure there started back
guiltily; Aunt Olivia did not want to be recognized.

"You there under the quilt, Thomas Jefferson?" The little voice put on
tenderness. "Because I'm a-going to tell you something. Once Aunt 'Livia
gave ME a birthday present and it was YOU. Such a little mite of a
yellow chicken! That's why I'm making the quilt for Aunt 'Livia. It was
three years ago; I've loved you ever since," added Rebecca Mary, simply.

For an instant Aunt Olivia stopped being a Plummer. A sob crept into
her throat. "Rebecca! Rebecca Mary! Rebecca Mary Plummer!" she cried,
involuntarily. Then she stepped back hastily, glad for the cotton in
Rebecca Mary's ears. For the surprise--she must not spoil the child's
hard-earned surprise. And, besides, Aunt Olivia wanted to be surprised.

It was a relief to get away. She could not look any longer at the
picture in the great cobwebby barn--the gorgeous quilt spread out to
its full extent, the empty scaffolds above Rebecca Mary stooping to her
work, Thomas Jefferson pecking about the floor. Aunt Olivia was not old;
through all the years ahead of her she would remember that picture.

She went straight to the southern boundary fence and looked across
at the jubilant little Tony Trumbullses. The one in a red dress like
Rebecca Mary's she singled out with a pointing finger. "YOU come here,"
she called. "I won't hurt you; no need to look scairt. Do you know who I
am? I'm Rebecca Mary's aunt. You know who Rebecca Mary is, don't you?"

"Gracious!" shrilled the little red Tony Trumbull, which Aunt Olivia
took for yes.

"Well, then, you know where I live. You see here--I want you all, the
whole kit o' you, to come to my house tomorrow morning to see Rebecca
Mary. I'm going to say it over again. Tomorrow morning, to see Rebecca
Mary!" setting apart the syllables with the pointing finger. "You can
play in my back yard," said Aunt Olivia, sublimely unconscious of slang.




The Bible Dream



Rebecca Mary sat on the kitchen steps, shelling peas and trying not
to listen. She had begun a hummy little tune to help out, but in the
interstices of rattling peas and the verses of the tune she could
distinctly hear some of the things Aunt Olivia and the Caller were
saying. This was one of the things:

"She's offered a reward, but _I_ don't calculate there's much chance
she'll ever see it again."

A sigh followed. The voice was the Caller's, the sigh Aunt Olivia's.

"It's queer where it ever went to!" Aunt Olivia's voice.

"Yes, it's all o' QUEER," the Caller's, with mysterious hints in it that
made Rebecca Mary, out on the doorsteps, shudder suddenly and forget
where she was in the tune. Oh, oh, dear, did they s'pose--they couldn't
s'pose it had been STOLEN?

Rebecca Mary's little hard brown hand stopped halfway to the pea-basket
and fell limply at her side on the doorstep. It made a little thud as
it fell. Rebecca Mary's horrified gaze wandered out into the glare of
sunshine where wandered Thomas Jefferson, stepping daintily, hunting
bugs. That was his day's work. Thomas Jefferson was a hard worker.

The voices went on, but Rebecca Mary did not heed them now; she was
looking at Thomas Jefferson, but she did not see him. Not until--it
happened. On a sudden Thomas Jefferson, forgetful of dignity, made a
swoop for something that glittered in the grass. Then Rebecca Mary saw
him--then started to her feet with an inarticulate little cry, while
in her honest brown eyes the horror grew. Oh, oh, dear, what was that
Thomas Jefferson had swooped for? For a brief instant it had glittered
in the grass--Rebecca Mary knew in her soul that it had glittered.

Thomas Jefferson stretched his sheeny neck, curved it ridiculously, and
crowed. It sounded like a crow of triumph; that was the way he crowed
when the bug had been a delicious one.

The Caller was coming out, Aunt Olivia with her. Rebecca Mary could hear
the crackle of their starched skirts; Aunt Olivia's crackled loudest.
Rebecca Mary had always had a queer feeling that Aunt Olivia herself was
starched. There had never been a time when she could not remember her
carrying her head very stiffly and straight and never bending her back.
Nobody else in the world, Rebecca Mary reflected proudly, could pick
up a pin without bending. SHE couldn't, herself, even after she had
privately practiced a good deal.

"Good afternoon, Rebecca Mary; you out here?" the Caller nodded
pleasantly. Folks had such queer ways of saying things. How could you
say good afternoon to anybody if she WASN'T here?

"Didn't you hear Mrs. Dixey, Rebecca Mary? I guess you've forgot your
manners," came in Aunt Olivia's crisp tones.

"Oh yes'm, I have. I mean I DID. Yes'm, thank you, I'm out here,"
quavered Rebecca Mary. She was not afraid of the Caller and she had
never been afraid of Aunt Olivia, but the horror that was settling round
her heart made her clear little voice unsteady. Her eyes were still
following Thomas Jefferson on his mincing travels about the yard. The
sunshine was on his splendid white coat, but Rebecca Mary felt no pride
in him.

"Ain't that the han'somest rooster! You ought to show him at the fair, I
declare! See how his feathers glisten in the sun!"

"Thomas Jefferson belongs to Rebecca Mary," Aunt Olivia said, briefly.
"She raised him."

"My! Well, he's han'some enough. Ain't it amusing how a nice-feeling
rooster like that will go stepping round as if he felt about too toppy
to live! He'd ought to wear diamonds."

"Oh, oh, dear, please don't!" breathed Rebecca Mary, softly, but neither
of the women heard her.

"Well, well, I must be going. I've made a regular visit. But I tell John
when I get away from home, it feels so good I STAY! 'I don't get away
any too often,' I says, 'and I guess I've earnt the right.' Well, I must
be going if I'm ever going to! Good-bye, Miss Plummer--good-bye, Rebecca
Mary. All is, I hope Mis' Avery's boarder'll find her diamond, don't
you? But I don't calculate she will. Well, good afternoon. She hadn't
ought to have wore the ring, when she knew it was loose in the setting
like that. Some folks are just that careless! Well--"

But Rebecca Mary did not hear the rest of the Caller's leave-taking. She
had slipped away to Thomas Jefferson out in the sun.

"Oh, come here--come here with me!" she cried, intensely. "Come out
behind the barn where we can talk. I've got to say something to you
that's awful! I've GOT to, you've got to listen, Thomas Jefferson."

It was still and terribly hot in the treeless glare behind the barn, but
it was all in the day's work to Thomas Jefferson. Behind the barn was a
beautiful place for bugs.

"Listen! Oh, you poor dear, you've got to listen!" Rebecca Mary cried.
"You've got to stop hunting for bugs--and don't you dare to crow! If you
crow, Thomas Jefferson, it will break my heart. I don't s'pose you know
what you've done--I don't know as you've done it--but there's something
awful happened. Oh, Thomas Jefferson, it glittered--I saw it glitter!"
Suddenly Rebecca Mary stooped and gathered Thomas Jefferson into her
arms. She held him with a passionate clasp against her flat little
calico breast. He was HERS. He was all the intimate friend she had ever
had. He had been her little downy baby and slept in her hand. She had
fed him and watched him grow and been proud of him. He was her all.

"Oh, Thomas Jefferson, Thomas Jefferson, what was it that glittered in
the grass? Tell me and I'll believe you. Say it was a little piece o'
glass and I'll put you down and go get you some corn, and we'll never
speak of it again. But don't look at me like that--don't look at me like
that! You look--GUILTY!"

She rocked him in her arms. In her soul she knew what it was that had
glittered. But in Thomas Jefferson's soul--oh, they could not blame
Thomas Jefferson!

"You haven't got any soul, poor dear; poor dear, you haven't got any
soul, and you can't be guilty without a soul. They couldn't--hang--you."
Her voice sank to the merest whisper. She tightened her clasp on the
great, soft body and smoothed the soft feathers with a tender, tremulous
little hand.

"The Lord didn't put anything in you but a stomach and a--a gizzard. He
left your soul out and you're not to blame for that. I don't blame
you, Thomas Jefferson, and of course the Lord don't. But Mrs. Avery's
boarder--oh, oh, dear, I'm afraid Mrs. Avery's boarder will! You mustn't
tell--I mean I mustn't. Nobody must know what it was that glittered in
the grass. Do you want to be--searched?

"You know 'xactly where she sat over to this house yesterday morning,
when she went by--and how she said you were too sweet for anything--and
how she flew her hand round with--with IT on it. You know as well as I
do. And it was loose, the di'mond-stone was loose. We didn't either of
us know that. We're not to blame if things are loose, and you're not to
blame for not having any soul. But oh, oh, dear, how dreadfully it makes
us both feel! You'd better give up crowing, Thomas Jefferson; I feel
just as if you'd let it out if you crew."

At tea Rebecca Mary played with her spoon, while her berries swam,
untasted, in their yellow sea of cream. Aunt Olivia remonstrated.

"Why don't you eat your supper, child?" she asked, sharply. Rebecca Mary
was always glad when she said child instead of Rebecca Mary, for then
the sharpness did not cut. She was feeling now for the glasses up in her
thin gray hair. Aunt Olivia could see everything through those glasses
and it made Rebecca Mary tremble to think--oh, oh, dear, suppose she
should see the secret hidden in Rebecca Mary's soul! It seemed as if
Aunt Olivia trained the glasses directly upon the corner where the
secret glittered in the gra--was hidden in Rebecca Mary's troubled
little soul. But this is what Aunt Olivia said:

"It's your stomach. What you need is a good dose of camomile tea to
tone you up. I didn't give you any this spring, for a wonder. Now you go
right up to bed and I'll set some to steeping. Does it hurt you any?"

"Oh yes'm," murmured Rebecca Mary, sadly, but she meant her soul and
Aunt Olivia meant her stomach. She mounted the steep stairs to her
little eavesdropping room and slipped her small spare body out of her
clothes into her scant little nightgown. It was rather a relief to go to
bed. If she could have been sure that Thomas Jefferson--but, no,
Thomas Jefferson was not in bed. As Rebecca Mary lay and waited for her
camomile tea she was certain she could hear him stepping about under the
window. Once he came directly under and "crew," and then Rebecca Mary
hid her head in the pillow for he was letting it out.

"Cock-a-doodle-do--ooo, did-you-see-me-swoo-oo-OOP-it-up?" crowed Thomas
Jefferson, under the window. Rebecca Mary with her eyes pillow-deep
could see him stretching his neck and letting it out. It seemed to her
everybody could hear him--Aunt Olivia downstairs, steeping camomile
'blows, and Mrs. Avery's boarder across the fields.

"Aunt Olivia," whispered Rebecca Mary, while she sipped her bitter tea
a little later, "how much--I suppose precious things cost a great deal,
don't they?"

"My grief!" Aunt Olivia set down the bowl and felt of Rebecca Mary's
temples, then of her wrists. The child was out of her head.

"Di'mond-stones like--like that boarder's--I suppose those cost a great
deal? As much as--how much as, Aunt Olivia?"

"My grief, don't you worry about any di'mond-stones! YOU haven't lost
any. What you'll lose will be your health, if you don't swallow down the
rest o' this tea and go right to sleep like a good girl! No, no, I'm not
going to answer any questions. Drink this; swallow it down."

Rebecca Mary swallowed it down, but she did not go right to sleep like a
good girl. She lay on the hard little bed and thought of many things, or
of one thing many times. Over and over, wearily, drearily, until the sin
of Thomas Jefferson became her sin. She adopted it.

When at last she dropped to sleep it was to dream a Bible dream. Usually
Rebecca Mary liked to dream Bible dreams, but not this one. This one was
different. This one was of Abraham and Isaac. She thought she was right
there and saw Abraham build the little altar and offer up--no, it wasn't
Isaac! It was Thomas Jefferson. And the Abraham in her dream was turning
into HER. The flowing white robes were dwindling to a little scant white
nightgown. She stood a little way off and saw herself offering up Thomas
Jefferson. It was a dreadful dream.

The night was a perfectly black one, the kind that Rebecca Mary was
afraid of. It was the only thing in the world she had ever been afraid
of--a black night. But after the dream she got up stealthily and slipped
through the blackness, out to Thomas Jefferson. It was only out to the
little lean-to shed, but it seemed a very long way to Rebecca Mary.
The blackness pressed up against her, she put out her little, trembling
hands and pushed through it.

"Thomas Jefferson! Thomas Jefferson!" she called softly. But he was a
sound sleeper, she remembered; she would have to find him and wake him.
In the darkness she felt about on Thomas Jefferson's perch for Thomas
Jefferson. When the little groping hand came upon something very soft
and warm, the other hand went up to join it, and together they lifted
Thomas Jefferson down. He gave a protesting croak, and then, because he
was acquainted with the clasp of the two small hands, and night or day
liked it, he went back to his interrupted dreams and said not another
word. Thomas Jefferson had never dreamed a Bible dream--never heard of
Abraham or Isaac, had no soul to be disquieted.

With her burden against her breast Rebecca Mary pushed back through the
darkness, up to the black little room under the eaves. She felt about
for her little carpet-covered shoe box and gently crowded the great
white bulk into it. Then she crept back into bed and lay on the outer
edge with her loving, light little hand on Thomas Jefferson's feathers.
The trouble in her burdened soul poured itself out.

"Oh, Thomas Jefferson," she whispered down to the heap of soft feathers,
"I'm going to smooth you this way all night for tomorrow you die!" Her
voice even in a whisper had a solemn, inspired note. "There's no other
way; you'll have to make up your mind to be willing. It's going to break
my heart, and, oh, I'm afraid it will break yours! I'm afraid it will
kill us both!"

Thomas Jefferson uttered a mournful little croaky sound that might have
been "ET TU, BRUTE?" It pierced Rebecca Mary's breast. "There, hush,
poor dear, poor dear, and rest. You'll need all your sleep," she crooned
softly and brokenly. "Tomorrow morning I'll give you some beautiful
corn, and then--and then I'm going to take you to Mrs. Avery's boarder
and tell her the worst. I'm going to give you up, Thomas Jefferson; and
I'm the best friend you've got in the world! But I've got to, I've got
to--I've got to! It's been revealed to me in a dream. There was a man
once in the Bible, named Abraham, and there was his dearly beloved
little boy named Isaac. And now here's me named Rebecca Mary, and
dearly beloved you named Thomas Jefferson. Oh, I don't suppose you can
understand; I suppose you're asleep. You'll never know how it feels to
give up your dearly belovedest, but oh, oh, dear, you'll know how it
feels to be given up! You'll be one o' the blessed martyrs, Thomas
Jefferson--doesn't that comfort you a little speck? Oh, why don't you
wake up and be comforted?

"The Lord excused Abraham, after all. But this isn't the Lord, it's Mrs.
Avery's boarder. I'm afraid she isn't the Lord's kind--I'm afraid not,
Thomas Jefferson. I don't dare to let you hope; I've got to prepare you
for the worst."

She caught up the big, white fellow with sudden, irresistible yearning
and sat up with him and rocked him back and forth in her arms. She began
a muffled, sad little tune like a wail. The words were terrible words.

"I'll hold you in my arms. I'll rock you--rock you--rock you. For
tomorrow, oh, to-MOR-row you--must--die! Aber-a-ham offered Isaac, and
_I_-MUST OFFER YOU."

Over and over, then tenderly she lowered Thomas Jefferson to the shoe
box again.

When Aunt Olivia came up in the morning, vaguely alarmed because it
was so late and no Rebecca Mary stirring, she had news to tell. Someone
going by had told her something.

"Well, that woman's found her 'di'mond-stone,'--how are you feeling this
morning, child? It was in her pocket where she'd put her hand in and
felt round! So all that fuss for noth--"

Suddenly Aunt Olivia stopped, for without warning, out of a box at the
bedside stalked a great white rooster and flew to the foot board and
"crew":


  "Cock-a-doodle-do-ooo!
  It was glass that glittered in the grass,
  And all the time I knew-oo-ooo!"

"My grief?" Aunt Olivia gasped.




The Cookbook Diary



Rebecca Mary decided to keep a diary. It was not an inspiration, though
it was rather like one in its suddenness. Of course she had always known
that Aunt Olivia kept a diary. When she was very small she had stretched
a-tiptoe and with little pointing forefinger counted rows and rows of
little black books that Aunt Olivia had "kept." Each little black book
had its year-label pasted neatly on the back. Rebecca Mary breathed
deep breaths of awe, there were so many of them. There must be so much
weather in those little black books--so many pleasant days, rainy days,
storms, and snows!

It was Rebecca Mary who remembered that it was Tuesday, and that it had
showered a little Wednesday--shone Thursday--showered again on Friday.
Rebecca Mary was the jog to Aunt Olivia's memory. It gave her now, at
the beginning of her own diary career, an experienced feeling, as if she
knew already how to keep a diary. It made it seem a much simpler matter
to begin.

And then, of course, the minister's littlest little boy--really it was
the minister's littlest little boy who had started Rebecca Mary. He had
volunteered a peep into his own diary, and made whispered explanations
and suggestions. He let Rebecca Mary read some of the entries: "MUNDY,
plesent and good. TUSDY, rany and bad. WENSDY, sum plesent and not
good enuf to hirt. THIRSDY" but he had hastily withdrawn the book at
"Thirsdy," and a tidal-wave of warm red blood had flowed up over his
little brown ears and in around all the little brown islands of his
freckles. So Rebecca Mary had begun hastily to talk of other things.
For the minister's littlest little boy had explained that the first
Statement in each entry referred to the weather and the second to the
deportment of the writer, and Rebecca Mary had remarked a sympathetic
resemblance between the two statements. She had caught a fleeting
glimpse of the weather part of "Thirsdy"--she could guess the rest.
Better let the curtain fall on "Thirsdy." On her way home Rebecca Mary
decided to keep a diary herself. Her first day's record had been a good
deal like the "Mundy" of the minister's littlest little boy, only there
were more a's in the weather. After that, little by little, she branched
out into a certain originality--the Rebecca Mary sort. If she had
not been hampered by circumstances, it would have been easier to be
original. The most hampering circumstance was the cookbook itself, which
she was driven to use in her new undertaking. There was room on the
blank leaves and above and below the recipes for cake and pudding
and pie. The book was one Aunt Olivia had given her long ago to draw
impossible pictures in.

In the beginning Rebecca Mary tried pasting pieces of "empty" paper
over the pies and puddings and cakes, but the empty paper was too
transparent. In rather startling places things were liable to show
through.

As: "SUNDAY.--It rained a level teaspoonful. Aunt Olivia and I went to
church. The text was thou shalt not steal 1 cups of sour milk--" Rebecca
Mary got no farther than that. She was a little appalled at the result
thus far, and hastily turned a page and began again in a blank space
where no intrusive pudding could break through and corrupt. Thereafter
she wrote above and below the recipes and pasted no more thin veils over
them. It seemed safer.

Aunt Olivia, apparently oblivious to what was going on, yet saw and did
not disapprove. It was to be expected that the child should come into
her inheritance sometime, early or late. If early--well.

"It's the Plummer in her. All the Plummers have kept diaries," Aunt
Olivia mused, knitting stolidly on while the child stooped painfully
to her self-imposed task. The quaint resemblance to herself at her own
diary-writing did not escape her, and she smiled a little in the Aunt
Olivia way that scarcely stirred her lips. Aunt Olivia smiled oftener
now when she looked at the child. She was "failing" a little, Plummerly.
Between the two of them, little Plummer and big, stretched of late a tie
woven of sheets and a gorgeous quilt of a thousand bits. It was not very
visible to the naked eye, but they were both rather shyly conscious that
it was there. They would never be quite so far apart again.

Rebecca Mary took her diary out to the haunts of Thomas Jefferson and
read aloud selections to him, with an odd, conscious little air, as
though she were graduating. The great white fellow was a sympathetic
auditor, if silence and extreme gravity count. Only once did he ever
make comments, and Rebecca Mary could never quite make up her mind
whether he laughed then or applauded. When a great white rooster
elongates his neck, crooks it ridiculously, flaps his wings and crows,
it's hard telling exactly what feeling prompts him. But Rebecca reasoned
from past experience and her faith in him--he had never laughed at her
before. It was applause. The especial entry which evoked it was the one
that first mentioned an allowance.

"'THURSDAY.--I think I'm going to--'" read Rebecca Mary slowly; and it
was significant that on this Thursday there was no weather. "'I havent
desided--I don't KNOW, but I think I'm going to ask Aunt Olivia to pay
me 5 cents a weak. Rhoda says you call it an alowance, and I supose she
knows. She is the minnister's daughter. She has 10 cents a weak unless
shes bad and then she pays the minnister an alowance. He charges her 1
cent a sin and he gives it to somebody who is indignant--I think Rhoda
said indignant. Then I should think he would give it back to Rhoda. I
shant only ask Aunt Olivia for 5 cents--I think she will be more likely.
I havent desided but I THINK I shall ask her tomorrow after her knap.
After knaps you are more rested and maybe things don't look just as they
do before knaps.

"'FRIDAY.--I think Ide better wait untill tomorrow. Her knap was rather
short. Ive desided to say you needent alow but 4 if 5 is too mutch. If
she alows Im going to buy me some crimpers. Rhodas curls natchurally but
she says you can crimp it if it doesent. I have begun to look at myself
in the glass and it fritens me--I guess there ought to be a gh in
that--to see how homebly I am. I wonder if it doesent kind of scare Aunt
Olivia. Prehaps if I was pretty like Rhoda she would call me darling and
dear instead of Rebecca Mary. I dont blame her mutch because I LOOK like
Rebecca Mary.

"'SATURDAY.--I think Sunday will be the best time to ask her, just
after she gets home from meeting and has rolled her bonnet strings up,
espesialy if the minnister preaches on the Lord lovething a cheerful
giver. I am hopeing he will. If I dont get the crimpers Ime going to
give up looking in the glass. For I think Ime growing homeblyer right
along. Theres something the matter with my nose. Rhodas doesent run up
hill. I never thought about noses before. Aunt Olivias is a little quear
too but I like it became its Aunt Olivias nose. I wish I knew if Aunt
Olivia liked mine. I wish we were better akquainted.

"'SUNDAY.--I wish the Lord had created mine curly because I dont dass
to ask Aunt Olivia. I don't dass to, so there. It scares my throat. I
supose its because aunts arnt mothers--seems as if youd dass to ask your
MOTHER. I hate to be scart on acount of being a Plummer. Im afraid Im
the only Plummer that ever was--'"

The reading suddenly stopped here. This was Sunday, and the last entry
was fresh from Rebecca Mary's pencil.

"Thomas Jefferson!" stormed Rebecca Mary, in a little gust of passion,
"don't you ever TELL I was scared! As long as you live!--cross your
heart!--oh, I wish I hadn't read that part to you! You're a Plummer too,
and you never were scared, and you can't understand--"

The diary was clutched to Rebecca Mary's little flat breast, and with a
swirl of starched Sunday skirts the child was gone. She went straight
to Aunt Olivia. Red spots of shame flamed in both sallow little cheeks;
resolution sat astride her little uphill nose. She could not bear to go,
but it was easier than being ashamed. The pointing fingers of all the
Plummers pushed her on. Go she must, or be a coward. Long ago--it seemed
long to Rebecca Mary--she had stood up straight and stanch and refused
to make any more sheets. Was that little girl who had dared, THIS little
girl who was afraid? Should that little girl be ashamed of this one?

"Aunt Olivia," steadily, though Rebecca Mary's heart was pounding
hard--"Aunt Olivia, are--are you well off?"

She had not meant to begin like that, but afterwards she was glad that
she had.

"My grief!" Aunt Olivia ejaculated in her surprise. What would the child
ask next? "Am I well off? If you mean rich, no, I ain't."

"Oh! Then you're--why, I didn't think about your being poor! I shouldn't
have thought of asking--that makes a great difference. I never thought
of THAT!"

She was off before Aunt Olivia had fully recovered her breath, and
the stumping of her heavy little shoes going upstairs was the only
distinctly audible sound. In her own room Rebecca Mary stopped, panting.

"Oh, I'm glad I didn't get as far as ASKING!" she breathed aloud. "I
never thought about her being poor--of course then I wouldn't ask!"

But she squared her shoulders and stood up, straight and unashamed. For
she had vindicated herself. She had been ready to ask. She could look
that other little girl of the sheets in the face. The Other Little Girl
was there, coming to meet her as she advanced to the little looking
glass above the table. But Rebecca Mary waved her back peremptorily.

"Go right back!" she said. "I only came to tell you I wasn't a
coward--that's all. Good-bye. For I'm not coming any more. You're sorry
I'm homely, and I'm sorry you are, but it doesn't do any good for us to
look at each other and groan. It will make us unsatisfied. So I shall
turn you back to the wall--good-bye."

But for a very [long] instant they looked sadly into each other's
little lean brown-yellow faces. It was a brief ceremony of farewell.
"Good-bye," smiled Rebecca Mary, bravely. And the lips of The Other
Little Girl moved as though saying it too. The Other Little Girl smiled.
And neither of them knew that just then she was beautiful.

Aunt Olivia was trying to meet her own courage test. She had been trying
a good many days. Duty--stern, unswerving duty--bade her inspect Rebecca
Mary's little cookbook diary. Should she not know--ought she not to know
the thoughts that were brewing in the child's mind? How else could she
bring her up properly?

"Read it," Duty said, "find out. Are you afraid?"

"I'm ashamed," groaned Aunt Olivia. "Do you think Rebecca Mary would
read my diary?"

"Is Rebecca Mary bringing you up?"

Aunt Olivia sometimes thought so. The puzzle that she had begun to try
to solve when Rebecca Mary's white, death-struck mother had laid her
baby in Aunt Olivia's unaccustomed arms was getting a little more
difficult every day. Some days Aunt Olivia wondered if she ought to give
it up. Oh, this bringing up--this bringing up of little children!

"If I must," groaned Aunt Olivia, and got as far as taking the little
diary in her hands. But she got no farther. She laid it gently down
again.

"I can't," she said, firmly, but she could not look Duty in the face as
she said it. She had always listened to Duty before.

"You know you ought to--"

"Yes, I know, but I can't! It seems a shameful thing to do. I'm sure
I've tried often enough--you know I've tried--"

"I know--that was good practice. Now stop trying and read it!"

Aunt Olivia flamed up. "I tell you I won't! It's a shameful thing. If
I found Rebecca Mary reading one of my diaries, I should send her to
bed--"

"Read hers and go to bed yourself. It's your duty to read it. When you
bring up a child--"

"I never will again!"

Aunt Olivia read it, with the relentless grip of Duty holding her to the
task. But flame spots crept up through the sallow of her thin cheeks and
made what atonement they could.

It did not take long, though some of the pages she read twice. The
weatherless week, when Rebecca Mary had put off her "asking" from day to
day, Aunt Olivia went back to the third time. When she closed the little
book it was not a Plummer face she lifted it to and laid it against for
the space of a breath--a Plummer face would not have been wet.

Then she Whirled upon Duty. "Well, I've done it--I hope you're
satisfied!"

"It had to be done," calm Duty responded. "If you think it will make you
feel any better, you can send yourself to bed."

"I'm going to," sighed Aunt Olivia, slipping away to her room. A strange
little yearning was upon her to hunt up Rebecca Mary and call her
darling and dear. But in her heart she knew she should not have the
courage to do it. Here was another Plummer coward!

"Why are some people made like me?" she thought--"so it kills 'em to
say anything anyways tenderish. Seems to be too much for their vocal
organs--they'd rather do a week's washing!"

Other thoughts came to Aunt Olivia as she lay on her bed, doing her
whimsical penance for violating the sanctity of the little old cookbook.
She was not comfortable. It was a hard bed--nothing was soft of Aunt
Olivia's. She moved about on it uneasily.

"When they're dead, we're willing enough to say tenderish things to
'em," her musings ran. "We wish we HAD then. I suppose if Rebecca Mary
was--"

She got no farther for the sudden horror that was upon her--that sent
her to her feet and to the door. But there she stopped in the blessed
relief that drifted in to her on a child's laugh. Somewhere out there
Rebecca Mary was laughing in her subdued, sweet way. A cracked, shrill
crow followed--Thomas Jefferson was laughing too.

Rebecca Mary was not dead. There was time to say a "tenderish" thing to
her before she lay--before that. Aunt Olivia shut her eyes resolutely to
the vision that had intruded upon her musings. It was Rebecca Mary who
was laughing somewhere out there that she wanted to see.

The next day was Sunday, and in the quiet of the long afternoon Rebecca
Mary read aloud again to Thomas Jefferson. It was from the little
cookbook diary. Thomas Jefferson was pecking about the long grass of the
orchard.

"Oh, listen!" cried Rebecca Mary, her eyes unwontedly shining. "Listen
to this, Thomas Jefferson!

"'SATURDAY.--Wind northwest by Mrs. Tupper's Weather vain. Something
happened yesterday. Aunt Olivia didn't say it, but she most did.
She came right out of her bedroom and I saw it in her face!
"Dear"--"darling,"--they were both there, and she was looking at me!
Nobody EVER looked "dear" "darling" at me before. I suppose my mother
would have. If I hadent had another mother I think I should like to have
had Aunt Olivia.

"'You feel that way more after you get akquainted. When I get VERY
akquainted prehaps I shall tell Aunt Olivia. Its quear, I think, how it
isent as easy to say some things as it is to think them. You can wright
them easier too. I am glad Ime keeping a diary because I can wright
about yesterday and what happenned. I shall read it to my grand
children--to be continude.

"'SUNDAY'--that's today, Thomas Jefferson,--'SUNDAY.--This is yesterday
continude, because there was too mutch for one day. Something else
beutiful happenned. My Aunt Olivia said to me as folows, I have desided
to pay you a weakly alowance of 10 cents a weak Rebecca Mary. And I
never asked her to. And she never said anything about charging me for
my sins. I was going to ask her but I found out she was poor. That was a
mistake, she isent. She must be SOME well of I think for 10 cents seams
a great deal to have of your own every weak. But I shant buy crimpers.
Ime going to buy a present for Aunt Olivia byamby. Ime very happy. I
wish I knew how to spell hooray.'"

Suddenly Rebecca Mary was on her feet, waving the cookbook jubilantly.

"Hoo-ray! Hoo-ray! Thomas Jefferson!" she shouted, surprising the gentle
Sunday calm. She surprised Thomas Jefferson, too, but he was equal to
the occasion--Thomas Jefferson was a gentleman.

"Hoo-ra-a-a-ay!" he crowed, splendidly, with a fine effect of clapping
his hands.

This time there could be no doubt. This was applause.




The Bereavement



Thomas Jefferson was losing his appetite. Even Aunt Olivia noticed it,
but it did not worry her as it did Rebecca Mary.

"He's always had as many appetites as a cat's got lives--he's got eight
good ones left," she said, calmly.

But Rebecca Mary was not calm. It seemed to her that Thomas Jefferson
was getting thinner every day.

"Oh, I can feel your bones!" she cried, in distress. "Your bones are
coming through, you poor, dear Thomas Jefferson! Won't you eat just one
more kernel of corn--just this one for Rebecca Mary? I'd do it for you.
Shut your eyes and swallow it right down and you'll never know it."

That day Thomas Jefferson listened to pleading, but not the next
day--nor the next. He went about dispiritedly, and the last few times
that he crowed it made Rebecca Mary cry. Even Aunt Olivia shook her
head.

"I could do it better than that myself," she said, soberly.

Rebecca Mary hunted bugs and angleworms and arranged them temptingly in
rows, but the big, white rooster passed them by with a feeble peck
or two. Bits of bread failed to tempt him, or even his favorite cooky
crumbs. His eighth appetite departed--his seventh, sixth, fifth, fourth.

"He lost his third one yesterday," lamented Rebecca Mary, "and today
he's lost his second. It's pretty bad when he hasn't only one left, Aunt
Olivia."

"Pretty bad," nodded Aunt Olivia. She was stirring up a warm mush.
When Rebecca Mary had gone upstairs she took it to Thomas Jefferson
and commanded him to eat. He was beyond coaxing--perhaps he needed
commanding.

Rebecca Mary thought Aunt Olivia did not care, and it added a new sting
to her pain. There was that time that Aunt Olivia said she wished the
Lord hadn't ever created roosters--Thomas Jefferson had just scratched
up her pansy seeds. And the time when she wished Thomas Jefferson was
dead; did she wish that now? Was she--was she glad he was going to be
dead?

For Rebecca Mary had given up hope. She was not reconciled, but she was
sure. She spent all her spare time with the big, gaunt, pitiful fellow,
trying to make his last days easier. She knew he liked to have her with
him.

"You do, don't you, dear?" she said. She had never called him "dear"
before. She realized sadly that this was her last chance. "You do like
to have me here, don't you? You'd rather? Don't try to crow--just nod
your head a little if you do." And the big, white fellow's head had
nodded a little, she was sure. She put out her loving little brown hand
and caressed it. "I knew you did, dear. Oh, Thomas Jefferson, Thomas
Jefferson, don't die! PLEASE don't--think of the good times we'll
have if you won't! Think of the--the grasshoppers--the bugs, Thomas
Jefferson--the cookies! Won't you think?--won't you try to be a little
bit hungry?"

Rebecca Mary knew what it was to be hungry and not be able to eat,
but to be able to eat and not be hungry--this was away and beyond her
experience. The sad puzzle of it she could not solve.

One day the minister had a rather surprising summons to perform his
priestly functions. The summoner was Rebecca Mary. She appeared like
a sombre little shadow in his sunny sermon room. The minister's wife
ushered her in, and in the brief instant of opening the door and
announcing her name flashed him a warning glance. He had been acquainted
so long with her glances that he was able to interpret this one with
considerable accuracy. "All right," he glanced back. No, he would not
smile--yes, he would remember that it was Rebecca Mary.

"Do what she asks you," flashed the minister's wife's glance.

"All right," flashed the minister. Then the door closed.

"Thomas Jefferson is dying," Rebecca Mary began, hurriedly. "I came to
see if you'd come."

In spite of himself the minister gasped. Then, as the situation dawned
clearly upon him, his mouth corners began--in spite of themselves--to
curve upward. But in time he remembered the minister's wife, and drew
them back to their centres of gravity. He waited a little. It was safer.

"Aunt Olivia isn't at home and I'm glad. She doesn't care. Perhaps she
would laugh. Oh, I know," appealed Rebecca Mary, piteously, "I know
he's a rooster! It isn't because I don't know--but he's FOLKS to me! You
needn't do anything but just smooth his feathers a little and say the
Lord bless you. I thought perhaps you'd come and do that. _I_ could, but
I wanted you to, because you're a minister. I thought--I thought perhaps
you'd try and forget he's a rooster."

"I will," the minister said, gently. Now his lips were quite grave. He
took Rebecca Mary's hand and went with her.

"He's a good man," murmured the minister's wife, watching them go. She
had known he would go.

"He was one of my parishioners," the minister was saying for the
comforting of Rebecca Mary. Unconsciously he used the past tense, as
one speaks of those close to death. It was well enough, for already big,
gaunt, white Thomas Jefferson was in the past tense.

Rebecca Mary chronicled the sad event in her diary:

"Tomas Jefferson passed away at ten minutes of three this afternoon
blessed are them that die in the Lord. The minnister did not get here in
time. I wish I had asked him to run for he is a very good minnister and
would have. He helped me berry him in the cold cold ground and we sang a
him. I dident ask him to pray because he was only a rooster, but he
was folks to me. I loved him. It is very lonesome. I dred wakening up
tomorrow because he always crowed under my window. The Lord gaveth and
the Lord has taken away."

This last Rebecca Mary erased once, but she wrote it again after a
moment's thought. For, she reasoned, it was the Lord part of Aunt Olivia
which had given Thomas Jefferson to her. In the primitive little creed
of Rebecca Mary every one had a Lord part, but some people's was very
small. Not Aunt Olivia's--she had never gauged Aunt Olivia's Lord part;
it would not have been consistent with her ideas of loyalty.

It was very lonely, as Rebecca Mary had known it would be. At best
her life had never been overfull of companionships, and the sudden
taking-off--it seemed sudden, as all deaths do--of Thomas Jefferson was
hard to bear. Strange how blank a space one great, white rooster can
leave behind him!

The yard and the orchard seemed full of blank spaces, though in a way
Thomas Jefferson's soul seemed to frequent his old beloved haunts.
Rebecca Mary could not see it pecking daintily about, but she felt it
was there.

"His soul isn't dead," she persisted, gently. She clung to the comfort
of that. And one morning she thought she heard again Thomas Jefferson's
old, cheery greeting to the sunrise. The sound she thought she heard
woke her instantly. Was it Thomas Jefferson's soul crowing?

"Aunt Olivia isent sorry," chronicled the diary, sadly. "Prehaps shes
glad. Once she wished the Lord had forgot to create roosters. But she
was ever kind to Tomas Jefferson, considdering the seeds he scrached up.
That was his besittingest sin and I know he is sorry now. I wish Aunt
Olivia was sorry."

Nothing was ever said between the two about Rebecca Mary's loss, but
Aunt Olivia recognized the keenness of it to the child. She worried
a little about it; it reminded her of that other time of worry when
Rebecca Mary and she had nearly starved. Sheets and roosters--there were
so many worries in the world.

That other time she went to the minister, this time to the minister's
wife. One afternoon she went and carried her work.

"You know about children," she began, without loss of time. "What
happens when they lose their appetite over a dead rooster?"

"Thomas Jefferson?" breathed the minister's wife, softly.

"Yes--he's dead and buried, and she's mourning for him. I set three
tarts on for dinner today, and I set three tarts AWAY after dinner.
Rebecca Mary is fond of tarts. What should you do if it was Rhoda?"

"Oh---Rhoda--why, I think I should get her another rooster, or a cat or
something, to get her mind off. But Rhoda isn't Rebecca Mary--"

Aunt Olivia folded up her work. She got up briskly.

"They've got a white rooster down to the Trumbullses'," she said. "I
guess I better go right down now; Tony Trumbull is liable to be at home
just before supper. I'm very much obliged to you for your advice."

"Did I advise her?" murmured the minister's wife, watching the resolute
swing of Aunt Olivia's skirts as she strode away. "I was going to tell
her that what would cure my Rhoda might not cure Rebecca Mary. Well, I
hope it will work," but she was sure it wouldn't. She had grown a little
acquainted with Rebecca Mary.

It was the new, white rooster crowing, instead of the soul of Thomas
Jefferson. Rebecca Mary found out after she had dressed and gone
downstairs. Soon after that she appeared in the kitchen doorway with an
armful of snowy feathers. Aunt Olivia, over her muffin pans, eyed her
with secret delight. The cure was working sooner than she had dared to
expect.

"This is the Tony Trumbullses' rooster; if I hurry I guess I can carry
him back before breakfast," Rebecca Mary said from the doorway. "I'll
run, Aunt Olivia."

"Carry him back!" Aunt Olivia's muffin spoon dropped into the bowl of
creamy batter. One look at Rebecca Mary convinced her that the cure had
not begun to work. Imperceptibly she stiffened. "He ain't anybody's but
mine. I've bought him," she explained, briefly. "You set him down
and feed him with these crumbs--he ain't human if he don't like
cloth-o'-gold cake."

But the child in the doorway, after gently releasing the great fellow,
drew away quietly. The second look at her face convinced Aunt Olivia
that the cure would never work.

"You feed him, please, Aunt Olivia," Rebecca Mary said; "I--couldn't.
I'll stir the muffins up."

Nothing further was ever said about keeping the Tony Trumbull rooster.
He pecked about the place in unrestrained freedom until the morning work
was done, and then Aunt Olivia carried him home in her apron.

"I concluded not to keep him--he'd likely be homesick," she said, with
a qualm of conscience; for the big, white fellow had certainly shown no
signs of homesickness. But she could not explain and reveal the secret
places of Rebecca Mary's heart. Aunt Olivia, too, had her ideas of
loyalty.

In the diary there occurred brief mention of the episode: "The Tony
Trumbull rooster has been here. I could eat him--that's how I feel about
the Tony Trumbull rooster.

"I never could have eatten Tomas Jefferson but once and then it would
have broken my heart but I was starveing. Aunt Olivia took him back."

Thomas Jefferson's grave was kept green. Rebecca Mary took her stents
down into the orchard and sat beside it, sadly stitching. She kept it
heaped with wild flowers and poppies from her own rows. Aunt Olivia's
flowers she never touched. The bitterness of Aunt Olivia's not being
sorry--perhaps being glad--rankled in her sore little soul. It would
have helped--oh yes, it would have helped.

Aunt Olivia worried on. It seemed to her that all Rebecca Mary's meals
in one meal would not have kept a kitten alive--and that reminded her.
She would try a kitten. The minister's wife had said a rooster or a cat.
A white kitten, she decided, though she could scarcely have told why.

The kitten was better, but it was not a cure. Rebecca Mary took the
little creature to her breast and told it her grief for Thomas Jefferson
and cried her Thomas Jefferson tears into its soft, white fur. In that
way, at any rate, it was a success.

"Maybe I shall love you some day," she whispered, "but I can't yet,
while Thomas Jefferson is fresh. He's all I have room for. He was
my intimate friend--when your intimate friend is dead you can't
love anybody else right away." But she apologized to the little cat
gently--she felt that an apology was due it.

"You see how it is, little, white cat," she said. "I shall have to ask
you to wait. But if I ever have a second love, I promise it will be
you. You're a great DEAL comfortinger than that Tony Trumbull rooster! I
could love you this minute if I had never loved Thomas Jefferson. Do you
feel like waiting?"

The little, white cat waited. And Aunt Olivia waited. She made tempting
dishes for Rebecca Mary's meals, and put a ruffle into her nightgown
neck and sleeves--Rebecca Mary had always yearned for ruffles.

"I don't believe she sees 'em. She don't know they're there," groaned
Aunt Olivia, impotently. "She don't see anything but Thomas Jefferson,
and I don't know as she ever will!"

But Rebecca Mary saw the ruffles and fluted them between her brown
little fingers admiringly. She tried once or twice to go and thank Aunt
Olivia, and got as far as her bedroom door. But the bitterness in her
heart stayed her hand from turning the knob. If Aunt Olivia had only
known that being sorry was the right thing to do! Strangely enough,
though Rebecca Mary's view of the matter never occurred to Aunt Olivia,
she came by and by to being sorry on her own account. Perhaps she had
been all along, underneath her disquietude for Rebecca Mary's sorrow.
Perhaps when she thought how quiet it had grown mornings, and what a
good chance there was now for a supplementary nap, she was being sorry.
When she remembered that she need not buy wheat now and yellow corn, and
that the cookies would last longer--perhaps then she was sorry. But
she did not know it. It seemed to come upon her with the nature of a
surprise on one especial day. She had been working her un-"scrached,"
untrampled flower-beds.

"My grief!" she ejaculated, suddenly, as if just aware of it. "I declare
I believe I miss him, too! I believe to my soul I'd like to hear him
crow--I wouldn't mind if he came strutting in here!" And "in here" was
Aunt Olivia's beloved garden of flowers. Surely she was being sorry now!

It was the next day that Rebecca Mary's bitterness was sweetened--that
she began to be cured. She and the little, white cat went down together
to Thomas Jefferson's resting place. When they went home--and they went
soon--Rebecca Mary got her diary and began to write in it with eager
haste. Her sombre little face had lighted up with some inner gladness,
like relief:

"Shes been there and put some lavvender on and pinks. I mean Aunt
Olivia. And shes the very fondest of her pinks and lavvender. So she
must have loved Tomas Jefferson. Shes sorry. Shes sorry. Shes sorry. And
Ime so glad."

Rebecca Mary caught up the little, white cat and cried her first tear of
joy on its neck. Then she wrote again:

"Now there are two morners instead of one. Two morners seams so mutch
lovinger than only one. I know he must feal better. I think he must have
been hurt before and so was I. I wish I dass tell Aunt Olivia how glad I
am shes sorry."

But she told only the little, white cat. The Plummer mantle of reticence
had fallen too heavily on her narrow little shoulders. What she longed
to do she did not "dass." But that evening in her little ruffled
nightgown she went to Aunt Olivia's room and thanked her for the
ruffles.

"They're beautiful," she murmured, in a small agony of shyness. "I think
it was very kind of you to ruffle me--I've always wanted to be. Thank
you very much." And then she had scurried away on her bare feet to the
safe retreat of her own room under the eaves. Aunt Olivia, left behind,
was unconsciously relieved at not having to respond. She was glad the
child had discovered the ruffles and was pleased. It was a good sign.

"I'll mix up some pancakes in the morning," Aunt Olivia said,
complacently. "Pancakes may help along. Rebecca Mary is fond of 'em."

The pinks and the fragrant lavender appeared to have established
a certain unspoken comradeship between the two "morners" of Thomas
Jefferson. Thereafter Rebecca Mary went about comforted, and Aunt Olivia
relieved. The little, white cat purred about the skirts of one and the
stubbed-out toes of the other in cheerful content.

"Well?" the minister's wife queried, in a moment of social intercourse
after church. She and Aunt Olivia walked down the aisle together.

"She's getting over it--or beginning to," nodded Aunt Olivia. "That
other rooster didn't work, but I think the little cat is going to. She
hugs it."

"Good! But she still mourns Thomas Jef--"

"Of course!" Aunt Olivia interposed, rather crisply. "You couldn't
expect her to get over it all in a minute. He was a remarkable rooster."

"She misses him, herself," inwardly smiled the minister's little wife.
Whether by virtue of her relationship to the minister or by her own
virtue, she had learned to read human nature with a degree of accuracy.

"I looked at myself in the glass tonight," confessed Rebecca Mary's
diary, "but it was on acount of the rufles. I think Ime not quite so
homebly in rufles. I think Aunt Olivia was kind to rufle me. I should
like to ware this night gown in the day time. I wish folks did."

The pencil slipped out of Rebecca Mary's fingers and rolled on the
floor, to the undoing of the little, white cat, who had gone to bed in
his basket. Rebecca Mary caught him up as he darted after the pencil,
and hugged him in an odd little ecstasy. She felt oddly happy.

"You little, white cat!" she cried, muffledly, her face in his thick
coat, "you've waited and waited, but I think I'm going to love you
now--you needn't wait any more."




The Feel Doll



The minister uttered a suppressed note of warning as solid little steps
sounded in the hall. It was he who threw a hasty covering over the doll.
The minister's wife sewed on undisturbedly. She did worse than that.

"Come here, Rhoda," she called, "and tell me which you like better,
three tucks or five in this petticoat?"

"Five," promptly, upon inspection. Rhoda pulled away the concealing
cover and regarded the stolid doll with tilted head. "She's 'nough like
my Pharaoh's Daughter to be a blood relation," she remarked. "She's got
the Pharaoh complexion."

"Spoken like MY daughter!" laughed the minister. "But I thought new
dolls in this house were always surprises. And here's Mrs. Minister
making doll petticoats out in the open!"

"This is Rebecca Mary's--I'm dressing a doll for Rebecca Mary, Robert.
She's eleven years old and never had a doll! Rhoda's ten and has
had--How many dolls have you had, Rhoda?"

"Gracious! Why, Pharaoh's Daughter, an' Caiapha, an' Esther the
Beautiful Queen, an' the Children of Israel--five o' them--an' Mrs. Job,
an'--"

"Never mind the rest, dear. You hear, Robert? Do you think Rhoda would
be alive now if she'd never had a doll?"

The minister pondered the question. "Maybe not, maybe not," he decided;
"but possibly the dolls would have been."

"Don't make me smile, Robert. I'm trying to make you cry. If Rebecca
Mary were sixty instead of eleven I should dress her a doll."

"Then why not one for Miss Olivia?"

"I may dress her one," undauntedly, "if I find out she never had one in
her life."

"She never did." The minister's voice was positive. "And for that
reason, dear, aren't you afraid she would not approve of Rebecca Mary's
having one? Isn't it rather a delicate mat--"

"Don't, Robert, don't discourage me. It's going to be such a beautiful
doll! And you needn't tell me that poor little eleven-year-old
woman-child won't hold out her empty arms for it. Robert, you're a
minister; would it be wrong to give it to her STRAIGHT?"

"Straight, dear?"

"Yes; without saying anything to her aunt Olivia. Tell me. Rhoda's gone.
Say it as--as liberally as you can."

The minister for answer swept doll, petticoat, and minister's wife into
his arms, and kissed them all impartially.

"Think if it were Rhoda," she pleaded.

"And you were 'Aunt Olivia'? You ask me to think such hard things, dear!
If I could stop being a minister long enough--"

"Stop?" she laughed; but she knew she meant keep on. With a sigh she
burrowed a little deeper in his neck. "Then I'll ask Aunt Olivia first,"
she said.

She went back to her tucking. Only once more did she mention Rebecca
Mary. The once was after she had come downstairs from tucking the
children into bed. She stood in the doorway with the look in her face
that mothers have after doing things like that. The minister loved that
look.

"Robert, nights when I kiss the children--you knew when you married me
that I was foolish--I kiss little lone Rebecca Mary, too. I began the
day Thomas Jefferson died--I went to the Rebecca-Mary-est window and
threw her a kiss. I went tonight. Don't say a word; you knew when you
married me."

Aunt Olivia received the resplendent doll in silence. Plummer honesty
and Plummer politeness were at variance. Plummer politeness said: "Thank
her. For goodness' sake, aren't you going to thank the minister's wife?"
But Plummer honesty, grim and yieldless, said, "You can't thank her,
because you're not thankful." So Aunt Olivia sat silent, with her
resplendent doll across her knees.

"For Rebecca Mary," the minister's wife was saying, in rather a halting
way. "I dressed it for her. I thought perhaps she never--"

"She never," said Aunt Olivia, briefly. Strange that at that particular
instant she should remember a trifling incident in the child's far-off
childhood. The incident had to do with a little, white nightgown rolled
tightly and pinned together. She had found Rebecca Mary in her little
waist and petticoat cuddling it in bed.

"It's a dollie. Please 'sh, Aunt Olivia, or you'll wake her up!" the
child had whispered, in an agony. "Oh, you're not agoing to turn her
back to a nightgown? Don't unpin her, Aunt Olivia--it will kill her!
I'll name her after you if you'll let her stay."

"Get up and take your clothes off." Strange Aunt Olivia should remember
at this particular instant; should remember, too, that the pin had
been a little rusty and came out hard. Rebecca Mary had slid out of bed
obediently, but there had been a look on her little brown face as of one
bereaved. She had watched the pin come out, and the nightgown unroll, in
stricken silence. When it hung released and limp over Aunt Olivia's arm
she had given one little cry:

"She's dead!"

The minister's wife was talking hurriedly. Her voice seemed a good
way off; it had the effect of coming nearer and growing louder as Aunt
Olivia stepped back across the years.

"Of course you are to do as you think best about giving it to her," the
minister's wife said, unwillingly. This came of being a minister's wife!
"But I think--I have always thought--that little girls ought--I
mean Rhoda ought--to have dolls to cuddle. It seems part of
their--her--inheritance." This was hard work! If Miss Olivia would not
sit there looking like that--.

"As if I'd done something unkind!" thought the gentle little mother,
indignantly. She got up presently and went away. But Aunt Olivia, with
the doll hanging unhealthily over her arm, followed her to the door.
There was something the Plummer honesty insisted upon Aunt Olivia's
saying. She said it reluctantly:

"I think I ought to tell you that I've never believed in dolls. I've
always thought they were a waste of time and kept children from learning
to do useful things. I've brought Rebecca Mary up according to my best
light."

"Worst darkness!" thought the minister's wife, hotly.

"She's never had a doll. I never had one. I got along. I could make
butter when I was seven. So perhaps you'd better take the doll--"

"No, no! Please keep it, Miss Olivia, and if you should ever change your
mind--I mean perhaps sometime--good-bye. It's a beautiful day, isn't
it?"

Aunt Olivia took it up into the guest chamber and laid it in an empty
bureau drawer. She closed the drawer hastily. She did not feel as
duty-proof as she had once felt, before things had happened--softening
things that had pulled at her heartstrings and weakened her. The quilt
on the guest chamber bed was one of the things; she would not look at it
now. And the sheets under the quilt--and the grave of Thomas Jefferson
that she could see from the guest chamber window. Aunt Olivia was
terribly beset with the temptation to take the doll out to Rebecca Mary
in the garden.

"Are you going to do it?" demanded Duty, confronting her. "Are you
going to give up all your convictions now? Rebecca Mary's in her twelfth
year-pretty late to begin to humor her. I thought you didn't believe in
humoring."

"I unpinned the nightgown," parried Aunt Olivia, on the defensive. "I
never let her make another one."

"But you're weakening now. You want to let her have THIS doll."

"It seems like part of--of her inheritance."

"Lock that drawer!"

Aunt Olivia turned the key unhappily. It was not that her "convictions"
had changed--it was her heart.

She went up at odd times and looked at the doll the minister's wife had
dressed. She had an unaccountable, uncomfortable feeling that it was
lying there in its coffin--that Rebecca Mary would have said, "She's
dead."

It was a handsome doll. Aunt Olivia was not acquainted with dolls,
but she acknowledged that. She admired it unwillingly. She liked its
clothes--the minister's wife had not spared any pains. She had not
stinted in tucks nor ruffles.

Once Aunt Olivia took it out and turned it over in her hands with
critical intent, but there was nothing to criticise. It was a beautiful
doll. She held it with a curious, shy tenderness. But that time she did
not sit down with it. It was the next time.

The rocker was so near the bureau, and Aunt Olivia was tired--and the
doll was already in her arms. She only sat down. For a minute she sat
quite straight and unrelaxed, then she settled back a little--a little
more. The doll lay heavily against her, its flaxen head touching her
breast. After the manner of high-bred dolls, its eyes drooped sleepily.

Aunt Olivia began to rock--a gentle sway back and forth. She was sixty,
but this was the first time she had ever rocked a chi--a doll. So she
rocked for a little, scarcely knowing it. When she found out, a wave of
soft pink dyed her face and flowed upward redly to her hair.

"Well!" Duty jibed, mocking her.

"Don't say a word!" cried poor Aunt Olivia. "I'll put her right back."

"What good will that do?"

"I'll lock her in."

"You've locked her in before."

"I'll--I'll hide the key."

"Where you can find it! Think again."

Aunt Olivia thrust the doll back into its coffin with unsteady hands.
The red in her face had faded to a faint, abiding pink. She locked the
drawer and drew out the key. She strode to the window and flung it out
with a wide sweep of her arm.

The minister's wife, ignorant of the results of her kind little
experiment, resolved to question Rebecca Mary the next time she came on
an errand. She would do it with extreme caution.

"I'll just feel round," she said. "I want to know if her aunt's given it
to her. You think she must have, don't you, Robert? By this time? Why,
it was six weeks ago I carried it over! It was such a nice, friendly
little doll! By this time they would be such friends--if her aunt gave
it to her. Robert, you think--"

"I think it's going to rain," the minister said. But he kissed her to
make it easier.

Rebecca Mary came over to bring Aunt Olivia's rule for parson-cake that
the minister's wife had asked for.

"Come in, Rebecca Mary," the minister's wife said, cordially. "Don't you
want to see the new dress Rhoda's doll is going to have? I suppose you
could make your doll's dress yourself?" It seemed a hard thing to say.
Feeling round was not pleasant.

"P'haps I could, but she doesn't wear dresses," Rebecca Mary answered,
gravely.

"No?" This was puzzling. "Her clothes don't come off, I suppose?" Then
it could not be the nice, friendly doll.

"No'm. Nor they don't go on, either. She isn't a feel doll."

"A--what kind did you say, dear?" The minister's wife paused in her work
interestedly. Distinctly, Miss Olivia had not given her THE doll; but
this doll--"I don't think I quite understood, Rebecca Mary."

"No'm; it's a little hard. She isn't a FEEL doll, I said. I never had a
feel one. Mine hasn't any body, just a soul. But she's a great comfort."

"Robert," appealed the minister's wife, helplessly. This was a case for
the minister--a case of souls.

"Tell us some more about her, Rebecca Mary," the minister urged, gently.
But there was helplessness, too, in his eyes.

"Why, that's all!" returned Rebecca Mary, in surprise. "Of course I
can't dress her or undress her or take her out calling. But it's a great
comfort to rock her soul to sleep."

"Call Rhoda," murmured the wife to the minister; but Rhoda was already
there. She volunteered prompt explanation. There was no hesitation in
Rhoda's face.

"She means a make believe doll. Don't you, Rebecca Mary?"

"Yes," Rebecca Mary assented; "that's her other name, I suppose, but I
never called her by it."

"What did you call her?" demanded practical Rhoda. "What's her name
mean?"

"Rhoda!"--hastily, from the minister's wife. This seemed like sacrilege.
But Rhoda's clear, blue eyes were fixed upon Rebecca Mary; she had not
heard her mother's warning little word.

A shy color spread thinly over the lean little face of Rebecca Mary. For
the space of a breath or two she hesitated.

"Her name's--Felicia," then, softly.

"Robert"--the children had gone out together; the minister's wife's eyes
were unashamedly wet--"Robert, I wish you were a--a sheriff instead of
a minister. Because I think I would make a better sheriff's wife. Do you
know what I would make you do?"

The minister could guess.

"I'd make you ARREST that woman, Robert!"

"Felicia!" But she saw willingness to be a sheriff come into his own
eyes and stop there briefly.

"Don't call me 'Felicia' while I feel as wicked as this! Oh, Robert, to
think she named her little soul-doll after me!"

"It's a beautiful name."

Suddenly the wickedness was over. She laughed unsteadily.

"It wouldn't be a good name for a sheriff's wife, would it?" she said.
"So I'll stay by my own minister."

One day close upon this time Aunt Olivia came abruptly upon Rebecca Mary
in the grape arbor. She was sitting in her little rocking chair, swaying
back and forth slowly. She did not see Aunt Olivia. What was she was
crooning half under her breath?

  "Oh, hush, oh, hush, my dollie;
  Don't worry any more,
  For Rebecca Mary 'n' the angels
  Are watching o'er,
  ---O'er 'n' o'er 'n' o'er."

The same words over and over--growing perhaps a little softer and
tenderer. Rebecca Mary's arm was crooked as though a little flaxen head
lay in the bend of it. Rebecca Mary's brooding little face was gazing
downward intently at her empty arm. Quite suddenly it came upon Aunt
Olivia that she had seen the child rocking like this before--that she
must have seen her often.

  "Rebecca Mary 'n' the angels
  Are watching o'er,"

sang on the crooning little voice in Aunt Olivia's ears.

The doll in its coffin upstairs; down here Rebecca Mary rocking her
empty arms. The two thoughts flashed into Aunt Olivia's mind and welded
into one. All her vacillations and Duty's sharp reminders occurred
to her clearly. She had thought that at last she was proof against
temptation, but she had not thought of this. She was not prepared for
Rebecca Mary, here in her little rocking chair, rocking her little
soul-doll to sleep.

The angels were used to watching o'er, but Aunt Olivia could not bear
it. She went away with a strange, unaccustomed ache in her throat. The
minister's wife would not have wanted her arrested then.

Aunt Olivia tiptoed away as though Rebecca Mary had said, "'Sh!" She was
remembering, as she went, the brief, sweet moment when she had sat like
that and rocked, with the doll the minister's wife dressed, in her arms.
It seemed to establish a new link of kinship between her and Rebecca
Mary.

She ran plump into Duty.

"Oh!" she gasped. She was a little stunned. Aunt Olivia's Duty was
solid.

"I know where you've been. I tried get there in time."

"You're too late," Aunt Olivia said, firmly, "Don't stop me; there's
something I must do before it gets too dark. It's six o'clock now."

"Wait!" commanded Duty. "Are you crazy? You don't mean--"

"Go back there and look at that child--and hear what she's singing! Stay
long enough to take it all in--don't hurry."

But Duty barred her way, grim and stern.

Palely she put up both her hands and thrust it aside. She did not once
look back at it.

Already it was dusky under the guest chamber window. She had to stoop
and peer and feel in the long tangle of grass. She kept on patiently
with the Plummer kind of patience that never gave up. She was eager and
smiling, as though something pleasant were at the end of the peering and
stooping and feeling.

Aunt Olivia was hunting for a key.




The Plummer Kind



The doll's name was Olivicia.

Rebecca Mary had evolved the name from her inner consciousness and her
intense gratitude to Aunt Olivia and the minister's wife. She had put
Aunt Olivia first with instinctive loyalty, though in the secret little
closet of her soul she had longed to call the beautiful being Felicia,
intact and sweet. She did not know the meaning of Felicia, but she knew
that the doll, as it lay in the loving cradle of her arms, gazing upward
with changeless placidity and graciousness, looked as one should look
whose name was Felicia. Greater compliment than this Rebecca Mary could
not have paid the minister's wife.

"Olivicia," she had placed the being on the sill of the attic window,
stood confronting, addressing it: "Olivicia, it's coming--it is very
near to! Sit there and listen and smile--oh yes, smile, SMILE. I don't
wonder! I would too, only I'm too glad. When you're TOO glad you can't
smile. I've been waiting for it to come. Olivicia, seems as if I'd been
waiting a thousan' years. You're so young, you've only lived such little
while, of course I don't expect you understand the deep-downness inside
o' me when I think--"

The address fluttered and came to a standstill here. Rebecca Mary was
suddenly minded that Olivicia was in the dark; must be enlightened
before she could smile understandingly.

"Why, you poor dear!--why, you don't know what it is that's coming and
that's near to! It's the--city, Olivicia," enlightened Rebecca Mary,
gently, to insure against shock. "Aunt Olivia's going--to--the--city."

In Rebecca Mary's dreamings it had always been THE city. It did not need
local habitation and a name; enough that it had streets upon streets,
houses upon houses upon houses, a dazzling swirl of men, women, and
little children--noise, glitter, glory. In her dreamings the city was
something so wondrous and grand that Heaven might have been its name.
The streets upon streets were not paved with gold, of course--of course
she knew they were not paved with gold! But in spite of herself she knew
that she would be disappointed if they did not shine.

Aunt Olivia had said it that morning. At breakfast--quite
matter-of-factly. Think of saying it matter-of-factly!

"I'm going to the city soon, Rebecca Mary," she had said, between sips
of her tea. "Perhaps by Friday week, but I haven't set the day, really.
There's a good deal to do."

Rebecca Mary had been helping do it all day. Now it was nearly time for
the pageant of red and gold in the west that Rebecca Mary loved, and she
had come up here with the beautiful being to watch it through the tiny
panes of the attic window, but more to ease the aching rapture in her
soul by speech. She must say it out loud. The city--the city--to the
city of streets and houses and men and wonders upon wonders!

Olivicia had come in the capacity of calm listener; for nothing excited
Olivicia.

"I," Aunt Olivia had said, but Aunt Olivia usually said "I." There was
no discouragement in that to Rebecca Mary. It did not for a moment occur
to her that "I" did not mean "we."

The valise they had got down from its cobwebby niche was roomy; it would
hold enough for two. Rebecca Mary knew that, because she had packed it
so many times in her dreamings. She wished Aunt Olivia would let her
pack it now. She knew just where she would put everything--her
best dress and Aunt Olivia's (for of course they would wear their
second-bests), their best hats and shoes and gloves. Their nightgowns
she would roll tightly and put in one end, for it doesn't hurt
nightgowns to be rolled tightly. Of course she would not put
anything heavy, like hair brushes and shoes and things, on top of
anything--unless it was the nightgowns, for it doesn't hurt--

"Oh, Olivicia--oh, Olivicia, how I hope she'll say, 'Rebecca Mary, you
may pack the valise'! I could do it with my eyes shut, I've done it so
many, many times!"

But Aunt Olivia did not say it. One day and then another went by without
her saying it, and then one morning Rebecca Mary knew by the plump,
well-fed aspect of the valise that it was packed. Aunt Olivia had packed
it in the night.

There was no one else in the room when Rebecca Mary made her
disappointing little discovery. She went over to the plump valise and
prodded it gently with her finger. But it is so difficult to tell in
that way whether your own best dress, your own best hat, best shoes,
best gloves, are in there. Rebecca Mary hurried upstairs and looked in
her closet and in her "best" bureau drawer.

They were not there! In her relief she caught up the beautiful being and
strained her hard, lifeless little body to her own warm breast. If she
had not been Rebecca Mary, she would have danced about the room.

"Oh, I'm so relieved, Olivicia!" she laughed, softly. "If they're not up
here, THEY'RE DOWN THERE. They've got to be somewhere. They're in that
valise--valise--vali-i-ise!"

Rebecca Mary had never been to a city, and within her remembrance Aunt
Olivia had never been. Curiosity was not a Plummer trait, hence Rebecca
Mary had never asked many questions about the remote period before her
own advent into Aunt Olivia's life. The same Plummer restraint kept her
now from asking questions. There was nothing to do but wait, but the
waiting was illumined by her joyous anticipations.

Oddly enough, Aunt Olivia seemed to have no anticipations--at least
joyous ones. Her, thin, grave face may even have looked a little thinner
and graver, IF Rebecca Mary had thought to notice.

The night the lean old valise took on plumpness, Aunt Olivia went often
into Mary's little room. Many of the times she came out very shortly
with the child's "best" things trailing from her arms, but once or twice
she stayed rather long--long enough to stand beside a little white bed
and look down on a flushed little face. A pair of wide-open eyes watched
her smilingly from the pillows, but they were not Rebecca Mary's eyes,
and Olivicia was altogether trustworthy.

An odd thing happened--but Olivicia never told. Why should she publish
abroad that she had lain there and seen Aunt Olivia bend once--bend
twice--over Rebecca Mary and kiss her?

Softly, patiently, very wearily, Aunt Olivia went in and out. The things
she brought out in her arms she folded carefully and packed, but not
in the lank old valise. She put them all with tender painstaking into a
quaint little carpetbag. When the work was done she set the bag away out
of sight, and went about packing her own things in the old valise.

The day before, she had been to see the minister and the minister's
wife. She called for them both, and sat down gravely and made her
proposition. It was startling only because of the few words it took
to make it. Otherwise it was very pleasant, and the minister and the
minister's wife received it with nods and smiles.

"Of course, Miss Olivia--why, certainly!" smiled and nodded the
minister.

"Why, it will be delightful--and Rhoda will be so pleased!" nodded and
smiled the minister's wife. But after their caller had gone she faced
the minister with indignant eyes.

"Why did you let her?" she demanded. "Why did you spoil it all by that?"

"Because she was Miss Olivia," he answered, gently.

"Yes--yes, I suppose so," reluctantly; "but, anyway, you needn't have
let her do it in advance. Actually it made me blush, Robert!"

The minister rubbed his cheeks tentatively. "Made me, too," he admitted,
"but I respect Miss Olivia so much--"

The minister's wife tacked abruptly to her other source of indignation.

"Why doesn't she TAKE Rebecca Mary? Robert, wait! You know it isn't
because--You know better!"

"It isn't because, dear--I know better," he hurried, assuringly. The
minister was used to her little indignations and loved them for being
hers. They were harmless, too, and wont to have a good excuse for being.
This one, now--the minister in his heart wondered that Miss Olivia did
not take Rebecca Mary.

"It would be such a treat. Robert, you think what a treat it would be to
Rebecca Mary!"

"Still, dear--"

"I don't want to be still! I want Rebecca Mary to have that treat!" But
she kissed him in token of being willing to drop it there--it was her
usual token--and ran away to get a little room ready. There was not a
device known to the minister's wife that she did not use to make that
room pleasant.

"Shall I take your pincushion, Rhoda?" Rhoda had come up to help.

"Yes," eagerly, "and I'll write Welcome with the pins."

"And the little fan to put on the wall--the pink one?"

"Yes, yes; let me spread it out, mamma!"

"That's grand. Now if we only had a pink quilt--"

"I 'only have' one!" laughed Rhoda, hurrying after it.

The whole little room when they left, like the pins in the pincushion,
spelled "WELCOME."

Aunt Olivia got up earlier than usual one day and went about the house
for a survey. The valise and the little carpetbag she carried downstairs
and out on to the front steps. Her face was whitened as if by a long
night's vigil. When she called Rebecca Mary it was with a voice strained
hoarse. The beautiful being Olivicia watched her with intent, unwinking
gaze. Could it be Olivicia understood?

"Hurry and dress, Rebecca Mary; there's a good deal to do," Aunt Olivia
said at the door. She did not go in. "Yes, in your second-best--don't
you see I've put it out. You can wear that every day now, till--for a
while." Something in the voice startled Rebecca Mary out of her subdued
ecstasy and sent her down to breakfast with a nameless fear tugging at
her heart.

"You're going to stay at the minister's--I've paid your board in
advance," Aunt Olivia said, monotonously, as if it were her lesson. She
did not look at Rebecca Mary. "I've put in your long-sleeve aprons so
you can help do up the dishes. There's plenty of handkerchiefs to last.
You mustn't forget your rubbers when it's wet, or to make up your bed
yourself. I don't want you to make the minister's wife any more trouble
than you can help."

The lesson went monotonously on, but Rebecca Mary scarcely heard. She
had heard the first sentence--her sentence, poor child! "You're going to
stay at the minister's--stay at the minister's--stay at the minister's."
It said itself over and over again in her ears. In her need for somebody
to lean on, her startled gaze sought the beautiful being across the room
in agonized appeal.

But Olivicia was staring smilingly at Aunt Olivia. ET TU, OLIVICIA!

If Rebecca Mary had noticed, there was an appealing, wistful look in
Aunt Olivia's eyes too, in odd contrast to the firm lips that moved
steadily on with their lesson:

"You can walk to school with Rhoda, you'll enjoy that. You've never had
folks to walk with. And you can stay with her, only you mustn't forget
your stents. I've put in some towels to hem. Maybe the minister's wife
has got something; if so, hem hers first. You'll be like one o' the
family, and they're nice folks, but I want you to keep right on being a
Plummer."

Years afterwards Rebecca Mary remembered the dizzy dance of the bottles
in the caster--they seemed to join hands and sway and swing about their
silver circlet and how Aunt Olivia's buttons marched and countermarched
up and down Aunt Olivia's alpaca dress. She did not look above the
buttons--she did not dare to. If she was to keep right on being a
Plummer, she must not cry.

"That's all," she heard through the daze and dizziness, "except that
I can't tell when I'll be back. It--ain't decided. Likely I shan't be
able--there won't be much chance to write, and you needn't expect me to.
No need to write me either. That's all, I guess."

The stage that came for Aunt Olivia dropped the little carpetbag and
Rebecca Mary at the minister's. In the brief interval between the start
and the dropping, Rebecca Mary sat, stiff and numb, on the edge of the
high seat and gazed out unfamiliarly at the familiar landmarks they
lurched past. At any other time the knowledge that she was going to the
minister's to stay--to live--would have filled her with staid joy. At
any other time--but THIS time only a dull ache filled her little dreary
world. Everything seemed to ache--the munching cows in the Trumbull
pasture, the cats on the doorsteps, the dog loping along beside the
stage, the stage driver's stooping old back. Aunt Olivia was going to
the city--Rebecca Mary wasn't going to the city. There was no room in
the world for anything but that and the ache.

Rebecca Mary's indignation was not born till night. Then, lying in the
dainty bed under Rhoda's pink quilt, her mood changed. Until then she
had only been disappointed. But then she sat up suddenly and said bitter
things about Aunt Olivia.

"She's gone to have a good time all to herself--and she might have taken
me. She didn't, she didn't, and she might've. She wanted all the good
time herself! She didn't want me to have any!"

"Rebecca Mary!--did you speak, dear?" It was the gentle voice of the
minister's wife outside the door. Rebecca Mary's red little hands
unwrung and dropped on the pink quilt.

"No'm, I did--I mean yes'm, I didn't--I mean--"

"You don't feel sick? There isn't anything the matter, dear?"

"No'm--oh, yes'm, yes'm!" for there was something the matter. It was
Aunt Olivia. But she must not say it--must not cry--must keep right on
being a Plummer.

"Robert, I didn't go in--I couldn't," the minister's wife said, back
in the cheery sitting room. "I suppose you think I'd have gone in and
comforted her, taken her right in my arms and comforted her the Rhoda
way, but I didn't."

"No?" The minister's voice was a little vague on account of the sermon
on his knees.

"I seemed to know--something told me right through that door--that she'd
rather I wouldn't. Robert, if the child is homesick, it's a different
kind of homesickness."

"The Plummer kind," he suggested. The minister was coming to.

"Yes, the Plummer kind, I suppose, Plummers are such--such PLUMMERY
persons, Robert!"

Upstairs under the pink quilt the rigid little figure relaxed just
enough to admit of getting out of bed and fumbling in the little
carpetbag. With her diary in her hand--for Aunt Olivia had remembered
her diary--Rebecca Mary went to the window and sat down. She had to
hold the cookbook up at a painful angle and peer at it sharply, for the
moonlight that filtered into the little room through the vines was dim
and soft.

"Aunt Olivia has gone to the city and I haven't," painfully traced
Rebecca Mary. "She wanted the good time all to herself. I shall never
forgive Aunt Olivia the Lord have mercy on her." Then Rebecca Mary
went back to bed. She dreamed that the cars ran off the track and they
brought Aunt Olivia's pieces home to her. In the dreadful dream she
forgave Aunt Olivia.

It was very pleasant at the minister's and the minister's wife's.
Rebecca Mary felt the warmth and pleasantness of it in every fibre of
her body and soul. But she was not happy nor warm. She thought it was
indignation against Aunt Olivia--she did not know she was homesick. She
did not know why she went to the old home every day after school and
wandered through Aunt Olivia's flower garden, and sat with little brown
chin palm-deep on the doorsteps. Gradually the indignation melted out of
existence and only the homesickness was left. It sat on her small, lean
face like a little spectre. It troubled the minister's wife.

"What can we do, Robert?" she asked.

"What?" he echoed; for the minister, too, was troubled.

"She wanders about like a little lost soul. When she plays with the
children it's only the outside of her that plays."

"Only the outside," he nodded.

"Last night I went in, Robert, and--and tried the Rhoda way. I think
she liked it, but it didn't comfort her. I am sure now that it is
homesickness, Robert." They were both sure, but the grim little spectre
sat on, undaunted by all their kindnesses.

"When thy father and thy mother forsake the," wrote Rebecca Mary in the
cookbook diary, "and thy Aunt Olivia for I know it means and thy Aunt
Olivia then the Lord will take the up, but I dont feal as if anyboddy
had taken me up. The ministers wife did once but of course she had to
put me down again rite away. She is a beutiful person and I love her but
she is differunt from thy father and thy mother and thy Aunt Olivia. Ide
rather have Aunt Olivia take me up than to have the Lord."

It was when she shut the battered little book this time that Rebecca
Mary remembered one or two things that had happened the morning Aunt
Olivia went away. It was queer how she HADN'T remembered them before.

She remembered that Aunt Olivia had taken her sharp little face between
her own hands and looked down wistfully at it--wistfully, Rebecca Mary
remembered now, though she did not call it by that name. She remembered
Aunt Olivia had said, "You needn't hem anything unless it's for the
minister's wife--never mind the towels I put in." That was almost the
last thing she had said. She had put her head out of the stage door to
say it. Rebecca Mary had hemmed a towel each day. There were but two
left, and she resolved to hem both of those tomorrow. A sudden little
longing was born within her for more towels to hem for Aunt Olivia.

It was nearly three weeks after Rebecca Mary's entrance into the
minister's family when the letter came. It was directed to Rebecca Mary,
and lay on her plate when she came home from school.

"Oh, look, you've got a letter, Rebecca Mary!" heralded Rhoda, joyfully.
Then her face fell, for maybe the letter would say Aunt Olivia was
coming home.

"Is it from your aunt Olivia?" she asked, anxiously.

"No," Rebecca Mary said, in slow surprise. "The writing isn't, anyway,
and the name is another one--"

"Oh! Oh! Maybe she's got mar--"

"Rhoda!" cautioned the minister.

This is the letter Rebecca Mary read:

"Dear Rebecca Mary,--You see I know your name from your aunt. She talked
about you all the time, but I am writing you of my own accord. She does
not know it. I think you will like to know that at last we are feeling
very hopeful about your aunt. We have been very anxious since the
operation, she had so little strength to rally with. But now if she
keeps on as well as this you will have her home again in a little while.
The doctors say three weeks. She is the patientest patient in the ward.
Yours very truly, Sara Ellen Nesbitt, Nurse" Ward A, Emmons Hospital

That was the letter. Rebecca Mary's face grew a little whiter at every
line of it. At every line understanding grew clearer, till at the end
she knew it all. She gave a little cry, and ran out of the room. Love
and remorse and sympathy fought for first place in her laboring little
breast. In the next few minutes she lived so long a time and thought so
many thoughts! But above everything else towered joy that Aunt Olivia
was coming home.

Rebecca Mary's eyes blazed with pride at being a Plummer. This kind of
courage was the Plummer kind. The child's lank little figure seemed to
grow taller and straighter. She held up her head splendidly and exulted.
She felt like going up on the minister's housetop and proclaiming:
"She's my aunt Olivia! She's mine! She's mine--I'm a Plummer, too! All
o' you listen, she's my aunt Olivia, and she's coming home!"

Suddenly the child flung out her arms towards the south where Aunt
Olivia was. And though she stood quite still, something within her
seemed to spring away and go hurrying through the clear air.

"I shouldn't suppose Aunt Olivia would ever forgive me, but she's Aunt
Olivia and she will," wrote Rebecca Mary that night, her small, dark
face full of a solemn peace--it seemed so long since she had been full
of peace before. She wrote on eagerly:

"When she gets home Ime going to hug her I can't help it if it wont be
keeping right on."




Article Seven



Rebecca Mary measured them. Against the woodshed wall, with chalk--it
was not altogether an easy thing to do. The result startled her. With
rather unsteady little fingers she measured from chalk mark to floor
again, to make sure it was as bad as that. It was even a little worse.

"Oh," sighed Rebecca Mary, "to think they belong to me--to think they're
hitched on!" She gazed down at them with scorn and was ashamed of them.
She tried to conceal their length with her brief skirts; but when she
straightened up, there they were again, as long as ever. She sat down
suddenly on the shed floor and drew them up underneath her. That was
temporarily a relief. "If I sit here world without end nobody'll see
'em," grimly smiled Rebecca Mary.

It was her legs Rebecca Mary measured against the woodshed wall. It was
her legs she was ashamed of. No wonder the minister's wife had said
to the minister going home from meeting, with Rebecca Mary behind them
unawares,--no wonder she had said, "Robert, HAVE you noticed Rebecca
Mary's legs?"

Rebecca Mary had not heard the reply of the minister, for of course she
had gone away then. If she had stayed she would have heard him say, with
exaggerated prudery, "Felicia! My dear! Were you alluding to Rebecca
Mary's limbs?" for the minister wickedly remembered inadvertent
occasions when he himself had called legs legs.

"LEGS," the minister's wife repeated, calmly--"Rebecca Mary's are too
long for limbs. Robert, that child will grow up one of these days!"

"They all do," sighed the minister. "It's human nature, dear. You'll be
telling me next that there's something the matter with Rhoda's--legs."

The minister's wife gazed thoughtfully ahead at a little trio fast
approaching the vanishing point. Her eyes grew a little wistful.

"There is now, perhaps, but I haven't noticed--I won't look!" she
murmured. "And, anyway, Robert, Rhoda will give us a little time to get
used to it in. But Rebecca Mary isn't the Rhoda kind--I don't believe
Rebecca Mary will give us even three days of grace!"

"I always supposed Rebecca Mary was born that way--grown up," the
minister remarked, tucking a gloved hand comfortably close under his
arm. "I wouldn't let it worry me, dear."

"Oh, I don't--not worry, really," she said, smiling--"only her legs
startled me a little today. If she were mine, I should let her dresses
down."

"If she were Rhod--"

"She isn't, she's Rebecca Mary. Probably if I were Miss Olivia I would
let Rhoda's down!" And she knew she would.

Rebecca Mary on the woodshed floor sat and thought "deep-down" thoughts.
Her eyes were fixed dreamily on a big knothole before her, and the
thoughts seemed to come out of it and stand before her, demanding
imperiously to be thought. One after another--a relentless procession.

"Think me," the first one had commanded. "I'm the Thought of Growing
Up. I saw you measuring your legs, and I concluded it was time for me to
introduce myself. I had to come some time, didn't I?"

"Oh yes," breathed Rebecca Mary, sadly. "I don't suppose I could expect
you to stay in there always; but--but I'm not very glad to see you. You
needn't have come so SUDDEN," she added, with gentle resentment.

The Thought of Growing Up crept into her mind and nestled down there. As
thoughts go, it was not an unkind one.

"You'll get used to me sometime and like me," it said, comfortingly. But
Rebecca Mary knew better. She drove it out.

Why must legs keep on growing and unwelcome Thoughts come out of
knotholes? Why could not little girls keep on sewing stents and learning
arithmetic and carrying beautiful doll-beings to bed? Why had the Lord
created little girls like this--this growing kind?

"If I had made the world," began Rebecca Mary--but stopped in a hurry.
The irreverence of presuming to make a better world than the Lord shamed
her.

"I suppose He knew best, but if He'd ever been a little girl--" This was
worse than the other. Rebecca Mary hastily dismissed the world and its
Maker from her musings for fear of further irreverences.

One Thought came out of the knothole, illustrated. It was leading a tall
woman-girl by the hand--no, it was pushing it as though the woman-girl
were loath to come.

"Come along," urged the new Thought, laughingly. "Here she is--this is
Rebecca Mary. Rebecca Mary, this is YOU! You needn't be afraid of each
other, you two. Take a good long look and get acquainted."

The woman-girl was tall and straight. She had Rebecca Mary's hair,
Rebecca Mary's eyes, mouth, little pointed chin. But not Rebecca Mary's
legs--unless the long skirts covered them. She was rather comely and
pleasant to look at. But Rebecca Mary tried not to look.

"She's got a lover---some day she'll be getting married," the new
Thought said more abruptly, startlingly, than grammatically. And then
with a little muffled cry Rebecca Mary put out her hands and pushed
the woman-girl away--back into the knothole whence she had come. The
Thought, too, for she had no room in her mind for thoughts like that.

"My aunt Olivia wouldn't allow me to think of you," she explained in
dismissing them. "And," with dignity she added, "neither would Rebecca
Mary."

It was to be as the minister's wife had prophesied--there were to be not
even the three days of grace allowed by law when Rebecca Mary grew up.
Sitting there with her legs, her poor little unappreciated legs, the
innocent cause of the whole trouble, curled out of sight, Rebecca Mary
planned that there should be but one day of grace. She would allow one
day more to be a little girl in, and then she would grow up. But that
one day--Rebecca Mary got up hastily and went to find Aunt Olivia.

"Aunt Olivia," she began, without preamble--Rebecca Mary never
preambled--"Aunt Olivia, may I have a holiday tomorrow?"

Aunt Olivia was rocking in her easy chair on the porch. It had taken her
sixty-two years to learn to sit in an easy chair and rock. Even now, and
she had been home from the hospital many months, she felt a little
as though the friendly birds that perched on the porch railing were
twittering tauntingly, "Plummer! Plummer! Plummer!--rocking in an easy
chair!"

"May I, Aunt Olivia?" It was an unusual occurrence for Rebecca Mary to
ask again so soon. But this was an unusual occurrence. Aunt Olivia's
thin face turned affectionately towards the child.

"School doesn't begin again tomorrow, does it?" she said in surprise.
Weren't all Rebecca Mary's days now holidays?

"Oh no---no'm. But I mean may I skip my stents? And--and may I soak the
kettles and pans? Just tomorrow."

"Just tomorrow," repeated bewildered Aunt Olivia--"soak your--stents--"

"Because it's going to be a pretty busy day. It's going to be a--a
celebration," Rebecca Mary said, softly. There was a strangely exalted
look on her face. Oddly enough she was not afraid that Aunt Olivia would
say no.

Aunt Olivia said yes. She did not ask any questions about the
celebration, on account of the exalted look. She could wait. But the
bewildered look stayed for a while on her thin face. Rebecca Mary was
a queer child, a queer child--but she was a dear child. Dearness atoned
for queerness in Aunt Olivia's creed.

The celebration began early the next morning before Aunt Olivia was up.
She lay in bed and heard it begin. Rebecca Mary out in the dewy garden
was singing at the top of her voice. Aunt Olivia had never heard her
sing like that before--not at the top. Her sweet, shrill voice sounded
rather unacquainted with such free heights as that, and the woman in the
bed wondered with a staid little smile if it did not make Rebecca Mary
feel as she felt when she sat in the easy chair rocking.

Rebecca Mary sang hymns mostly, but interspersed in her programme were
bits of Mother Goose set to original tunes--she had learned the Mother
Goose of the minister's Littlest Little Boy--and original bits set to
familiar tunes. It was a wild little orgy of song.

"My grief!" Aunt Olivia ejaculated under her breath; but she did not
mean her grief. Other people might think Rebecca Mary was crazy--not
Aunt Olivia. But yet she wondered a little and found it hard to wait.

Rebecca Mary washed the breakfast cup and plates, but put the pans and
kettles to soak, and hurried away to her play. There was so much playing
to be done before the sun set on her opportunity. She had made a little
programme on a slip of paper, with approximate times allotted to each
item. As:

   Tree climbing... 1 hr.
   (Do not tare anything)
   Mud pies... 1 hr. and 1/2.
   (Do not get anything muddy)
   Tea party... 2 hrs.
   (Do not break anything)
   Skipping... 1/2 hr.

Rebecca Mary had written 1 hr. at first opposite skipping, but it had
rather appalled her to think of skipping for so long a period of time,
and, with a sense of being already out of breath, she had hurriedly
erased the 1 and substituted 1/2. Underneath she had written, ("Do not
tip over anything"). All the items had cautionary parentheses
underneath them, for Rebecca Mary did not wish the celebration to injure
"anything." Not this last day, when all the days of all the years before
it, that had gone to make up her little girlhood, nothing had been torn
or muddied or tipped over.

Rebecca Mary had never climbed trees, had never made mud pies, never had
tea parties, nor skipped. It was with rather a hesitating step that she
went forward to meet them all. She was even a little awed. But she went.
No item on her programme was omitted.

From her rocker on the porch Aunt Olivia watched proceedings with quiet
patience. It was a good vantage point--she could see nearly all of the
celebration. The tree Rebecca Mary climbed was on the edge of the old
orchard next to Aunt Olivia, and there was a providential little rift
through the shrubbery and vines that intervened. This part of the
programme she could see almost too clearly, for it must be confessed
that this part startled Aunt Olivia out of her calm. It--it was so
unexpected. She stopped rocking and leaned forward in her chair to peer
more sharply. What was the child--"She's climbing a tree!" breathed Aunt
Olivia in undisguised astonishment. Even as she breathed it, there came
to her faintly the snapping of twigs and flutter of leaves. Then all was
quite still, but she could discern with her pair of trusty Plummer eyes
two long legs gently dangling.

If Aunt Olivia had known, Rebecca Mary, too, was startled. It--it was so
strange an experience. She was not in the least afraid--it was a mental
start rather than a physical one. When she had reached the limb set down
in her programme she sat on it in a little daze of bewildered delight.
She liked it!

"Why, why, it's nice!" Rebecca Mary breathed. Her turn had come for
undisguised astonishment. The leaves all about her nodded to her and
stroked her cheeks and hair and hands. They whispered things into her
ears. They were such friendly little leaves!

Nothing looked quite the same up there. It was a little as if she were
in a new world, and she felt odd thrills of pride, as probably people
who had discovered countries and rivers and north poles felt. Through
a rift in the leaves she could see with her good Plummer eyes a swaying
spot of brown and white that was Aunt Olivia rocking. Suddenly
Rebecca Mary experienced a pang of remorse that she had wasted so many
opportunities like this--that this was her only one. She wished she had
put 2 hrs. instead of 1 hr. over against "Tree climbing," but it was too
late now. She had borrowed Aunt Olivia's open-faced gold watch to serve
as timekeeper, and promptly at the expiration of the 1 hr. she slid down
through the crackling twigs and friendly leaves to the old world below.
She did not allow herself to look back, but she could not help the sigh.
It was going to be harder to grow up than she had thought it would be.

The mud pies she made with conscientious care as Rhoda, the minister's
little girl, had said she used to make them. She made rows and rows of
them and set them in the sun to bake. There were raisin stones in them
all and crimped edges around them. It did not take nearly all the 1 hr.
and 1/2, so she made another and still another batch. When the time was
up she did not sigh, but she had had rather a good time. How many mud
pies she HADN'T made in all those years that were to end today!

Olivicia and the little white cat went to the tea party. Rebecca Mary
thought of inviting Aunt Olivia--she got as far as the porch steps,
but no farther. She caught a glimpse of her own legs and shrank back
sensitively. They seemed to have grown since she measured them against
the woodshed wall. Rebecca Mary felt the contrast between her legs and
the tea party. Aunt Olivia never knew how near she had come to being
invited to take part in the celebration, at Article III. on the
programme.

Rhoda had had tea parties unnumbered, like the sands of the sea. She had
described them fluently, so Rebecca Mary was not as one in the dark. She
knew how to cut the bread and the cake into tiny dice, and the cookies
into tiny rounds. She knew how to make the cambric tea and to arrange
the jelly and flowers. But Rhoda had forgotten to tell her how to make a
rose pie--how to select two large rose leaves for upper and under crust,
and to fill in the pie between them with pink and white rose petals and
sugar in alternate layers. Press until "done." Why had Rhoda forgotten?
It seemed a pity that there was no rose pie at Rebecca Mary's tea
party--and no time left to make one.

"Will you take sugar in your tea, Olivicia?" Rebecca Mary asked, shyly.
She sat on the ground with her legs drawn under her out of sight, but
there were little warm spots in her cheeks. She had not expected to
be--ashamed. If there had been a knothole anywhere, she thought to
herself, the Thought of Growing Up would have come out of it and
confronted her and reminded her of her legs.

"Will you help yourself to the bread? Won't you have another cookie?"
She left nothing out, and gradually the strangeness wore away. It got
gradually to be a good time. "How many tea parties," thought Rebecca
Mary, "there might have been!"

Rebecca Mary was skipping, when the minister's wife came to call on Aunt
Olivia. It was the minister's wife who discovered it. Aunt Olivia
caught the indrawing of her breath and saw her face. Then Aunt Olivia
discovered it, and a delicate color overspread her thin cheeks and rose
to her temples. Now what was the child--

"Rhoda is a great skipper," the minister's wife said, hurriedly. But it
was the wrong thing--she knew it was the wrong thing.

"Rebecca Mary is having a--celebration," hurried Aunt Olivia; but she
wished she had not, for it seemed like trying to excuse Rebecca Mary.
She, too, had said the wrong thing.

"How pleasant it is out here!" tried again the minister's wife.

"Yes, it's cool," Aunt Olivia agreed, gratefully. After that the things
they said were right things. The fantastic little figure down there in
the orchard, skipping wildly, determinedly, was in none of them. Both
of them felt it to be safer. But the minister's wife's gaze dwelt on the
skipping figure and followed it through its amazing mazes, in spite of
the minister's wife.

"I couldn't have helped it, Robert," she said. "Not if you'd been there
preaching 'Thou shalt not' to me! You would have looked too, while you
were preaching. You can't imagine, sitting there at that desk, what the
temptation was--Robert, you don't suppose Rebecca Mary has gone crazy?"

"Felicia! You frighten me!"

"No, _I_ don't suppose either. But it was certainly very strange. It was
almost ALARMING, Robert. And she didn't know how at all. I wanted to go
down and show her!"

"It seems to me"--the minister spoke impressively "that it is not
Rebecca Mary who has gone crazy--"

"Why, the idea! Haven't I made it plain?" laughed she. "I'll speak in A
B C's then. Rebecca Mary was SKIPPING, Robert--skipping skipping."

"Then it's Rebecca Mary," the minister murmured.

"That's what I'm afraid--didn't I say so? Or else it's her second
childhood--"

"First, you mean. If THAT'S it, don't let's say a word, dear--don't
breathe, Felicia, for fear we'll stop it."

"Dear child!" the minister's wife said, tenderly. "I wish I'd gone down
there and shown her how. And I'd have told her--Robert, I'd have told
her how to climb a tree! Don't tell the parish."

The day was to end at sunset, from sunrise to sunset, Rebecca Mary had
decreed. The last article on her crumpled little programme was, "Saying
Good-by to Olivicia(Don't cry)." It was going to be the most difficult
thing of all the articles. Olivicia had existed so short a time
comparatively--it might not have been as difficult if there had always
been an Olivicia. "Or it might have been harder," Rebecca Mary said. She
went towards that article with reluctant feet. But it had to come.

The bureau drawer was all ready. Rebecca Mary had lined it with
something white and soft and sweetened it with dried rose petals spiced
in the century-old Plummer way. It bore rather grewsome resemblance to
Olivicia's coffin, but it was not grewsome to Rebecca Mary. She laid the
doll in it with the tender little swinging motion mothers use in laying
down their tiny sleepers.

"There, there the-re!" crooned Rebecca Mary, softly, brooding over the
beautiful being. "You'll rest there sweetly after your mother is grown
up. And you'll try not to miss her, won't you? You'll understand,
Olivicia?--oh, Olivicia!" But she did not cry. Her eyes were very
bright. For several minutes she stood there stooped over painfully,
gazing down into the cof--the bureau drawer, wherein lay peaceful
Olivicia. She was saying good-bye in her heart--she never said it aloud.

"Dear," very softly indeed, "you are sure you understand? Everybody has
to grow up, dear. It--it hurts, but you have to. I mean I'VE got to.
I wouldn't so soon if it wasn't for my legs. But they keep right on
growing--they're awful, dear!--I can't stop 'em. Olivicia, lie right
there and be thankful you're a doll! But I wish you could open your eyes
and look at me just once more."

Rebecca Mary shut the drawer gently. It was over--no, she would say one
thing more to the beautiful being in there. She bent to the keyhole.

"Olivicia!" she called in a tender whisper, "I shall be right here
nights. We shan't be far away from each other."

But it would not be like lying in each other's arms--oh, not at all like
that. Rebecca Mary caught her breath; it was perilously like a sob. Then
she girded up her loins and went away to meet her fate--the common fate
of all.

She was very tired. The day had been a strain upon her that was
beginning now to tell. To put all one's childhood into one day--that is
not easy.

Article VI. was the last. In a way, it was a rest to Rebecca Mary, for
it entailed merely a visit to the woodshed. She could sit quietly on the
floor opposite the knothole and wait for the Thoughts. If the Thought of
Growing Up came out tonight, she would say: "Oh, well, you may stay--you
needn't go back. I'm not any glad to see you, but I'm ready. I suppose I
shall get used to you."

What Thoughts came out of the knothole to Rebecca Mary she never told
to any one. It was nearly dark when she went away, planting her feet
firmly, holding her head straight--Rebecca Mary Plummer. She went to
find Aunt Olivia and tell her. On the way, she stopped to get
Aunt Olivia's shawl, for it was getting chilly out on the porch.
Significantly the first thing Rebecca Mary did after she began to grow
up was to get the shawl and lay it over Aunt Olivia's spare shoulders.
The second thing was to bend to the scant gray hair and lightly rub it
with her cheek. It was a Rebecca Mary kiss.

Out in front of the rocking chair, still straight and firm, she told
Aunt Olivia.

"It's over--I think I put everything in," she said. "I thought you ought
to know, so I came to tell you. I'm ready to grow up."

After all, if Rebecca Mary had known, her "programme" had not ended
with Article VI. Here was another. Take the pencil in your steady little
fingers, Rebecca Mary, and write:

Article VII.--Growing up. (Do not break Aunt Olivia's heart.)




Un-Plummered



Aunt Olivia sighed. It was the third time since she had begun to let
Rebecca Mary down. The third sigh was the longest one. Oh, this letting
down of children who would grow up!

"I won't do it!" Aunt Olivia rebelled, fiercely, but she took up her
scissors again at Duty's nudge.

"You don't want people laughing at her, do you?" Duty said, sensibly.
"Well, then, rip out that hem and face up that skirt and stop sighing.
What can't be cured must be endur--"

"I'm ripping it out," Aunt Olivia interrupted, crisply. But Duty was not
to be silenced.

"You ought to have done it before," dictatorially. "You've known all
along that Rebecca Mary was growing up."

Aunt Olivia, like the proverbial worm, turned.

"I didn't know till Rebecca Mary told me," she retorted; then the
rebellion died out of her thin face and tenderness came and took its
place. Aunt Olivia was thinking of the time when Rebecca Mary told her.
She gazed past Duty, past the skirt across her knees, out through the
porch vines, and saw Rebecca Mary coming to tell her. She saw the shawl
the child was bringing, felt it laid on her shoulders, and something
else laid on her hair, soft and smooth like a little, lean, brown cheek.
The memory was so pleasant that Aunt Olivia closed her eyes to make it
stay. When she opened them some one was coming along the path, but it
was not Rebecca Mary.

"Good afternoon!" some one said. Aunt Olivia stiffened into a Plummer
again with hurried embarrassment. She did not recognize the voice nor
the pleasant young face that followed it through the vines.

"It's Rebecca Mary's aunt, isn't it?" The stranger smiled. "I should
know it by the family resemblance."

"We're both Plummers," Aunt Olivia answered, gravely. "Won't you come up
on the porch and take a seat?"

"No, I'll sit down here on the steps--I'd rather. I think I'll sit
on the lowest step for I've come on a very humble errand! I'm Rebecca
Mary's teacher."

"Oh!" It was all Aunt Olivia could manage, for a sudden horror had
come upon her. She had a distinct remembrance of being at the Tony
Trumbullses when the school teacher came to call.

"It's--it's rather hard to say it." The young person on the lowest step
laughed nervously. "I'd a good deal rather not. But I think so much of
Rebecca Mary--"

The horror grew in Aunt Olivia's soul. It was something terribly like
that the Tony Trumbullses' teacher had said. And like this:

"It hurts--there! But I made up my mind it was my duty to come up here
and say it, and so I've come. I'm sorry to have to say--"

"Don't!" ejaculated Aunt Olivia, trembling on her Plummer pedestal. For
she was laboring with the impulse to refuse to listen to this intruder,
to drive her away--to say: "I won't believe a word you say! You may as
well go home."

"Hoity-toity!" breathed Duty in her ear. It saved her.

"Well?" she said, gently. "Go on."

"I'm sorry to say I can't teach Rebecca Mary any more, Miss Plummer.
That's what I came to tell you--"

This was awful--awful! But hot rebellion rose in Aunt Olivia's heart.
There was some mistake--it was some other Rebecca Mary this person
meant. She would never believe it was HERS--the Plummer one!

"Because I've taught her all I know. There! Do you wonder I chose the
lowest step to sit on? But it's the truth, honest," the little teacher
laughed girlishly, but there were shame spots on her cheeks--"Rebecca
Mary is the smartest scholar I've got, and I've taught her all I know."
In her voice there was confession to having taught Rebecca Mary a little
more than that. The shame spots flickered in a halo of humble honesty.

"She's been from Percentage through the arithmetic four times--Rebecca
Mary's splendid in arithmetic. And she knows the geography and grammar
by heart."

The look on Aunt Olivia's face! The transition from horror to pride was
overwhelming, transfiguring.

"Rebecca Mary's smart," added the honest one on the doorstep. "_I_ think
she ought to have a chance. There! That's all I came for, so I'll
be going. Only, I don't suppose--you don't think you'll have to tell
Rebecca Mary, do you? About--about me, I mean?"

"No, I don't," Aunt Olivia assured her, warmly. Her thin, lined hand met
and held for a moment the small, plump one--long enough to say, "You're
a good girl--I like you," in its own way. The little teacher went away
in some sort comforted for having taught Rebecca Mary all she knew.
She even hummed a relieved little tune on her way home, because of the
pleasant tingle in the hand that Rebecca Mary's aunt had squeezed. After
all, no matter how much you dreaded doing it, it was better to tell the
truth.

Aunt Olivia hummed no relieved little tune. The pride in her heart
battled with the Dread there and went down. Aunt Olivia did not call the
Dread by any other name. It was Duty who dared.

Confronting Aunt Olivia: "I suppose you know what it means? I suppose
you know it means you've got to give Rebecca Mary a chance? When are you
going to send her away to school?"

"Oh--don't!" pleaded Aunt Olivia. "You don't give me any time. There's
no need of hurry--"

"I'm still a Plummer, if you're not," broke in Duty, with ironic
sharpness. "The Plummers were never afraid to look their duty in the
face."

"I'm--I'm looking at you," groaned Aunt Olivia, climbing painfully back
on to her pedestal. "Go ahead and say it. I'm ready--only I guess you've
forgot how long I've had Rebecca Mary. When you've brought a child up--"

"I brought her up myself," calmly. "I ought to know. She wouldn't have
been Rebecca Mary, would she, if I hadn't been right on hand? Who was
it taught her to sew patchwork before she was four years old? And make
sheets--and beds--and bread? Who was it kept her from being a little
tomboy like the minister's girl? Who taught her to walk instead of run,
and eat with her fork, and be a lady? Who was it--"

"Oh, you--you!" sighed Aunt Olivia, trembling for her balance. "You did
'em all. I never could've alone."

"Then"--Duty was justly complacent--"Then perhaps you'll be willing to
leave Rebecca Mary's going away to school to me. She must go at once, as
soon as you can get her read--"

Aunt Olivia tumbled off. She did not wait to pick herself up before she
turned upon this Duty that delighted in torturing her.

"You better get her ready yourself! You better let her down and make her
some nightgowns and count her pocket-handkerchiefs! You think you can do
anything--no, I'M talking now! I guess it's my turn. I guess I've waited
long enough. Maybe you brought Rebecca Mary up, but I'm not going to
leave it to you whether she'd ought to go away to school. She's my
Rebecca Mary, isn't she? Well? It's me that loves her, isn't it--not
you? If I can't love her and stay a Plummer, then I'll--love her. I'm
going to leave it to the minister."

The minister was a little embarrassed. The wistful look in Aunt Olivia's
eyes said, "Say no" so plainly. And he knew he must say yes--the
minister's Duty was imperative, too.

"If she can't get any more good out of the school here--" he began.

"She can't," said Aunt Olivia's Duty for her. "The teacher says she
can't. Rebecca Mary's smart." Then Duty, too, was proud of Rebecca Mary!

"I know she is," said the minister, heartily. "My Rhoda--you ought to
hear my Rhoda set her up. She thinks Rebecca Mary knows more than the
teacher does."

"Rhoda's smart, too," breathed Duty in Aunt Olivia's ear.

"So you see, dear Miss Olivia, the child would make good use of any
advantage--"

"You mean I ought to send her away? Well, I'm ready to--I said I'd leave
it to you. Where shall I send her? If there was only--I don't suppose
there's some place near to? Children go home Friday nights sometimes,
don't they?"

"There is no school near enough for that, I'm afraid," the minister
said, gently. He could not bear the look in Miss Olivia's eyes.

"It hurt," he told his wife afterwards. "I wish she hadn't asked me,
Felicia."

"I know, dear, but it's the penalty of being a minister. Ministers'
hearts ought to be coated with--with asbestos or something, so the looks
in people's eyes wouldn't burn through. I'm glad she didn't ask ME!"

"It will nearly kill them both," ran on the minister's thoughts, aloud.
"You know how it was when Miss Olivia was at the hospital."

"Robert!"--the minister's wife's tone was reproachful--"you're talking
in the future tense! You said 'will.' Then you advised her to send
Rebecca Mary away!"

"Guilty," pleaded the minister. "What else could I do?"

"You could have offered to teach her yourself"--with prompt inspiration.
"Oh, Robert, why didn't you?"

"Felicia!--my dear!"--for the minister was modest.

"You know plenty for two Rebecca Marys," she triumphed. "Didn't you
appropriate all the honors at college, you selfish boy!"

"It's too late now, dear." But the minister's eyes thanked her, and the
big clasp of his arms. A minister may be mortal.

"Maybe it is and maybe it isn't," spoke the minister's wife, in riddles.
"We'll wait and see."

"But, Felicia--but, dear, they're both them Plummers."

"Maybe they are and maybe they aren't," laughed she.

That night Aunt Olivia told Rebecca Mary--after she went to bed, quite
calmly:

"Rebecca Mary, how would you like to go away to school? For I'm going to
send you, my dear."

"'Away--to school--my dear!'" echoed Rebecca Mary, sitting upright in
bed. Her slight figure stretched up rigid and preternaturally tall in
the dim light.

"Yes; the minister advises it--I left it to him. He thinks you ought to
have advantages." Aunt Olivia slipped down suddenly beside the little
rigid figure and touched it rather timidly. She felt a little in awe of
the Rebecca Mary who knew more than her teacher did.

"They all seem to think you're--smart, my dear," Aunt Olivia said, and
she would scarcely have believed it could be so hard to say it. For the
life of her she could not keep the pride from pricking through her tone.
The wild temptation to sell her Plummer birthright for a kiss assailed
her. But she groped in the dimness for Duty's cool touch and found it.
In the Plummer code of laws it was writ, "Thou shalt not kiss."

"I'm going right to work to make you some new nightgowns," Aunt Olivia
added, hastily. "I think I shall make them plain," for it was in the
nature of a reinforcement to her courage to leave off the ruffles.

Rebecca Mary's eyes shone like stars in the dark little room. The child
thought she was glad to be going away to school.

"Shall I study algebra and Latin?" she demanded.

"I suppose so--that'll be what you go for."

"And French--not FRENCH?"

"Likely."

Rebecca Mary fell back on the pillows to grasp it. But she was presently
up again.

"And that thing that tells about the air and--and gassy things? And the
one that tells about your bones?"

Aunt Olivia did not recognize chemistry, but she knew bones. She sighed
gently.

"Oh yes; I suppose you'll find out just how you're put together, and
likely it'll scare you so you won't ever dare to breathe deep again.
Maybe learning like that is important--I suppose the minister knows."

"The minister knows everything," Rebecca Mary said, solemnly. "If you
let me go away to school, I'll try to learn to know as much as he does,
Aunt Olivia. You don't--you don't think he'd mind, do you?"

In the dark Aunt Olivia smiled. The small person there on the pillows
was, after all, a child. Rebecca Mary had not grown up, after all!

"He won't mind," promised Aunt Olivia for the minister. She went
away presently and cut out Rebecca Mary's new nightgowns. She sat and
stitched them, far into the night, and stitched her sad little bodings
in, one by one. Already desolation gripped Aunt Olivia's heart.

Rebecca Mary's dreams that night were marvelous ones. She dreamed she
saw herself in a glass after she had learned all the things there were
to learn, and she looked like the minister! When she spoke, her voice
sounded deep and sweet like the minister's voice. Somewhere a voice like
the minister's wife's seemed to be calling "Robert! Robert!"

"Yes?" answered Rebecca Mary, and woke up.

There were many preparations to make. The days sped by busily, and to
Rebecca Mary full of joyous expectancy. Aunt Olivia made no moan. She
worked steadily over the plain little outfit and thrust her Dreads away
with resolute courage, to wait until Rebecca Mary was gone. Time enough
then.

"You're doing right--that ought to comfort you," encouraged Duty,
kindly.

"Clear out!" was what Aunt Olivia cried out, sharply, in answer. "You've
done enough--this is all your work! Don't stand there hugging yourself.
YOU'RE not going to miss Rebecca Mary--"

"I shall miss her," Duty murmured. "I was awake all night, too, dreading
it. You didn't know, but I was there."

The last day, when it came, seemed a little--a good deal--like that
other day when Aunt Olivia went away, only it was the other way about
this time. Rebecca Mary was going away on this day. The things packed
snugly in the big valise were her things; it was she, Rebecca Mary, who
would unpack them in a wondrous, strange place. It was Rebecca Mary the
minister's wife and Rhoda came to bid good-bye.

Aunt Olivia went to the station in the stage with the child. She did not
speak much on the way, but sat firmly straight and smiled. Duty had told
her the last thing to smile. But Duty had not trusted her; unseen and
uninvited, Duty had slipped into the jolting old vehicle between Aunt
Olivia and Rebecca Mary.

"She isn't the Plummer she was once," sighed Duty.

But at the little station, in those few final moments, two Plummers, an
old one and a young one, waited quietly together. Neither of them broke
down nor made ado. Duty retired in palpable chagrin.

"Good-bye, my dear," Aunt Olivia said, steadily, though her lips were
white.

"Good-bye, Aunt Olivia," Rebecca Mary Plummer said, steadily. "I'm very
MUCH obliged to you for sending me."

"You're--welcome. Don't forget to wear your rubbers. I put in some
liniment in case you need it--don't get any in your eyes."

Outside on the platform Aunt Olivia sought and found Rebecca Mary's
window and stood beside it till the train started. Through the dusty
pane their faces looked oddly unfamiliar to each other, and the two
pairs of eyes that gazed out and in had a startled wistfulness in them
that no Plummer eyes should have. If Duty had staid--

The train shook itself, gave a jerk or two, and plunged down the shining
rails. Aunt Olivia watched it out of sight, then turned patiently to
meet her loneliness. The Dreads came flocking back to her as if she had
beckoned to them. For now was the time.

The letters Rebecca Mary wrote were formally correct and brief. There
was no homesickness in them. It was pleasant at the school, that book
about bones was going to be very interesting. Aunt Olivia was not to
worry about the rubbers, and Rebecca Mary would never forget to air her
clothes when they came from the wash. Yes, she had aired the nightgown
that Aunt Olivia ironed the last thing. No, she hadn't needed any
liniment yet, but she wouldn't get any in her eyes.

Aunt Olivia's letters were to the point and calm, as though Duty stood
peering over her shoulder as she wrote. She was glad Rebecca Mary
liked the bones, but she was a little surprised. She was glad about the
rubbers and the wash; she was glad there had been no need yet for the
liniment. It was a good thing to rub on a sore throat. The minister's
wife had been over with her work she said Rhoda missed Rebecca Mary.
Yes, the little, white cat was well--no, she hadn't caught any mice.
The calla lily had two buds, the Northern Spy tree was not going to bear
very well.

"Robert, I've been to see Miss Olivia," the minister's wife said at tea.

"Yes?" The minister waited. He knew it was coming.

"She was knitting stockings for Rebecca Mary. Robert, she sat there and
smiled till I had to come home to cry!"

"My dear!--do you want me to cry, too?"

"I'm a-going to," sniffed Rhoda. "I feel it coming."

"She is so lonely, Robert! It would break your heart to see her smile.
How do I know she is? Oh no--no, she didn't say she was! But I saw her
eyes and she let the little, white cat get up in her lap!"

"Proof enough," the minister said, gently.

Between the two of them--the child at school and Aunt Olivia at
home--letters came and went for six weeks. Aunt Olivia wrote six,
Rebecca Mary six. All the letters were terse and brief and unemotional.
Weather, bones, little white cats, liniment--everything in them but
loneliness or love. Rebecca Mary began all hers "Dear Aunt Olivia," and
ended them all "Respectfully your niece, Rebecca Mary Plummer."

"Dear Rebecca Mary," began Aunt Olivia's. "Your aff. aunt, Olivia
Plummer," they closed. Yet both their hearts were breaking. Some hearts
break quicker than others; Plummer hearts hold out splendidly, but in
the end--

In the end Aunt Olivia went to see the minister and was closeted with
him for a little. The minister's wife could hear them talking--mostly
the minister--but she could not hear what they said.

"It's come," she nodded, sagely. "I was sure it would. That's what the
little, white cat purred when she rubbed against my skirts, 'She can't
stand it much longer. She doesn't sleep nights nor eat days--she's
giving out.' Poor Miss Olivia!--but I can't understand Rebecca Mary."

"It's the Plummer in her," the little, white cat would have purred. "You
wait!"

Aunt Olivia turned back at the minister's study door. "Then you will?"
she said, eagerly. "You're perfectly willing to? I don't want to feel--"

"You needn't feel," the minister smiled. "I'm more than willing. I'm
delighted. But in the matter of--er--remuneration, I cannot let you--"

"You needn't let me," smiled Miss Olivia; "I'll do it without." She was
gently radiant. Her pitifully thin face, so transfigured, touched the
big heart of the minister. He went to his window and watched the slight
figure hurry away. He would scarcely have been surprised to see it turn
down the road that led towards the railway station.

"Oh, Robert!" It was the minister's wife at his elbow. "You dear boy, I
know you've promised! You needn't tell me a thing--didn't I suggest it
in the first place? Dear Miss Olivia--I'm so glad, Robert! So are you
glad, you minister!" But they were neither of them thinking of little,
stubbed-out shoes that would be easier to buy.

Aunt Olivia turned down the station road the next morning, in the
swaying old stage. Her eager gaze never left the plodding horses, as if
by looking at them she could make them go faster.

"They're pretty slow, aren't they?" she said.

"Slow--THEM? Well, I guess you weren't never a stage horse!" chuckled
the old man at the reins.

"No," admitted Aunt Olivia, "I never was, but I know I'd go faster
today."

At the Junction, halfway to Rebecca Mary, she descended alertly from the
train and crossed the platform. She must wait here, they told her, an
hour and twenty minutes. On the other side of the station a train was
just slowing up, and she stood a moment to scan idly the thin stream
of people that trickled from the cars. There were old women--did any of
them, she wondered, feel as happy as she did? There were tall children,
too. There was one--Aunt Olivia started a little and fumbled in her soft
hair, under the roses in her bonnet brim, for her glasses. There was
one tall child--she was coming this way--she was coming fast--she was
running! Her arms were out--

"Aunt Olivia! Aunt Olivia!" the Tall Child was crying out, joyously,
"Oh, Aunt Olivia!"

"Rebecca Mary!--my dear, my dear!"

They were in each other's arms. The roses on Aunt Olivia's bonnet brim
slipped to one side--the two of them, not Plummers any more, but a
common, glad old woman and a common, glad, tall child, were kissing each
other as though they would never stop. The stream of people reached them
and flowed by on either side. Trains came and went, and still they stood
like that.

"Hoity-toity!" muttered Aunt Olivia's Duty, and slipped past with the
stream. A Plummer to the end, what use to stay any longer there?

"I was coming home," cried Rebecca Mary. "I couldn't bear it another
minute!"

"I was coming after you--my dear, my DEAR, _I_ couldn't bear it another
minute!"





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Rebecca Mary, by Annie Hamilton Donnell

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK REBECCA MARY ***

***** This file should be named 3419.txt or 3419.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/4/1/3419/

Produced by An Anonymous Volunteer

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
