The Project Gutenberg EBook of Cupid's Understudy, by Edward Salisbury Field

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Cupid's Understudy

Author: Edward Salisbury Field

Posting Date: April 20, 2009 [EBook #3602]
Release Date: January, 2003
First Posted: June 6, 2001

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CUPID'S UNDERSTUDY ***




Produced by Charles Franks and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team. HTML version by Al Haines.










CUPID'S UNDERSTUDY


by

Edward Salisbury Field




Chapter One


If Dad had been a coal baron, like Mr. Tudor Carstairs, or a
stock-watering captain of industry, like Mrs. Sanderson-Spear's husband,
or descended from a long line of whisky distillers, like Mrs.
Carmichael Porter, why, then his little Elizabeth would have been
allowed the to sit in seat of the scornful with the rest of the Four
Hundred, and this story would never have been written. But Dad
wasn't any of these things; he was just an old love who had made
seven million dollars by the luckiest fluke in the world.

Everybody in southern California knew it was a fluke, too, so the
seven millions came in for all the respect that would otherwise have
fallen to Dad. Of course we were celebrities, in a way, but in a
very horrid way. Dad was Old Tom Middleton, who used to keep a
livery-stable in San Bernardino, and I was Old Tom Middleton's girl,
"who actually used to live over a livery-stable, my dear!" It sounds
fearfully sordid, doesn't it?

But it wasn't sordid, really, for I never actually lived over a
stable. Indeed, we had the sweetest cottage in all San Bernardino. I
remember it so well: the long, cool porch, the wonderful gold-of-Ophir
roses, the honeysuckle where the linnets nested, the mocking
birds that sang all night long; the perfume of the jasmine, of the
orange-blossoms, the pink flame of the peach trees in April, the
ever-changing color of the mountains. And I remember Ninette, my
little Creole mother, gay as a butterfly, carefree as a meadow-lark.
'Twas she who planted the jasmine.

My little mother died when I was seven years old. Dad and I and my
old black mammy, Rachel, stayed on in the cottage. The mocking-birds
still sang, and the linnets still nested in the honeysuckle, but
nothing was ever quite the same again. It was like a different
world; it was a different world. There were gold-of-Ophir roses,
and, peach blossoms in April, but there was no more jasmine; Dad had
it all dug up. To this day he turns pale at the sight of it--poor
Dad!

When I was twelve years old, Dad sold out his hardware business,
intending to put his money in an orange grove at Riverside, but the
nicest livery-stable in San Bernardino happened to be for sale just
then, so he bought that instead, for he was always crazy about
horses.

To see me trotting about in Paquin gowns and Doucet models, you'd
never think I owed them to three owlish little burros, would you?
But it's a fact. When Dad took over the livery-stable, he found he
was the proud possessor of three donkeys, as well as some twenty-odd
horses, and a dozen or so buggies, buckboards and surries. The
burros ate their solemn heads off all winter, but in May it had been
the custom to send them to Strawberry Valley in charge of a Mexican
who hired them out to the boarders at the summer hotel there.
Luckily for us, when Fortune came stalking down the main street of
San Bernardino to knock at the door of the Golden Eagle Stables,
both dad and the burros were at home. If either had been out, we
might be poor this very minute.

It is generally understood that when Fortune goes a-visiting, she
goes disguised, so it's small wonder Dad didn't recognize her at
first. She wasn't even a "her"; she was a he, a great, awkward Swede
with mouse-colored hair and a Yon Yonsen accent--you know the kind--slow
to anger; slow to everything, without "j" in his alphabet--by
the name of Olaf Knutsen.

Now Olaf was a dreamer. Not the conventional sort of a dreamer, who
sees beauty in everything but an honest day's work, but a brawny,
pick-swinging dreamer who had dug holes in the ground at the end of
many rainbows. That he had never yet uncovered the elusive pot of
gold didn't seem to bother him in the least; for him, that tender
plant called Hope flowered perennially. And now he was bent on
following another rainbow; a rainbow which; arching over the
mountains, ended in that arid, pitiless waste known in the south
country as Death Valley.

He wouldn't fail this time. No, by Yimminy! With Dad's three burros,
and plenty of bacon and beans and water--it was to be a grub-stake,
of course--he would make both their fortunes. And the beautiful part
about it was, he did.

No doubt you have heard of the famous Golden Eagle mine. Well,
that's what Olaf and the three burros found in Death Valley. Good
old Olaf! He named the mine after Dad's livery-stable in San
Bernardino, and he insisted on keeping only a half interest, even
though Dad fought him about it. You see, Dad didn't have the
reputation of being the squarest man in San Bernardino for nothing.




Chapter Two


My mother's family had never approved of her marriage with Dad, but
Dad, poor and running a hardware shop or a livery-stable, and Dad
with a fortune in his hands were two very different people--from
their standpoint, at least; so as soon as Olaf and the three burros
struck it rich, Dad sold his livery-stable, and mammy Rachel and I
were bundled off to Ninette's relations in New Orleans. I didn't
like it a bit at first, but one can get used to anything in time.
Ninette's maiden sister, Miss Marie Madeline Antoinette Hortense
Prevost, was awfully nice to me; so was grandmere Prevost. I lived
with them till I was sixteen, when I was sent to France.

If I wanted to (and you would let me) I could personally conduct you
to Paris, where if you were ten feet tall and not averse to staring,
you could look over a certain gray stone wall on the Boulevard des
Invalides, and see me pacing sedately up and down the gravel walks
in the garden of the Convent of the Sacred Heart. That is, you could
have seen me three years ago. I'm not there now, thank goodness! I'm
in California.

And just one word before we go any further any further. I don't want
you to think for a minute that I came back from Paris a little
Frenchified miss. No, indeed! I'm as American as they make them.
When I boasted to the other girls, whether in Paris or New Orleans,
I always boasted about two things: Dad and California. And I've an
idea I'll go on boasting about them till my dying day.

Of course, when I returned from Paris, Dad met me in New York. It
was a good thing he was rich, for it took a lot of money to get me
and my seven trunks through the custom-house. It might have taken
more, though, if it hadn't been for a young man who came over on the
same boat.

He was such a good-looking young man; tall and broad-shouldered and
fair, with light-brown hair, and the nicest eyes you ever saw. It
wasn't their color so much (his eyes were blue) as the way they
looked at you that made them so attractive. He was awfully well
bred, too! He noticed me a lot on the boat (I had a perfect love of
a Redfern coat to wear on deck), but he didn't try to scrape
acquaintance with me. He worshipped from afar (a woman can always
tell when a man's thinking about her), and while I wouldn't have had
him act otherwise for the world, I was crazy to have him speak to
me.

Our boat docked at Hoboken, and by tipping right and left I managed
to be the very first passenger down the gangway. I half ran, half
slid, but I landed in Dad's arms.

My boxes and bags passed through the custom-house with flying
colors. But my trunks--I couldn't even find them all. Five of them
were stacked in the "M" division, but the other two.... Then
there was my maid's trunk to look for under the "V's" (her name is
Valentine). Dad and I were commencing at "A," prepared to got
through the whole alphabet, if necessary, when the nice young man
stepped up and, raising his hat, asked if he might be of any
service. He asked Dad, but he looked at me.

"Oh, If you please!" I said "I've lost two trunks. My brand is a
white, 'M' in a red circle."

"I noticed them in the 'R' pile" he replied. "I'll have them moved
to the 'M's' right away."

"Now that's what I call being decent," said Dad, as soon as the
young man had left us. "Did you notice, he didn't wear a uniform?
Probably an inspector, or something of the sort, eh, Elizabeth?"

"Well--er--not exactly," I managed to say. "The fact is, Dad, he
came over on the boat with me, and--"

Dad looked thoughtful.

"He never spoke to me once the whole trip," I added hastily.

Dad looked less thoughtful.

"It was nice of him to wait till I had you with me, wasn't it?"

Dad smiled. "If you think it was, it probably was, my dear," he
said.




Chapter Three


The nice young man did more than find my missing trunks; he found a
custom-house officer, and, after asking me privately which trunks
contained my most valuable possessions and how much I had thought of
declaring, he succeeded in having them passed through on my own
valuation without any undue exposure of their contents.

By this time Dad had grown very respectful. To see his little
Elizabeth treated like a queen, while on all sides angry women were
having their best gowns pawed over and mussed; was a most wholesome
lesson. He paid the thousand and odd dollars duty like a little man.

We'd been saved a lot of bother, and nobody hates a lot of bother
more than Dad. So when the trunks were locked and strapped and ready
to be sent to our hotel, Dad went up to the nice young man and said:
"I'm Tom Middleton, from California, and this is my daughter
Elizabeth. We're both very grateful to you, and if you should ever
happen to come to California, I hope you'll look us up."

That's Dad all over!

I never saw anybody look so pleased as the young man: "My name's
Porter," he said, "Blakely Porter. If my mother were in New York I
would ask if she might call on Miss Middleton, but, as it happens,
she's in California, where I intend to join her, so I shall look
forward to seeing you there."

Then Dad did just the right thing. "What's the use of waiting till
we get to California?" he said. "Why not dine with us to-night!"

There are people, merely conventional people, who could never
appreciate the fine directness and simplicity, of Dad's nature--not
if they lived to be a thousand years old. But Mr. Blakely Porter
understood perfectly; I know he did, for he told me so afterwards.
"It was the greatest compliment I ever had paid me in my life," he
said. "Your father knew nothing about me, absolutely nothing, yet he
invited me to dine with him--and you. It was splendid, splendid!"

The dear boy didn't know, perhaps, that honesty shone in his eyes,
that one could not look at him and deny he was a gentleman. And, of
course, I didn't enlighten him, for it is well for men,
particularly, young men, to feel grateful, and the least bit humble;
it keeps them from being spoiled.

But to return to the dinner invitation: Mr. Porter accepted it
eagerly. "It is more than kind of you," he said. "My mother is away,
and her house is closed. It is my first home-coming in four years,
and I should have been lonely to-night."

And poor Dad, who has been lonely--oh, so lonely!--ever since
Ninette died, shook hands with him, and said: "If my daughter and I
can keep you from feeling lonely, we shall be so glad. We are
stopping at The Plaza, and we dine at half past seven."

Then Mr. Porter found us a taxi-cab, and away we went.

It was good to be in America again. I made Dad stop the car, and
have the top put back, even though it was freezing cold, for I had
never been in New York before (when I'd gone to France, I had sailed
from New Orleans) and I wanted to see everything. The tall
buildings, the elevated, even the bad paving till we got to Fifth
Avenue, interested me immensely, as they would any one to whom.
Paris had been home, and New York a foreign city. Not that I had
ever thought of Paris as my real home; home was, where my heart
was--with Dad. I tried to make him understand how, happy I was to be
with him, how I had missed him, and California.

"So you missed your old father; did you, girlie?"

"Yes, Dad."

"And you'll be glad to go to California?"

"Oh, so glad!"

"Then," said Dad, "we'll start tomorrow."

Our rooms at the hotel were perfect; there was a bed room and bath
for me a bed room and bath for Dad, with a sitting room between, all
facing the Park. And there were roses everywhere; huge American
Beauties, dear, wee, pink roses, roses of flaming red. I turned to
Dad, who was standing in the middle of the sitting room, beaming at
me. "You delightful old spendthrift!" I cried. "What do you mean by
buying millions of roses? And in the middle of January too! You
deserve to be disciplined, and you shall be."

"Discipline is an excellent thing; even if it does disturb the set
of one's tie," Dad remarked thoughtfully, a moment later.

"I couldn't help hugging you, Daddy."

"My dear, that hug of yours was the sweetest thing that has happened
to your dad in many a long year."

And then, of course, I had to hug him again.

After luncheon (we had it in our sitting room) Dad asked if I would
enjoy a drive through the Park.

"I should enjoy it immensely," I said, "but I can't possibly go."

You see, there was a trunk to unpack, the one holding my prettiest
dinner gown. Of course Valentine was quite capable of attending to
the unpacking. Still, one likes to inspect everything one is to
wear, especially when one is expecting a guest to dinner. "Then,"
said Dad, "I think I'll order dinner, and go for a walk, shall we
have dinner here?"

"Oh, by all means! This is so much more homelike than a public
dining room."

"I'll not be gone more than an hour or two... Hullo! Come in."

A small boy entered, carrying a box quite as big as himself. "For
Miss Middleton," he said.

"Another present from you, Dad?"

"Open it, my dear."

"I thought so," he remarked, as the removal of the cover displayed
more American Beauties. (There were five dozen;) I counted them
after Dad had gone. Another million roses and in the middle of
January! "Who's the spendthrift this time, Elizabeth?"

"His name," I said, slipping a card: from the envelope that lay on a
huge bow of red ribbon, "is Mr. Blakely Porter."

Although I know, now, there are many things more beautiful, I
believed, then, that nothing more beautiful had ever happened; for
it was the first time a man had ever sent me roses. Nineteen years
old, and my first roses! They made me so happy. Paris seemed very
far away; the convent was a mythical place I had seen in a dream;
nothing was real but Dad, and America, and the roses somebody, had
sent. Somebody!




Chapter Four


Mr. Porter arrived on time to the minute, looking perfectly splendid
in a wonderful furlined coat. And if his eyes were anxious, and his
manner a bit constrained at first, it didn't last long; Dad's
greeting was too cordial, not to make him feel at home. Indeed, he
talked delightfully all through dinner, and with the coffee, half
laughingly, half apologizingly told us the story of his life. "For,"
said he, "although I feel as if I'd known you always," (he looked at
Dad, but I was sure he meant me, too) "you may not feel the same in
regard to me--and I want you to."

It was sweet to see Dad grow almost boyish in his insistence that he
felt as Mr. Porter did. "Nonsense!" he said. "It seems the most
natural thing in the world to have you here. Doesn't it Elizabeth!"

It was rather embarrassing to be asked such a question in Mr.
Porter's presence, but I managed to murmur a weak "Yes, indeed!"
Inside, though, I felt just as Dad did, and I was fearfully
interested in Mr. Porter's account of himself. I could see, too,
that he belittled the real things, and magnified the unimportant.
According to his narrative, the unimportant things were that he was
a civil engineer, that he had been in Peru building a railroad for
an English; syndicate, and that the railroad was now practically
completed; he seemed, however, to attach great importance to the
cable that had called him to London to appear before a board of
directors, for that had been the indirect means of his taking
passage on the same ship with me. Then there was the wonderful fact
that he was to see us in California. He had been in harness now for
four years, he said, and he felt as if he'd earned a vacation. At
all events, he meant to take one.

As neither he nor Dad would hear of my leaving them to their cigars,
I sat by and listened, and loved it all, every minute of it. I
didn't know, then (I don't know to this day) whether I liked Mr.
Porter best for being so boyish, or so manly. But manly men who
retain all the enthusiasms of youth have a certain charm one likes
instinctively, I think.

There is no doubt that Mr. Porter quite captivated Dad. "You make me
feel like a boy," he said, after listening to a delightfully
whimsical account of conditions in Peru. "By George, that's a
country for you! And Ecuador, I've always thought that must be an
interesting place. Have you ever been there?"

Yes, Mr. Porter had been to Ecuador. And there was a certain
rail-road in India he had helped put through. India! Now that WAS a
place! Had Dad ever been to India?

No, Dad had never been to India, but... "Good Lord, boy, how old
are you, anyway?"

"Thirty-two."

"Well, I never would have guessed it. Would you, Elizabeth?"

This, too, was rather embarrassing, but I managed to say I thought
Mr. Porter didn't look a day over twenty-eight.

"It's the life he leads," Dad declared with an air of
proprietorship--"out of doors all day long. It must be great!"

"It IS interesting. But I think I like it best for what it has done
for one; you see, I was supposed to have lungs once, long ago. Now
I'm as sound as a dollar."

"He looks it, doesn't he, Elizabeth!"

If Dad hadn't been such a dear, I should have been annoyed by his
constant requests for my opinion where it was so obviously
unnecessary. But Dad is such a dear. To make it worse, Mr. Porter
seemed to consider that whether he was, or was not, as sound as a
dollar, depended entirely on my answer.

"One would think I was a sort of supreme court from the way Dad
refers all questions to me. But I warn you, Mr. Porter; my 'yes' or
'no' makes little difference in his opinions."

"You are my supreme court, and they do," declared Dad.

"I'm sure they do," said Mr. Porter,

"When the novelty of having me with you has worn off, you'll be your
same old domineering self, Daddy dear."

"Domineering! Hear the minx! I'm a regular lamb, Porter. That
reminds me: When are you going to California!"

"I hadn't thought. That is, I had thought... That is, I've wished...
I mean I've wondered..... I hope you won't think me presumptuous,
Mr. Middleton, but I've wondered if you'd allow me to go on the same
train with you and Miss Middleton."

"Why, my dear boy, we'd be delighted. Wouldn't we, Elizabeth!"

Mr. Porter turned to me. "You see, Miss Middleton, you are the
supreme court, after all," his lips said. But his eyes told me why
he wanted to go on the same train with Dad and me, told me plainer
than words. Perhaps I should have remembered I had never spoken to
him till that morning, but.....

"The supreme court congratulates the inferior court on the wisdom of
its decision," I said, with an elaborate bow to Dad to hide my
confusion.

"It's settled!" cried Dad. "This is quite the nicest thing that ever
happened," said Mr. Porter. "If only you knew how grateful I am. I
feel like--like giving three cheers, and tossing my hat in the air."

"The inferior court rules against hat-tossing as irrelevant,
immaterial, and incompetent."

"Ruling sustained," I said.

"And they call this a free country!"

"The newspapers don't. Read the newspapers my boy."

"At any rate, I now belong to the privileged class. When do we
leave, Mr. Middleton?"

"Elizabeth says to-morrow. We go by rather a slow train."

"But why?" I began.

"Because, my dear, an all-wise Providence has decreed that express
trains shall not haul private cars."

"Oh, I say!" exclaimed Mr. Porter. "That makes all the difference in
the world."

"Only a day's difference."

"I mean....."

"You're going as our guest, you know."

"But really, Mr. Middleton, I never....."

"Don't be absurd, my boy."

"No," said Mr. Blakely Porter, "I won't be absurd. I shall be more
than glad to go as your guest."

"That's the way it should be. Isn't it, Elizabeth!"

"I didn't know you owned a private car, Dad."

"Pshaw!" said Dad. "What's a private car?"

I smiled at what I was pleased to term "Dad's magnificence," little
thinking I was soon to look on private cars as one of the most
delectable of modern inventions.




Chapter Five


Our train left Grand Central Station at two o'clock next afternoon;
it was bitter cold, I remember, and I drove to the station,
smothered in furs. But our car was wonderfully cozy and comfortable,
and it warmed my heart to see how proud Dad was of it: I must
inspect the kitchen; this was my stateroom, did I like it? I mustn't
judge Amos by his appearance, but the way he could cook--he was a
wonder at making griddle cakes. Did I still like griddle cakes? "And
do look at the books and magazines Mr. Porter brought. And a box of
chocolates, too. Wasn't it kind of him?" Dear Dad! He was like a
child with a new toy.

I'm sure he enjoyed every minute of the trip. Mr. Porter played
cribbage with him (Dad adores cribbage) by the hour; they talked
railroads, and politics, and mining--I don't think Dad had been so
happy in years. I know I had never been so happy, for I was sure Mr.
Porter loved me. I couldn't help being sure; his heart was in his
eyes every time he looked at me.

When we started from New York, we were Mr. Middleton, and Mr.
Porter, and Miss Middleton to one another; at Chicago, it was Tom,
and Blakely, and Miss Middleton; I became Elizabeth in Utah (I made
him call me that.) And when we reached Nevada.....

It happened so naturally, so sweetly. Dad was taking a nap after
luncheon, and Blakely and I were sitting on the rear platform of our
car, the last car in the train. It was a heavenly day of blue sky
and sunshine; the desert was fresh from recent rain. And then a few,
dear, faltered words changed the desert into a garden that reached
to the rim of the world.

"I love you. I didn't mean to tell you quite yet, but I.....
I....."

"I know. And it makes me so happy."

      *      *      *      *      *

You never saw anybody so delighted as Dad was when we told him.
"This makes me glad clear through," he said. "Blakely, boy, I
couldn't love you more if you were my own son. Elizabeth, girl, come
and kiss your old Daddy."

"And you aren't surprised, Dad?"

"Not a bit."

"He's known I've loved you, all along. Haven't you, Tom?"

"I may have suspected it."

"But I'm sure he never dreamed I could possibly care for you," I
said. And then, because I was too happy to do anything else, I went
to my state-room, and had a good cry.

I have read somewhere that Love would grow old were it not for the
tears of happy women.




Chapter Six


When we flew down the grade into California, everything seemed settled;
we were going to Santa Barbara where Dad was building a little palace
for his Elizabeth as a grand surprise (Blakely's mother was in Santa
Barbara); we would take rooms at the same hotel; I would be presented
to Mrs. Porter, and as soon as the palace on the hill was completed--a
matter of two or three months--Blakely, and Dad, and I would move into
it. Only, first, Blakely and I were going to San Bernardino on our
wedding trip.

Wasn't that sweet of Blakely? When I told him about San Bernardino,
and the livery-stable, and the cottage where Dad and I used to live,
he said he'd rather spend our honeymoon there than any place in the
world. Of course Dad had never sold the cottage, and it was touching
to see how pleased he was with our plan.

"You'll find everything in first-class condition," he said; "I go
there often myself. I built a little house in one corner of the
garden for the caretakers. You should see that gold-of-Ophir rose,
Elizabeth; it has grown beyond belief."

When we reached Oakland--where our car had to be switched off and
attached to a coast line, train--we found we had four hours to kill,
so Dad and Blakely and I (it was Blakely's idea) caught the boat
across to San Francisco.

What do you suppose that dear boy wanted us to go over there for?
And where do you suppose he took us? He took us straight to
Shreve's, and he and Dad spent a beautiful two hours in choosing an
engagement ring for me. So when we finally landed in Santa Barbara I
was wearing a perfect love of a ruby on the third finger of my left
hand. I was wearing my heart on my sleeve, too; I didn't care if all
the world saw that I adored Blakely. We arrived in Santa Barbara in
the morning, and it was arranged that Blakely should lunch with his
mother and devote himself to her during the afternoon, but he was to
dine with us in our rooms. Naturally, I had a lot to do, supervising
the unpacking of my clothes, and straightening things about in our
sitting-room so that it wouldn't look too hotelish. Then Dad
wouldn't be happy till I'd inspected my new palace on the hill.

It was an alarming looking pile. If anybody but Dad had been
responsible for it, I should have said it was hideous. Poor old Dad!
He knows absolutely nothing about architecture. But of course I
raved over it, and, really, when I came to examine it closer, I
found it had its good points. Covered with vines, it would have been
actually beautiful. Virginia creeper grows like mad in California
and with English ivy and Lady Banksia roses to help out, I was sure
I could transform my palace into a perfect bower in almost no time.
I was awfully glad I had seen it first, for now. I could break the
bad news gently to Blakely. If I were a man, I couldn't love a girl
who owned such a hideous house.

But I didn't have a chance to talk house to Blakely for some time.
When he came in to dinner that night he looked awfully depressed; he
brightened up a lot, though, when he saw me. I had on my most
becoming gown, and Dad had ordered a grand dinner, including his own
special brand of Burgundy. If Dad knew as much about architecture as
he does about wine, they'd insist on his designing all the buildings
for the next world's fair.

All through dinner Blakely wasn't quite himself--I could see it; I
think Dad saw it, too-but I knew he would tell us what was the
matter as soon as he had an opportunity. One, of the sweetest things
about Blakely is his perfect frankness. I couldn't love a man who
wasn't frank with me. That is, I suppose I could, but I should hate
to; it would break my heart. Well, after dinner, when Dad had
lighted his cigar, and Blakely his cigarette, it all came out.

"Tom!"

"Yes, my boy." (I think Dad loved to hear Blakely say Tom almost as
much as I loved to hear him say Elizabeth.)

"Tom, I've got you and Elizabeth into a deuce of an unpleasant
position. I've told you what a fine woman my mother is, and how
she'd welcome Elizabeth with open arms, and now I find I was all
wrong. My mother isn't a fine woman; she's an ancestor-worshiping,
heartless, selfish snob. I'm ashamed of her, Tom. She refuses to
meet Elizabeth."




Chapter Seven


I never was so sorry for anybody in my whole life as I was for
Blakely; I would have done anything to have saved him the bitterness
and humiliation of that moment. As for Dad, he couldn't understand
it at all. That Blakely's mother should refuse to meet his Elizabeth
was quite beyond his comprehension.

"This is very strange," he said, "very strange. There must be some
mistake. Why shouldn't she meet Elizabeth?"

"There is no reason in the world," Blakely answered.

"Then why--?"

"She probably has other plans for her son, Daddy dear," I said. "And
no doubt she has heard that we're fearfully vulgar."

"Well, we ain't," said Dad in a relieved voice; "and as for those
plans of hers, I reckon she'll have to outgrow them. Buck up, my
boy! One look at Elizabeth will show her she's mistaken."

"You don't know my mother," Blakely replied; "I feel that I haven't
known her till now. It's out of the question, our staying here after
what has happened. Let's go up to Del Monte, and let's not wait four
months for the wedding. Why can't we be married this week? I'm done
with my mother and with the whole tribe of Porters; they're not my
kind, and you and Elizabeth are."

"Tom, I never felt, that I had a father till I found you. Elizabeth,
girl, I never knew what happiness was till you told me you loved me.
My mother says she would never consent to her son's marrying the
daughter of a man who has kept a livery-stable. I say that I'm done
with a family that made its money out of whisky. My mother's father
was a distiller, her grandfather was a distiller, and if there's any
shame, it's mine, for by all the standards of decency, a livery-stable
is a hundred times more respectable than a warehouse full of
whisky. You made your money honestly, but ours has been wrung out of
the poor, the sick, the ragged, the distressed. The whisky business
is a rotten business, Tom, rotten!"

"It was whisky that bought an ambassadorship for my mother's
brother; it was whisky that paid for the French count my sister
married; it was whisky that sent me to college. Whisky,
whisky--always whisky!"

"I never thought twice about it before, but I've done some tall
thinking today. I'm done with the Porters, root and branch.
Elizabeth and I are going to start a little family tree, of our own,
and we're not going to root it in a whisky barrel, either.
We're--we're--"

"There, there!" said Dad. "It's all right, Blakely, boy. It ain't so
bad as you think. You ain't going to throw your mother over and your
mother ain't going to throw you over. I take it that all mothers are
alike; they love their sons. Naturally, you're sore and disappointed
now, but I reckon that mother of yours is sore and disappointed,
too. As for our going to Del Monte, I never heard of a Middleton yet
that cut and ran at a time like this, and Elizabeth and I ain't
going to start any precedent."

"No, my boy, we're going to stay right here, and you're going to
stay here with us. There's lots of good times ahead for you and
Elizabeth, and in the meantime, I want you to be mighty sweet to
that mother of yours. She's the only mother you've got, boy. You
don't know what it means for us old folks to be disappointed in our
children. Now, don't disappoint me, lad. You be nice to that mother
of yours, and keep on loving Elizabeth, and it will all come right,
you see if it don't. If it don't come one way, it will come another;
you can take my word for it." As if Dad knew anything about it. He
thought then that every woman possessed a sweet mind and a loving
heart; he thinks so now. But one glimpse of Blakely's mother was
enough for me. She had a heart of stone; everything about her was
militant, uncompromising; her eyes were of a piercing, steely blue;
the gowns she wore were insolently elegant; she radiated a superb
self-satisfaction. When she looked at you through her lorgnette, you
felt as if you were on trial for your life. When she ceased looking,
you knew you were sentenced to mount the social scaffold. If it
hadn't been for Blakely and Dad, I should have died of rage during
the first two weeks of our stay in Santa Barbara.

It was a cruel position for me, and it didn't make it easier that
before we had been there three days the whole hotel was talking
about it. Of course, every woman in the hotel who had been snubbed
by Blakely's mother instantly took my part, and as there were only
two women who hadn't been snubbed by her--Mrs. Tudor Carstairs and
Mrs. Sanderson-Spear--I was simply overwhelmed with unsolicited
advice and undesirable attention. Indeed, it was all I could do to
steer a dignified course between that uncompromising Scylla,
Blakely's mother, and the compromising Charybdis of my self-elected
champions. But I managed it, somehow. Dad bought me a stunning big
automobile in Los Angeles, and Blakely taught me how to run it;
then, Blakely was awfully fond of golf; and we spent loads of time
at the Country Club. And of course there was the palace on the hill
to be inspected every little while.

Poor Blakely! How he did hate it all! Again and again he begged Dad
to give his consent to our marrying at once. But Dad, as unconscious
of what was going on round him as a two-months-old baby, would
always insist that everything would come out all right.

"Give her time, my boy," he would say, "give her time. Your mother
isn't used to our Western way of rushing things, and she wants a
little time to get used to it."

"What if she never gets used to it?" Blakely would ask.

Then Dad would answer: "You're impatient, boy; all lovers are
impatient. Don't I know?"

"But things can't go on this way forever."

"Of course they can't," Dad would agree. "When I think things have
gone long enough, I'll have a little talk with your mother myself.
She's a dashed fine-looking woman, your mother--a dashed
fine-looking woman! Be patient with her, boy."

Poor Dad! Blakely and I were resolved that he should never have that
little talk he spoke of with so much confidence. Ideals are awfully
in the way sometimes, but nobody with a speck of decency can bear to
stand by and see them destroyed. Dad's deals had to be preserved at
any price.




Chapter Eight


And so another two weeks passed. Then, one day, a comet of amazing
brilliancy shot suddenly into our social orbit, and things happened.
That this interesting stellar phenomenon was a Russian grand duke, a
nephew of the Czar, but added to the piquancy of the situation.

The hotel was all in a flutter; the manager was beside himself with
joy; bell-boys danced jig steps in the corridors; chambermaids went
about with a distracted air--and all because the grand duke,
Alexander Melovich, was to arrive on the morrow. It was an
epoch-making event. It was better than a circus, for it was free. Copies
of the Almanach de Gotha appeared, as if by magic. Everybody was
interested. Everybody was charmed, until--

The rumor flew rapidly along the verandas. It was denied by the head
waiter, it was confirmed by the chief clerk; it was referred to the
manager himself and again confirmed. Alas, it was true! The Grand
Duke Alexander was coming, not to honor the hotel, but to honor Mrs.
Carmichael Porter; she would receive him as her guest, she would pay
the royal hotel bill, she would pay the bills of the royal suite.
Yes, Blakely's mother had captured the grand duke.

A wave of indignation swept the columns of the rank and file. They
didn't want the grand duke themselves, but they didn't want
Blakely's mother to have him; Blakely's mother and Mrs. Sanderson-Spear,
and Mrs. Tudor Carstairs. In a way, it was better than a
comic opera; it was fearfully amusing.

The grand duke, accompanied, according to the newspapers, "by the
Royal Suite and the Choicest Flower of San Francisco Society,"
arrived on a special train direct from Del Monte. Having captured a
grand duke, these "Choicest Flowers" (ten in number) were loath to
lose him, so they accompanied him. They did more; they paid for the
special train. Blakely's mother greeted them, one and all, in a most
friendly manner. There was an aristocratic air about the whole
proceeding that was distinctly uplifting.

And now began a round of gaieties, the first being a tea were real
Russian samovars were in evidence, and sandwiches of real Russian
caviar were served. Real Russian cigarettes were smoked, real
Russian vodka was sipped; the Czar's health was drunk; no bombs were
thrown, no bonds were offered for sale, the Russian loan was not
discussed; the Japanese servants were not present, having been given
a half holiday. Oh, it was a little triumph, that tea! Blakely's
mother was showered with congratulations. The "Choicest Flowers"
vied with one another in assurances of their distinguished approval.

Indeed, they were all crazy about it--except the grand duke. Blakely
said the grand duke was bored to death, and that he had led him off
to the bar and given him a whisky-and-soda out of sheer pity. From
that time on the duke stuck to him like a postage stamp, so that
Blakely had an awful time escaping that night to dine with Dad and
me. He told us all about the tea at dinner, and I was surprised to
learn (I hadn't seen him yet) that the duke was just Blakely's age,
and, as Blakely put it, "a very decent sort." Not that there is any
reason why a grand duke shouldn't be a decent sort, but Rumor was
busy just then proclaiming that this particular grand duke was a
perfect pig.

The next day I had a chance to judge for myself. It seems the duke
noticed me as I got into my automobile for my morning ride, and
after finding out who I was, sent for Blakely and demanded that I be
presented to him.

Blakely was awfully angry. He said: "Look here, I don't know what
you've been used to, but in this country, where a man wishes to meet
a young lady, he asks to be presented to her. Not only that, but he
doesn't take it for granted that she'll be honored by the request.
Miss Middleton is my fiancee. I don't know whether she cares to meet
you or not. If she does, I'll let you know." The duke was terribly
mortified. He apologized beautifully.

Then Blakely apologized for getting angry, and they became better
friends than ever, with the result that the duke was presented to me
that very afternoon.

The Grand Duke Alexander was short and fat and fair, with a yellow
mustache of the Kaiser Wilhelm variety. It was rather a shock to me,
for I had expected a dashing black-haired person with flashing eyes
and a commanding presence. No, he wasn't at all my idea of what a
grand duke should look like; he looked much more like a little
brother to the ox (a well-bred, well-dressed, bath-loving little
brother, of course) than a member of an imperial family. Not that he
didn't have his points: he had nice hands and nice feet, and his
smile was charming.

You should have seen his face light up when he found I spoke French.
The poor fellow wasn't a bit at home in the English language and the
eagerness with which he plunged into French was really pathetic.
Luckily, Blakely spoke French, too--not very well, but he understood
it lots better than he spoke it--so we three spent a pleasant hour
together on the veranda. Of course, in a way, it was a little
triumph for me; the women whom Blakely's mother had snubbed enjoyed
the sight immensely, and when she appeared, accompanied by Mrs.
Sanderson-Spear and some of the "Choicest Flowers," and saw what was
happening to her duke, she was too angry for words. Heavens, how
that woman did hate me that afternoon!

The next morning six more "Choicest Flowers" arrived from San
Francisco (rare orchids whose grandfathers had come over from
Ireland in the steerage). The third son of an English baronet who
owned a chicken-ranch near Los Angeles and a German count who sold
Rhine wines to the best families also appeared; for that night
Blakely's mother was to give such a dinner as had never before been
given in Santa Barbara.

Under the heading:

SANTA BARBARA NOW THE MOST COSMOPOLITAN CITY IN AMERICA

an enterprising Los Angeles newspaper devoted a whole page to the
coming event. Adjective was piled on adjective, split infinitive on
split infinitive. The dinner was to be given in the ballroom of the
hotel.... The bank accounts of the assembled guests would total
$400,000,000.... The terrapin had been specially imported from
Baltimore.... The decorations were to be magnificent beyond the
wildest dream.... The duke was to sit on the right of his
hostess.... Mr. Sanderson-Spear, the Pierpont Morgan of
Pennsylvania, who would arrive that morning from Pittsburg in his
private car, would sit on her left.... Count Boris Beljaski,
intimate friend and traveling companion of the grand duke, would
appear in the uniform of the imperial guard.... The Baroness
Reinstadt was hurrying from San Diego, in her automobile.... As a
winter resort, Santa Barbara was, as usual, eclipsing Florida,
etc., ... Blakely and I read the paper together; we laughed over it
till we cried.

"It would be lots funnier if it wasn't my mother who was making such
a holy show of herself," Blakely said. "Do you know, my dear--"

He was silent for a moment. When he did speak, there was a wicked
gleam in his eyes. "By Jove," he cried, "I'll do it!"

"Do what?" I asked.

"Oh, nothing much. I'll tell you all about it later--if there's
anything to tell. Now I must run away. Good-by, dear."




Chapter Nine


At a quarter to four I received a note from Blakely saying it would
be impossible for him to come in to tea as he had planned. It was
the first time he had ever broken an engagement with me, and I was a
wee bit unhappy over it, though I knew, of course, there must be
some good reason why he couldn't come. Still, his absence rather put
me out of humor with tea, so I sent Valentine for a box of
chocolates. When she returned I sat down with them and a novel,
prepared to spend the rest of the afternoon alone.

The novel wasn't half as silly as some I've read--the hero reminded
me of Blakely--and the chocolates were unusually good; I was having
a much better time than I had expected. Then some one knocked at the
door.

"Bother!" I thought. "It can't be anybody I wish to see; I'll not
let them in."

The knock, was repeated. It suddenly occurred to me that maybe
Blakely had changed his plans and had come for tea after all.

"Come in," I called.

The door opened slowly, and there, standing on the threshold,
was--  Had I gone quite mad? I rose from my chair and stared
unbelievingly--at Blakely's mother.

"May I come in?" she asked in her even, well-bred voice.

"Why--yes," I faltered.

Closing the door behind her, she walked over to the fireplace.

"Won't you sit down?" I asked. "No, I thank you. This is not an
afternoon call, Miss Middleton, it is--But of course you
understand."

I didn't understand at all, and her manner of saying I did made me
furious.

"Perhaps I am very stupid," I said, "but I cannot imagine why you
are here."

"Do you know where my son is?"

"I do not."

"You have no idea?"

"I have no idea where your son is, nor why you are here."

She eyed me intently. How cold and determined she looked and how
handsome she was.

"If I thought you were telling the truth--"

"Mrs. Porter!"

She handed me a letter. "Please read that," she said.

"I will not read it," I replied. "I must beg that you leave me."

"There, there, child, I did not mean to be rude."

"You are more than rude, you are insolent."

"I am distracted, child. Please read the letter."

"Very well," I said, "I'll read it."

This was the letter:


"MY DEAR MOTHER: This will be handed to you at four o'clock. At
that hour I shall be in Ventura, accompanied by the Grand Duke
Alexander, and, as we are making the trip by automobile, it may be
that we shall neither of us return in time for your dinner this
evening."

"If, however, on reading this you will wire me at Ventura your full
consent to my marriage with Miss Middleton, I think I can guarantee
that your dinner party will be a success."

"I shall be in Ventura till half past four. Should I fail to hear
from you by that time, we shall continue our journey toward Los
Angeles as fast as our six-cylinders will take us."

"It grieves me more than I can tell you to employ this cavalier
method against you, but my softer appeals have been in vain."

"While not a party to the plot, the duke, I find is something of a
philosopher; I do not look for any resistance on his part. If he
does resist, so much the worse for him."

"Your affectionate son, BLAKELY PORTER."

"P. S. Please do not think that Miss Middleton has any knowledge of
this plan. She has not."

"P. S. Remember! We leave Ventura for Los Angeles at 4:50 p.m.
sharp."


"Mrs. Porter," I said when I had finished reading the letter, "I am
deeply humiliated that Blakely should have done this."

"Still, I suppose you would marry him if I gave my consent."

"I would not," I replied hotly. "I might marry him without your
consent, for I love him dearly; but I would never consider you had
given your consent if it were forced from you by trickery."

"You wouldn't?"

"I would not."

"But if he doesn't bring the duke back my dinner will be ruined."

"I will telegraph him myself," I said.

"Supposing he won't come?"

"Blakely will come if I ask him to."

"And you will do this for me?"

"No; I am not doing it for you."

"Then why--"

"Because I cannot bear to have Blakely act so ungenerously toward
his mother."

"He has but used my own weapons against me," she remarked
thoughtfully.

"Your weapons are quite unworthy of him, Mrs. Porter." "The telegram
must be dispatched at once," she announced, glancing impatiently at
her watch.

"If you will call the office and ask them to send up a boy with some
forms, I will think over what I wish to say," I said.

When the boy arrived I had decided upon my message. It was:


"BLAKELY PORTER, Ventura."

"If you do not return at once with your captive I shall consider
that we have never met."

"ELIZABETH."


I wrote it out on a form and handed it to Mrs. Porter. "Will that
do?" I asked.

She read it at a glance. "Yes," she said, "it will do. Here, boy,
see that this is rushed."

"I'm glad it was satisfactory," I said. "Good afternoon, Mrs.
Porter."

"My dear girl....."

"Good afternoon, Mrs. Porter."

Still she did not go. I realized her predicament, and was childish
enough to enjoy it, for Blakely's mother could not bear to accept a
favor from a social inferior. Had I been a child, she would have
patted me on the head and presented me with a sugar plum. As matters
stood she was quite at sea; she wished to do something gracious--she
didn't know how.

To make her position more impossible, who should come stalking into
the room but Dad,--dear, unsuspecting Dad. When he saw Mrs. Porter
he immediately jumped at a whole row of conclusions.

"Well, well well!" he said. "This is a sight that does me good. I'm
very glad indeed to see you, Mrs. Porter. Your son has had an idea
that you were opposed to meeting Elizabeth; but I knew he couldn't
be right. And here you are; calling on her? Well, well, well!
Elizabeth, haven't you any tea to offer Blakely's mother!"

"Mrs. Porter was just leaving," I managed to say. "She has been here
some time."

Dad beamed on us both.

"I told Blakely, Elizabeth couldn't marry him until you consented,"
he blundered on, "but now I suppose it is all arranged. These
children of ours are wonderfully impatient. I'm as fond of Blakely
as if he were my own son, and you'll feel the same about Elizabeth
when you've known her longer."

"Don't let Dad keep you, Mrs. Porter," I said. "I'm sure you have
many things to attend to."

Blakely's mother who had been standing like one in a dream, now woke
up.

"Yes," she said, "I must be going. I called informally on Elizabeth
to beg you both to come to my dinner to-night."

"I told her we couldn't possibly come," I began. "Nonsense! Of
course we can come," Dad declared. "It will quite upset Blakely if
you don't come, and I shall be so disappointed."

"There, there," said Dad, "you're not going to disappoint Blakely's
mother by refusing."

"No," I replied. "If Mrs. Porter really wants us we shall be
delighted to come."

"If either of you fails me it will make me most unhappy," she said,
and there was a note of sincerity, in her voice that was
unmistakable.

"Thank you," I murmured. "We shall not fail you."




Chapter Ten


When Blakely returned with the grand duke, he came straight to me.
What he expected was an explanation; what he actually received was
the worst scolding of his life. But the poor boy was so apologetic
and so humble, I finally relented, and kissed him, and told him all
about his mother's call, and its surprising consequences.

"I suppose I should be grateful," I said, "but the idea of going to
the ducal dinner fills me with rage."

"Let's be ill, and dine together."

"I can't, I've given my word. And then there's Dad; he feels now
that all the prophecies he has uttered in regard to your mother have
at last come true. It's only my wicked pride that's talking, dear.
Please don't pay any attention to it."

And then Blakely said one of the sweetest things he ever said to me.
Of course, it wasn't true but it made me so happy. "Dearest," he
said "everything I should love best to be, you are."

Before dressing for dinner, Dad came to my room "to talk things
over," as he put it. He was so superbly satisfied with himself and
the world, I could hardly forbear a smile.

"Naturally, I should be the last person to say 'I told you so',
Elizabeth, but you see what patience has done. It is always best to
be patient, my child."

"Yes, Dad." "Blakely's mother has acted very handsomely toward us,
considering--"

"Very handsomely, CONSIDERING," I agreed.

"And we must try to meet her half way." "Yes, Dad."

"No doubt she had her reasons for behaving as she did."

"I'm sure of it."

"You see, my dear, I've understood the situation from the very
first."

"You sweet old simpleton, of course you have! But here it is half
past seven, and you haven't begun to dress. Be off with you."

Although, at first, I had felt it would be all but impossible for me
to attend Mrs. Porter's dinner, my talk with Blakely had so raised
my spirits that now I was able to face the ordeal with something
very like serenity. What did it matter? What did anything matter, so
long as Blakely loved me? Then, too, I knew I was looking my very
best; my white lace gown was a dream; Valentine had never done my
hair so becomingly.

When Blakely called at our rooms for Dad and me, I was not at all
unhappy. And the dear boy was so relieved to see it! I will confess,
however, to one moment of real terror as we approached the drawing
room where we were to join our hostess. But her greeting was most
cordial and reassuring. And when she begged me to stand up with her,
and help her receive her guests, I almost felt at home, for I knew
it meant her surrender was unconditional.

After, that, it was like a beautiful dream. Except that some of the
"Choicest Flowers" of San Francisco society were fearfully and
fashionably late, nothing occurred to disturb the social atmosphere.
And when, on entering the dining room, I saw how the guests were
placed, I could have hugged Blakely's mother. For where do you
suppose she had put Dad? On her left! Of course the duke, as guest
of honor, was on her right; and I sat next to the duke, and Blakely
sat next to me.

By placing us so, Mrs. Porter had supplied the balance of the table
with a topic of conversation, always a desirable addition to a
dinner party; I noted with amusement the lifted eyebrows, the
expressions of wonder and resentment on the faces of some of the
guests. Nor did it seem to add to their pleasure that their hostess
devoted herself to Dad, while the duke and Blakely developed a
spirited, though friendly, rivalry as to which should monopolize
little Mimi.

But the real sensation was to occur when the champagne was poured.
(I could hardly believe my eyes, of my ears, either). For who should
rise in his place but Dad! Yes, there he stood, the old darling, a
brimming champagne glass in his hand, a beatific expression on his
face. And this is what he was saying:

"Our hostess has asked me to do something, which is to announce the
engagement of my daughter and her son. Let us drink to their
happiness."

"Bravo!" cried the Duke. "I give the American three cheers: Rah,
rah, rah!" "How delightfully boyish the dear Duke is," observed Mrs.
Sanderson-Spear, beaming at him from across the table.

"So ingenious, I mean so ingenuous," assented a languid lady from
San Francisco. "But we must stand up; toute le monde is standing up,
my dear."

And so it was, standing up to drink our healths, Blakely's and mine,
while Blakely held my hand under the table.

"Bravo!" cried the Duke. "It ees delightful. I cannot make the
speech, mais, mademoiselle, monsieur--I drink your health." He
drained his glass, then flung it, with a magnificent gesture, over
his shoulder. "It ees so we drink to royalty," he said.

Such a noble example naturally had its effect; there followed a
perfect shower of glasses. Indeed, I think every one at table
indulged in this pretty piece of extravagance except the third son
of an English baronet, who was too busy explaining how it was done
at home: "Purely a British custom, you understand--the wardroom of a
man-of-war, d'ye see.--They were officers of a Scotch regiment, and
they drank it standing on their chairs, with one foot on the table.
And, by gad, I didn't care for it!"--No doubt I should have learned
more concerning this purely British custom if the Pierpont Morgan of
Pennsylvania hadn't called on Blakely for a speech, just then. Poor
Blakely! He didn't know at all how to make a speech. Thought I must
say I was rather glad of it; the most tiresome thing about Americans
is their eternal speechmaking, I think.

Blakely having faltered his few words of thanks, some one proposed
the duke's health; but that had to wait till new glasses were
brought in and filled. Altogether, then, instead of being a solemn,
dignified affair, such as one might have expected, it was a
tremendously jolly dinner--a little rowdy, perhaps, but delightfully
friendly. If I had entered the dining room as Old Tom Middleton's
daughter, "who actually used to live over a livery stable, my dear,"
it was not so I left it; for the nimbus of the sacred name of Porter
had already begun to shed its beautiful light on my many graces and
social accomplishments. Indeed, when I retired with my hostess to
the drawing room, it was to hold a sort of reception; Mrs. Tudor
Carstairs vied with Mrs. Sanderson-Spear in assurances of regard,
"Choicest Flowers" expressed approval, the German baroness, bless
her, conferred the distinction of a motherly kiss. And Blakely's
mother was so gracious, so kind and considerate, it was hard to
believe we had faced each other, five hours before, with something
very like hatred in our eyes.

When Blakely and Dad, and the other men joined us, I was so happy I
could have kicked both my slippers to the ceiling. I might have
disgraced myself doing it, too, if the third son of the English
baronet hadn't come up just then to felicitate me. He would have
done it charmingly if he hadn't felt constrained to add that
Americans always say "dook" instead of "duke," that nobody present
seemed to realize the proper way to address a nephew of the Czar was
to call him Monseigneur, that the Olympic games in London had been
conducted admirably, arid that he didn't believe in marriage,
anyway.

But the sweetest thing to me of all that wonderful evening was to
see the love and gratitude in Blakely's eyes when he looked at his
mother; for a man who doesn't love his mother misses much, and I
love Blakely so tenderly, I couldn't bear to have him miss the last
then that makes for contentment and happiness.




Chapter Eleven


When I awoke, late next morning, it was to find myself, if not
famous, at least conspicuous; in the Los Angeles newspaper Valentine
brought me with my coffee, much space was devoted to the ducal
dinner.

GRAND DUKE SMASHES CHAMPAGNE GLASSES

Miss Middleton Toasted in Truly Royal Fashion by Distinguished
Nephew of Russia's Reigning Czar.

Brilliant Dinner Reaches Climax in Shower of Costly Crystal While
Hostess Smiles Approval.

Disgusting as it was, I couldn't help laughing at the pen-and-ink
sketch which accompanied it--a sketch of the duke, with crowned
head, and breast covered with decorations, smiling fatuously from
within a rakish border of broken champagne glasses.

But there was worse to come. On another page under the heading:

WHIRLWIND WOOING WINS WESTERN GIRL

a distorted Cupid supported pictures of Blakely and me, while
beneath our pictures, a most fulsome chronicle of untruths was
presented. "Mr. Porter first met his fiancee on shipboard.....
Being of that fine old New York stock which never takes 'no' for an
answer, he followed her to Santa Barbara..... If rumor is to be
credited, the Grand Duke Alexander, as well as Cupid, was concerned
in this singularly up-to-date love affair..... Mr. Porter's sister,
the Countess de Bienville, is a well-known leader in exclusive
Parisian circles..... Miss Middleton an only daughter of Thomas
Middleton, the mining magnate..... Although slightly indisposed,
His Imperial Highness granted an interview to our representative
late last evening. If the time-worn adage, in vino veritas, is to be
believed; it is certain that the wedding will not only take place
soon, but that the favorite nephew of the Czar of all the Russias
will himself appear in this charming romance of throbbing hearts,
playing the role of best man."

It was really too dreadful; my cheeks burned with mortification and
anger.

People had assured me the horrid little American newspaper published
in Paris was not typical of America--that it was no more than a paid
panderer to seekers after notoriety. Yet here in California, my own
dear California, a newspaper had dared print my picture without my
consent, had thrown its ugly light on the sweet story of my love
serving it up in yellow paragraphs for the benefit of the bootblack,
the butcher, the waiter in cheap restaurants. What a hideous world!

Pleading a sick headache, I stayed in my room till tea time.

We had tea at five, Blakely and I, on the roof of the hotel. I
looked across the channel to the distant islands, followed the sweet
contour of the shore, watched the aimless flight of sea-gulls;
turning, I scanned the friendly hills, the mountains painted in the
tender colors of late afternoon--I looked into Blakely's eyes. It
was a beautiful world, after all. "Let's try and forget that awful
newspaper," I said.

"I forgot it long ago, dear."

"You also seem to have forgotten that some one may appear any
minute."

"Let's try and forget that some one may appear any minute."

"I can't."

"You shouldn't say 'I can't,' Elizabeth; you should say 'I'll try'."

It is really surprising what one can do when one tries.




Chapter Twelve


"What would we have done with-out the duke`?" I murmured a moment
later.

"There's a more important question than that to be answered," said
Blakely; "we have still to decide what we shall do with the duke."

"I don't understand."

"It's my charming way of breaking news gently, sweetheart."

"Bad news?"

"Not exactly. It may annoy you."

"It annoys me that you seems afraid to tell it," I said.

"I'm not afraid, not the least bit. I'm a little ashamed, though.
You see mother is....."

"Don't dare adopt an apologizing attitude towards your mother.
Hasn't she done everything in the world for us?"

"There are some things one would rather do for oneself, girlie. I
had quite set my heart on Perry Arnold being best man at our
wedding."

"And so he shall be."

"I wrote him a week ago, and his answer came this morning. He was
delighted, poor chap! He's in Denver, now, and could be here in
three days." "You won't need him for three months," I warned. "But
why can't you have him, dear?"

"Because mother has already engaged the duke in that capacity."

"Not really?"

"It's the gospel truth. Perry will think me no end of a snob. I
won't know what explanation to make."

"Nonsense! I'll explain it to him myself."

"Then you feel I ought to accept mother's arrangements?"

"You must, if it will make her happy."

"She assured me she would be most miserable if I didn't."

"Then it's settled," I said.

"That's not all, Elizabeth; the duke is sailing for Japan on the
twenty-sixth of February."

"And this is the twentieth!" I gasped.

"Yes, sweetheart. And mother has arranged our wedding for the
twenty-fourth."

I was silent from sheer indignation.

"I told mother you wouldn't like it. But will you.....? Do you.....?
Would you mind very much being married on the twenty-fourth?"

"Would you mind?" I asked.

"Mind? I should love it above everything! Life is so uncertain, each
day is so precious, and I've waited so long for you, Elizabeth."

"You've only known me a little over a month."

"But I've waited years for you;"

"Yes," I said, "I believe you have: It shall be as you wish, dear."

And then, as a woman's greatest happiness lies in making the man she
loves happy, and as no one ever looked so radiantly happy as
Blakely, I was so glad I had said "yes," I didn't know what to do.

But Blakely knew exactly what to do; he kissed me.









End of Project Gutenberg's Cupid's Understudy, by Edward Salisbury Field

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CUPID'S UNDERSTUDY ***

***** This file should be named 3602.txt or 3602.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/6/0/3602/

Produced by Charles Franks and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team. HTML version by Al Haines.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
