The Project Gutenberg EBook of Jonah, by Louis Stone

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Jonah

Author: Louis Stone

Posting Date: June 20, 2009 [EBook #3678]
Release Date: January, 2003
First Posted: July 16, 2001

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JONAH ***




Produced by Col Choat.  HTML version by Al Haines.









Jonah


by

Louis Stone





CONTENTS


PART 1

LARRIKINS ALL

  1  SATURDAY NIGHT AT THE CORNER
  2  JONAH EATS GREEN PEAS
  3  CARDIGAN STREET AT HOME
  4  JONAH DISCOVERS THE BABY
  5  THE PUSH DEALS IT OUT
  6  THE BABY DISCOVERS JONAH
  7  A QUIET WEDDING
  8  JONAH STARTS ON HIS OWN
  9   PADDY'S MARKET
 10  JONAH DECLARES WAR
 11  THE COURTING OF PINKEY


PART 2


THE SIGN OF THE "SILVER SHOE"

 12  THE SIGN OF THE "SILVER SHOE"
 13  A FAMILY IN EXILE
 14  ADA MAKES A FRIEND
 15  Mrs PARTRIDGE LENDS A HAND
 16  A DEATH IN THE FAMILY
 17  THE TWO-UP SCHOOL
 18  THE "ANGEL" LOSES A CUSTOMER
 19  THE PIPES OF PAN
 20  Mrs PARTRIDGE MINDS THE SHOP
 21  DAD WEEPS ON A TOMBSTONE
 22  A FATAL ACCIDENT




PART 1



LARRIKINS ALL




CHAPTER 1

SATURDAY NIGHT AT THE CORNER


One side of the street glittered like a brilliant eruption with the
light from a row of shops; the other, lined with houses, was almost
deserted, for the people, drawn like moths by the glare, crowded and
jostled under the lights.

It was Saturday night, and Waterloo, by immemorial habit, had flung
itself on the shops, bent on plunder.  For an hour past a stream of
people had flowed from the back streets into Botany Road, where the
shops stood in shining rows, awaiting the conflict.

The butcher's caught the eye with a flare of colour as the light played
on the pink and white flesh of sheep, gutted and skewered like victims
for sacrifice; the saffron and red quarters of beef, hanging like the
limbs of a dismembered Colossus; and the carcasses of pigs, the unclean
beast of the Jews, pallid as a corpse.  The butchers passed in and out,
sweating  and greasy, hoarsely crying the prices as they cut and hacked
the meat.  The people crowded about, sniffing the odour of dead flesh,
hungry and brutal--carnivora seeking their prey.

At the grocer's the light was reflected from the gay labels on tins and
packages and bottles, and the air was heavy with the confused odour of
tea, coffee and spices.

Cabbages, piled in heaps against the door-posts of the greengrocer's,
threw a rank smell of vegetables on the air; the fruit within, built in
pyramids for display, filled the nostrils with the fragrant, wholesome
scents of the orchard.

The buyers surged against the barricade of counters, shouting their
orders, contesting the ground inch by inch as they fought for the value
of a penny.  And they emerged staggering under the weight of their
plunder, laden like ants with food for hungry mouths--the insatiable
maw of the people.

The push was gathered under the veranda at the corner of Cardigan
Street, smoking cigarettes and discussing the weightier matters of
life--horses and women.  They were all young--from eighteen to
twenty-five--for the larrikin never grows old.  They leaned against the
veranda posts, or squatted below the windows of the shop, which had
been to let for months.

Here they met nightly, as men meet at their club--a terror to the
neighbourhood.  Their chief diversion was to guy the pedestrians,
leaping from insult to swift retaliation if one resented their foul
comments.

"Garn!" one was saying, "I tell yer some 'orses know more'n a man.  I
remember old Joe Riley goin' inter the stable one day to a brown mare
as 'ad a derry on 'im 'cause 'e flogged 'er crool.  Well, wot does she
do? She squeezes 'im up agin the side o' the stable, an' nearly
stiffens 'im afore 'e cud git out.  My oath, she did!"

"That's nuthin' ter wot a mare as was runnin' leader in Daly's 'bus
used ter do," began another, stirred by that rivalry which makes
talkers magnify and invent to cap a story; but he stopped suddenly as
two girls approached.

One was short and fat, a nugget, with square, sullen features; the
other, thin as a rake, with a mass of red hair that fell to her waist
in a thick coil.

"'Ello, Ada, w'ere you goin'?" he inquired, with a facetious grin. "Cum
'ere, I want ter talk ter yer."

The fat girl stopped and laughed.

"Can't--I'm in a 'urry," she replied.

"Well, kin I cum wid yer?" he asked, with another grin.

"Not wi' that face, Chook," she answered, laughing.

"None o' yer lip, now, or I'll tell Jonah wot yer were doin' last
night," said Chook.

"W'ere is Joe?" asked the girl, suddenly serious.  "Tell 'im I want ter
see 'im."

"Gone ter buy a smoke; 'e'll be back in a minit."

"Right-oh, tell 'im wot I said," replied Ada, moving away.

"'Ere, 'old 'ard, ain't yer goin' ter interdooce yer cobber?" cried
Chook, staring at the red-headed girl.

"An' 'er ginger 'air was scorchin' all 'er back," he sang in parody,
suddenly cutting a caper and snapping his fingers.

The girl's white skin flushed pink with anger, her eyes sparkled with
hate.

"Ugly swine!   I'll smack yer jaw, if yer talk ter me," she cried.

"Blimey, 'ot stuff, ain't it?" inquired Chook.

"Cum on, Pinkey.  Never mind 'im," cried Ada, moving off.

"Yah, go 'ome an' wash yer neck!" shouted Chook, with sudden venom.

The red-headed girl stood silent, searching her mind for a stinging
retort.

"Yer'd catch yer death o' cold if yer washed yer own," she cried; and
the two passed out of sight, tittering.  Chook turned to his mates.

"She kin give it lip, can't she?" said he, in admiration.

A moment later the leader of the Push crossed the street, and took his
place in silence under the veranda.  A first glance surprised the eye,
for he was a hunchback, with the uncanny look of the deformed--the
head, large and powerful, wedged between the shoulders as if a giant's
hand had pressed it down, the hump projecting behind, monstrous and
inhuman. His face held you with a pair of restless grey eyes, the
colour and temper of steel, deep with malicious intelligence.  His nose
was large and thin, curved like the beak of an eagle.  Chook, whose
acquaintance he had made years ago when selling newspapers, was his
mate.  Both carried nicknames, corrupted from Jones and Fowles, with
the rude wit of the streets.

"Ada's lookin' fer yous, Jonah," said Chook.

"Yer don't say so?" replied the hunchback, raising his leg to strike a
match.  "Was Pinkey with 'er?" he added.

"D'ye mean a little moll wi' ginger hair?" asked Chook.

Jonah nodded.

"My oath, she was!   Gi' me a knockout in one act," said Chook; and the
others laughed.

"Ginger fer pluck!" cried someone.

And they began to argue whether you could tell a woman's character from
the colour of her hair; whether red-haired women were more deceitful
than others.

Suddenly, up the road, appeared a detachment of the Salvation Army,
stepping in time to the muffled beat of a drum.  The procession halted
at the street corner, stepped out of the way of traffic, and formed a
circle.  The Push moved to the kerbstone, and, with a derisive grin,
awaited the performance.

The wavering flame of the kerosene torches, topped with thick smoke,
shone yellow against the whiter light of the gas-jets in the shops. The
men, in red jerseys and flat caps, held the poles of the torches in
rest.  When a gust of air blew the thick black smoke into their eyes,
they patiently turned their heads.  The sisters, conscious of the
public gaze, stood with downcast eyes, their faces framed in grotesque
poke-bonnets.

The Captain, a man of fifty, with the knotty, misshapen hands of a
workman, stepped into the centre of the ring, took off his cap, and
began to speak.

"Oh friends, we 'ave met 'ere again tonight to  inquire after the
safety of yer everlastin' souls.  Yer pass by, thinkin' only of yer
idle pleasures, w'en at any moment yer might be called to judgment by
'Im Who made us all equal in 'Is eyes.  Yer pass by without 'earin' the
sweet voice of Jesus callin' on yer to be saved this very minit. For 'E
is callin' yer to come an' be saved an' find salvation, as 'E called me
many years ago.  I was then like yerselves, full of wickedness, an
gloryin' in sin.  But I 'eard the voice of 'Im Who died on the Cross,
an' saw I was rushin' 'eadlong to 'ell.  An' 'Is blood washed all my
sins away, an' made me whiter than snow.  Whiter than snow,
friends--whiter than snow!   An' 'E'll do the same fer you if yer will
only come an' be saved.  Oh, can't yer 'ear the voice of Jesus callin'
to yer to come an' live with 'Im in 'Is blessed mansions in the sky?
Oh, come tonight an' find salvation!"

His arms were outstretched in a passionate gesture of appeal, his rough
voice vibrated with emotion, the common face flamed with the ecstasy of
the fanatic.  When he stopped for breath or wiped the sweat from his
face, the Army spurred him on with cries of "Hallelujah!   Amen!" as
one pokes a dying fire.

The Lieutenant, who was the comedian of the company, met with a grin of
approval as he faced the ring of torches like an actor facing the
footlights, posing before the crowd that had gathered, flashing his
vulgar conceit in the public eye.  And he praised God in a song and
dance, fitting his words to the latest craze of the music-hall:

  "Oh! won't you come and join us?
  Jesus leads the throng,"

snapping his fingers, grimacing, cutting capers that would have
delighted the gallery of a theatre.

"Encore!" yelled the Push as he danced himself to a standstill, hot and
breathless.

The rank and file came forward to testify.  The men stammered in
confusion, terrified by the noise they made, shrinking from the crowd
as a timid bather shrinks from icy water, driven to this performance by
an unseen power.  But the women were shrill and self-possessed,
scolding their hearers, demanding an instant surrender to the Army,
whose advantages they pointed out with a glib fluency as if it were a
Benefit Lodge.

Then the men knelt in the dust, the women covered their faces, and the
Captain began to pray.  His voice rose in shrill entreaty, mixed with
the cries of the shopmen and the noise of the streets.

The spectators, familiar with the sight, listened in nonchalance,
stopping to watch the group for a minute as they would look into a shop
window. The exhibition stirred no religious feeling in them, for their
minds, with the tenacity of childhood, associated religion with
churches, parsons and hymn-books.

The Push grew restless, divided between a desire to upset the meeting
and fear of the police.

"Well I used ter think a funeral was slow," remarked Chook, losing
patience, and he stepped behind Jonah.

"'Ere, look out!" yelled Jonah the next minute, as, with a push from
Chook, he collided violently with one of the soldiers and fell into the
centre of the ring.

"'E shoved me," cried Jonah as he got up, pointing with an injured air
to the grinning Chook.  "I'll gi' yer a kick in the neck, if yer git me
lumbered," he added, scowling with counterfeit anger at his mate.

"If yer was my son," said the Captain severely--"If yer was my son..."
he repeated, halting for words.

"I should 'ave trotters as big as yer own," cried Jonah, pointing to
the man's feet, cased in enormous bluchers.  The Push yelled with
derision as Jonah edged out of the circle ready for flight.

The Captain flushed angrily, and then his face cleared.

"Well, friends," he cried, "God gave me big feet to tramp the streets
and preach the Gospel to my fellow men." And the interrupted service
went on.

Jonah, who carried the brains of the Push, devised a fresh attack,
involving Chook, a broken bottle, and the big drum.

"It'll cut it like butter," he was explaining, when suddenly there was
a cry of "Nit!  'Ere's a cop!" and the Push bolted like rabbits.

Jonah and Chook alone stood their ground, with reluctant valour, for
the policeman was already beside them.  Chook shoved the broken bottle
into his pocket, and listened with unusual interest to the last hymn of
the Army.  Jonah, with one eye on the policeman, looked worried, as if
he were struggling with a desire to join the Army and lead a pure life.
The policeman looked hard at them and turned away.

The pair were making a strategic movement to the rear, when the two
girls who had exchanged shots  with Chook at the corner passed them.
The fat girl tapped Jonah on the back.  He turned with a start.

"Nit yer larks!" he cried.  "I thought it was the cop."

"Cum 'ere, Joe; I want yer," said the girl.

"Wot's up now?" he cried, following her along the street.

They stood in earnest talk for some minutes, while Chook complimented
the red-headed girl on her wit.

"Yer knocked me sky-'igh," he confessed, with a leer.

"Did I?"

"Yer did.  Gi' me one straight on the point," he admitted.

"Yous keep a civil tongue in yer head," she cried, and the curious pink
flush spread over her white skin.

"Orl right, wot are yer narked about?" inquired Chook.

He noticed, with surprise, that she was pretty, with small regular
features; her eyes quick and bright, like a bird's.  Under the gaslight
her hair was the colour of a new penny.

"W'y, I don't believe yer 'air is red," said Chook, coming nearer.

"Now then, keep yer 'ands to yerself," cried the girl, giving him a
vigorous push.  Before he could repeat his attack, she walked away to
join Ada, who hailed her shrilly.

Jonah rejoined his mate in gloomy silence.  The Push had
scattered--some to the two-up school, some  to the dance-room.  The
butcher's flare of lights shone with a desolate air on piles of bones
and scraps of meat--the debris of battle.  The greengrocer's was
stripped bare to the shelves, as if an army of locusts had marched
through with ravenous tooth.

"Comin' down the street?" asked Chook, feeling absently in his pockets.

"No," said Jonah.

"W'y, wot's up now?" inquired Chook in surprise.

"Oh, nuthin'; but I'm goin' ter sleep at Ada's tonight," replied Jonah,
staring at the shops.

"'Strewth!" cried Chook, looking at him in wonder.  "Wot's the game
now?"

"Oh! the old woman wants me ter put in the night there.  Says some
blokes 'ave bin after 'er fowls," replied Jonah, hesitating like a boy
inventing an excuse.

"Fowls!" cried Chook, with infinite scorn.  "Wants yer to nuss the
bloomin' kid."

"My oath, she don't," replied Jonah, with great heartiness.

"Well, gimme a smoke," said Chook, feeling again in his pockets.

Jonah took out a packet of cigarettes, counted how many were left, and
gave him one.

"Kin yer spare it?" asked Chook, derisively.  "Lucky I've only got one
mouth."

"Mouth?  More like a hole in a wall," grinned Jonah.

"Well, so long.  See yer to-morrer," said Chook, moving off.  "Ere,
gimme a match," he added.

"Better tell yer old woman I'm sleepin' out," said Jonah

He was boarding with Chook's family, paying what he could spare out of
fifteen shillings or a pound a week.

"Oh, I don't suppose you'll be missed," replied Chook graciously.

"Rye buck!" cried Jonah.




CHAPTER 2

JONAH EATS GREEN PEAS


Eighteen months past, Jonah had met Ada, who worked at Packard's boot
factory, at a dance.  Struck by her skill in dancing, he courted her in
the larrikin fashion.  At night he stood in front of the house, and
whistled till she came out.  Then they went to the park, where they
sprawled on the grass in obscure corners.

At intervals the quick spurt of a match lit up their faces, followed by
the red glow of Jonah's everlasting cigarette.  Their talk ran
incessantly on their acquaintances, whose sayings and doings they
discussed with monotonous detail.  If it rained, they stood under a
veranda in the conventional attitude--Jonah leaning against the wall,
Ada standing in front of him.  The etiquette of Cardigan Street
considered any other position scandalous.

On Saturday night they went to Bob Fenner's dance-room, or strolled
down to Paddy's Market.  When Jonah was flush, he took her to the
"Tiv.", where they sat in the gallery, packed like sardines.  If it
were hot, Jonah sat in his shirtsleeves, and went out for a drink at
the intermission.  When they reached home, they stood in the lane
bordering the cottage where Ada lived, and talked for an hour in the
dim light of the lamp opposite, before she went in.

Sometimes, in a gay humour, she knocked off Jonah's hat, and he
retaliated with a punch in the ribs.  Then a scuffle followed, with
slaps, blows and stifled yells, till Ada's mother, awakened by the
noise, knocked on the wall with her slipper.  And this was their
romance of love.

Mrs Yabsley was a widow; for Ada's father, scorning old age, had
preferred to die of drink in his prime.  The publicans lost a good
customer, but his widow found life easier.

"Talk about payin' ter see men swaller knives an' swords!" she
exclaimed. "My old man could swaller tables an' chairs faster than I
could buy 'em."

So she opened a laundry, and washed and ironed for the neighbourhood.
Cardigan Street was proud of her.  Her eyes twinkled in a big, humorous
face; her arm was like a leg of mutton; the floors creaked beneath her
as she walked.  She laughed as a bull roars; her face turned purple;
she fought for air; the veins rose like cords on her forehead.  She was
pointed out to strangers like a public building as she sat on her
veranda, gossiping with the neighbours in a voice that shook the
windows.  There was no tongue like hers within a mile.  Her sayings
were quoted like the newspaper.  Draymen laughed at her jokes.

Yet the women took their secret troubles to her.  For this unwieldy
jester, with the jolly red face and rough tongue, could touch the heart
with a word,  when she was in the humour.  Then she spoke so wisely and
kindly that the tears gathered in stubborn eyes, and the poor fools
went home comforted.

Ever since her daughter was a child she had speculated on her marriage.
There was to be no nonsense about love.  That was all very well in
novelettes, but in Cardigan Street love-matches were a failure.
Generally the first few months saw the divine spark drowned in beer.
She would pick a steady man with his two pounds a week; he would jump
at the chance, and the whole street would turn out to the wedding.
But, as is common, her far-seeing eyes had neglected the things that
lay under her nose. Ada, in open revolt, had chosen Jonah the larrikin,
a hunchback, crafty as the devil and monstrous to the sight.  In six
months the inevitable had happened.

She was dismayed, but unshaken, and set to work to repair the damage
with the craft and strategy of an old general.  She made no fuss when
the child was born, and Jonah, who meditated flight, in fear of
maintenance, was assured he had nothing to worry about.  Mrs Yabsley
had a brief interview with him at the street corner.

"As fer puttin' yous inter court, I'll wait till y'earn enough ter keep
yerself, an' Gawd knows w'en that'll 'appen," she remarked pleasantly.

As she spoke she earnestly considered the large head, wedged between
the shoulders as if a giant's hand had pressed it down, the masterful
nose, the keen grey eyes, and the cynical lips; and in that moment
determined to make him Ada's husband.  Yet he was the last man she
would have chosen for a son-in-law.  A loafer and a vagabond, he spoke
of marriage with a grin.  Half his time was spent under the veranda at
the corner with the Push.  He worked at his trade by fits and starts,
earning enough to keep himself in cigarettes.

That was six months ago, and Ada had returned to the factory, where her
disaster created no stir.  Such accidents were common.  Mrs Yabsley
reared the child as she had reared her daughter, in a box-cradle near
the wash-tub or ironing-board, for Ada proved an indifferent mother.

Then, with a sudden change of front, she encouraged Jonah's intimacy
with Ada.  She invited him to the house, which he avoided with an
animal craft and suspicion, meeting Ada in the streets.  It was her
scheme to get him to live in the house; the rest, she thought, would be
easy.  But Jonah feared dimly that if he ventured inside the house he
would bring himself under the law.  So he grinned, and kept his
distance, like an animal that fears a trap.

But at last, his resistance worn to a thread by constant coaxing, he
had agreed to spend the night there on account of the fowls.  He was
interested in these, for one pair was his gift to Ada, the fruit of
some midnight raid.

Jonah stood alone at the corner watching the crowd.  Chook's reference
to the baby had shaken his resolution, and he decided to think it over.
And as he watched the moving procession with the pleasure of a
spectator at the play, he thought uneasily of women and marriage.  As
he nodded from time to time to an acquaintance, a young man passed him
carrying a child in his arms.  His wife, a slip of a  girl, loaded with
bundles, gave Jonah a quick look of fear and scorn.  The man stared
Jonah full in the face without a sign of recognition, and bent his head
over the child with a caressing movement.  Jonah noted the look of
humble pride in his eyes, and marvelled.  Twelve months ago he was
Jonah's rival in the Push, famous for his strength and audacity, and
now butter wouldn't melt in his mouth.  Jonah called to mind other
cases, with a sudden fear in his heart at this mysterious ceremony
before a parson that affected men like a disease, robbing them of all a
man desired, and leaving them contented and happy.  He turned into
Cardigan Street with the air of a man who is putting his neck in the
noose, resolving secretly to cut and run at the least hint of danger.

As he walked slowly up the street he became aware of a commotion at the
corner of George Street.  He saw that a crowd had gathered, and
quickened his pace, for a crowd in Cardigan Street generally meant a
fight.  Jonah elbowed his way through the ring, and found a young
policeman, new to this beat, struggling with an undersized man with the
face of a ferret. Jonah's first thought was to effect a rescue, as his
practised eye took in the details of the scene.  Let them get away from
the light of the street lamp, and with a sudden rush the thing would be
done.  He looked round for the Push and remembered that they were
scattered.  Then he saw that the captive was a stranger, and decided to
look on quietly and note the policeman's methods for future use.

On finding that he was overmatched in strength, the prisoner had
dropped to the ground, and, with silent, cat-like movements baulked the
policeman's efforts.  As Jonah looked on, the constable straightened
his back, wiped the sweat from his face, and then, suddenly desperate,
called on the nearest to help him.  The men slipped behind the women,
who laughed in his face.  It was his first arrest, and he looked in
astonishment at the grinning, hostile faces, too nervous to use his
strength, harassed by the hatred of the people.

"Take 'im yerself; do yer own dirty work."

"Wot's the poor bloke done?"

"Nuthin', yer may be sure."

"These Johns run a man in, an' swear his life away ter git a stripe on
their sleeve."

"They think they kin knock a man about as they like 'cause 'e's poor."

"They'd find plenty to do if they took the scoundrels that walk the
streets in a top 'at."

"It don't pay.  They know which side their bread's buttered, don't yous
fergit."

Chiefly by his own efforts the prisoner had become a disreputable
wreck. Hatless, with torn collar, his clothes covered with the dirt he
was rolling in, ten minutes' struggle with the policeman had
transformed him into a scarecrow.

"If there was any men about, they wouldn't see a decent young man
turned into a criminal under their very eyes," cried a virago, looking
round for a champion.

"If I was a man, I'd..."

She stopped as Sergeant Carmody arrived with a brisk air, and the crowd
fell back, silent before the official who knew every face in the ring.
In an instant the captive was lifted to his feet, his arms were twisted
behind his back till the sinews cracked, and the procession moved off
to the station.  When Jonah reached the cottage, he stood irresolute on
the other side of the street.  Already regretting his promise, he
turned to go, when Ada came to the door and saw him under the gas lamp.
He crossed the street, trying to show by his walk that his presence was
a mere accident.

"Cum in," cried Ada.  "Mum won't eat yer."

Mrs Yabsley, who was ironing among a pile of shirts and collars, looked
up, with the iron in her hand.

"W'y, Joe, ye're quite a stranger!" she cried.  "Sit down an' make
yerself at 'ome."

"'Ow do, missus?" said Jonah, looking round nervously for the child,
but it was not visible.

"I knowed yer wouldn't let them take the old woman's fowls," she
continued.  "'Ere, Ada, go an' git a jug o' beer."

The room, which served for a laundry, was dimly lit with a candle. The
pile of white linen brought into relief the dirt and poverty of the
interior.  The walls were stained with grease and patches of dirt,
added slowly through the years as a face gathers wrinkles.  But Jonah
saw nothing of this.  He was used to dirt.

He sat down, and, with a sudden attack of politeness, decided to take
off his hat, but, uncertain of his footing, pushed it on the back of
his head as a compromise.  He lit a cigarette, and felt more at ease.

A faint odour of scorching reached his nostrils as Mrs Yabsley passed
the hot iron over the white fronts.  The small black iron ran swiftly
over the clean surface, leaving a smooth, shining track behind it.  And
he watched, with an idler's pleasure, the swift, mechanical movements.

When the beer came, Jonah gallantly offered it to Mrs Yabsley, whose
face was hot and red.

"Just leave a drop in the jug, an' I'll be thankful for it when I'm
done," she replied, wiping her forehead on her sleeve.  Jonah had risen
in her esteem.

After some awkward attempts at conversation, Jonah relapsed into
silence. He was glad that he had brought his mouth-organ, won in a
shilling raffle. He would give them a tune later on.

When she had finished the last shirt, Mrs Yabsley looked at the clock
with an exclamation.  It was nearly ten.  She had to deliver the
shirts, and then buy the week's supplies.  For she did her shopping at
the last minute, in a panic.  It had been her mother's way--to dash
into the butcher's as he swept the last bones together, to hammer at
the grocer's door as he turned out the lights.  And she always forgot
something which she got on Sunday morning from the little shop at the
corner.

As she was tying the shirts into bundles, she heard the tinkle of a
bell in the street, and a hoarse voice that cried:

"Peas an' pies, all 'ot, all 'ot!"

"'Ow'd yer like some peas, Joe?" she cried, dropping the shirts and
seizing a basin.

"I wouldn't mind," said Jonah.

"'Ere, Ada, run an' git threepenn'orth," she cried.

In a minute Ada returned with the basin full of green peas, boiled into
a squashy mass.

Mrs Yabsley went out with the shirts, and Jonah and Ada sat down to the
peas, which they ate with keen relish, after sprinkling them with
pepper and vinegar.

After the green peas, Ada noticed that Jonah was looking furtively
about the room and listening, as if he expected to hear something.  She
guessed the cause, and decided to change his thoughts.

"Give us a tune, Joe," she cried.

Jonah took the mouth-organ from his pocket, and rubbed it carefully on
his sleeve.  He was a famous performer on this instrument, and on
holiday nights the Push marched through the streets, with Jonah in the
lead, playing tunes that he learned at the "Tiv".  He breathed slowly
into the tubes, running up and down the scale as a pianist runs his
fingers over the keyboard before playing, and then struck into a
sentimental ballad.

In five minutes he had warmed up to his work, changing from one tune to
another with barely a pause, revelling in the simple rhythm and facile
phrases of the popular songs.  Ada listened spellbound, amazed by this
talent for music, carried back to the gallery of the music-hall where
she had heard these very tunes.  At last he struck into a waltz,
marking the time with his foot, drawing his breath in rapid jerks to
accentuate the bass.

"Must 'ave a turn, if I die fer it," cried Ada, springing to her feet,
and, with her arms extended to embrace an imaginary partner, she began
to spin round on her toes.  Ada's only talent lay in her feet, and,
conscious of her skill, she danced before the hunchback with the
lightness of a feather, revolving smoothly on one spot, reversing,
advancing and retreating in a straight line, displaying every intricacy
of the waltz. The sight was too much for Jonah, and, dropping the
mouth-organ, he seized her in his arms.

"Wot did yer stop for?" cried Ada.  "We carn't darnce without a tune."

"Carn't we?" said Jonah, in derision, and began to hum the words of the
waltz that he had been playing:

  White Wings, they never grow weary,
  They carry me cheerily over the sea;
  Night comes, I long for my dearie--
  I'll spread out my White Wings and sail home to thee.


The pair had no equals in the true larrikin style, called "cass
dancing", and they revolved slowly on a space the size of a
dinner-plate, Ada's head on Jonah's breast, their bodies pressed
together, rigid as the pasteboard figures in a peep-show.  They were
interrupted by a cry from Mrs Yabsley's bedroom.  Jonah stopped
instantly, with a look of dismay on his face. Ada looked at him with a
curious smile, and burst out laughing.

"I'll 'ave ter put 'im to sleep now.  Cum an' 'ave a look at 'im,
Joe--'e won't eat yer."

"No fear," cried Jonah, recoiling with anger.  "Wot did yer promise
before I agreed to come down?"

Chook's words flashed across his mind.  This was a trap, and he had
been a fool to come.

"I'll cum to-morrow, an' fix up the fowls," he cried, and grabbing his
mouth-organ, turned to go--to find his way blocked by Mrs Yabsley,
carrying a shoulder of mutton and a bag of groceries.




CHAPTER 3

CARDIGAN STREET AT HOME


Mrs Yabsley came to the door for a breath of fresh air, and surveyed
Cardigan Street with a loving eye.  She had lived there since her
marriage twenty years ago, and to her it was the pick of Sydney, the
centre of the habitable globe.  She gave her opinion to every newcomer
in her tremendous voice, that broke on their unaccustomed ears like
thunder:

"I've lived 'ere ever since I was a young married woman, an' I know wot
I'm talkin' about.  My 'usband used ter take me to the play before we
was married, but I never see any play equal ter wot 'appens in this
street, if yer only keeps yer eyes open.  I see people as wears
spectacles readin' books.  I don't wonder.  If their eyesight was good,
they'd be able ter see fer themselves instead of readin' about it in a
book.  I can't read myself, bein' no scholar, but I can see that books
an' plays is fer them as ain't got no eyes in their 'eads."

The street, which Mrs Yabsley loved, was a street of poor folk--people
to whom poverty clung like their shirt.  It tumbled over the ridge
opposite the church, fell rapidly for a hundred yards, and then,
recovering its balance, sauntered easily down the slope till it met
Botany Road on level ground.  It was a street of small houses and large
families, and struck the eye as mean and dingy, for most of the houses
were standing on their last legs, and paint was scarce.  The children
used to kick and scrape it off the fences, and their parents rub it off
the walls by leaning against them in a tired way for hours at a
stretch.  On hot summer nights the houses emptied their inhabitants on
to the verandas and footpaths. The children, swarming like rabbits,
played in the middle of the road. With clasped hands they formed a
ring, and circled joyously to a song of childland, the immemorial
rhymes handed down from one generation to another as savages preserve
tribal rites.  The fresh, shrill voices broke on the air, mingled with
silvery peals of laughter.

  What will you give to know her name,
  Know her name, know her name?
  What will you give to know her name,
  On a cold and frosty morning?


Across the street comes a burst of coarse laughter, and a string of
foul, obscene words on the heels of a jest.  And again the childish
trebles would ring on the tainted air:

  Green gravel, green gravel,
  Your true love is dead;
  I send you a message
  To turn round your head.


They are ragged and dirty, true children of the gutter, but Romance,
with the cloudy hair and starry eyes, holds them captive for a few
merciful years.  Their parents loll against the walls, or squat on  the
kerbstone, devouring with infinite relish petty scandals about their
neighbours, or shaking with laughter at some spicy yarn.

About ten o'clock the children are driven indoors with threats and
blows, and put to bed.  By eleven the street is quiet, and only gives a
last flicker of life when a drunken man comes swearing down the street,
full of beer, and offering to fight anyone for the pleasure of the
thing. By twelve the street is dead, and the tread of the policeman
echoes with a forlorn sound as if he were walking through a cemetery.

As Mrs Yabsley leaned over the gate, Mrs Swadling caught sight of her,
and, throwing her apron over her head, crossed the street, bent on
gossip. Then Mrs Jones, who had been watching her through the window,
dropped her mending and hurried out.

The three women stood and talked of the weather, talking for talking's
sake as men smoke a pipe in the intervals of work.  Presently Mrs
Yabsley looked hard at Mrs Swadling, who was shading her head from the
sun with her apron.

"Wot's the matter with yer eye?" she said, abruptly.

"Nuthin'," said Mrs Swadling, and coloured.

The eye she was shading was black from a recent blow, a present from
her husband, Sam the carter, who came home for his tea, fighting drunk,
as regular as clockwork.

"I thought I 'eard Sam snorin' after tea," said Mrs Jones.

"Yes, 'e was; but 'e woke up about twelve, an'  give me beans 'cause
I'd let 'im sleep till the pubs was shut."

"An' yer laid 'im out wi' the broom-handle, I s'pose?"

"No fear," said Mrs Swadling.  "I ran down the yard, an' 'ollered blue
murder."

"Well," said Mrs Yabsley, reflectively, "an 'usband is like the
weather, or a wart on yer nose.  It's no use quarrelling with it.  If
yer don't like it, yer've got ter lump it.  An' if yer believe all yer
'ear, everybody else 'as got a worse."

She looked down the street, and saw Jonah and Chook, with a few others
of the Push, sunning themselves in the morning air.  Her face darkened.

"I see the Push 'ave got Jimmy Sinclair at last.  Only six months ago
'e went ter Sunday school reg'lar, an' butter wouldn't melt in 'is
mouth. Well, if smokin' cigarettes, an' spittin', and swearin' was 'ard
work, they'd all die rich men.  There's Waxy Collins.  Last week 'e
told 'is father 'e'd 'ave ter keep 'im till 'e was twenty-one 'cause of
the law, an' the old fool believed 'im.  An' little Joe Crutch, as used
ter come 'ere beggin' a spoonful of drippin' fer 'is mother, come 'ome
drunk the other night so natural, that 'is mother mistook 'im fer 'is
father, an' landed 'im on the ear with 'er fist.  An' 'im the apple of
'er eye, as the sayin' is.  It's 'ard ter be a mother in Cardigan
Street.  Yer girls are mothers before their bones are set, an' yer sons
are dodgin' the p'liceman round the corner before they're in long
trousers."

It was rare for Mrs Yabsley to touch on her private sorrows, and there
was an embarrassing  silence.  But suddenly, from the corner of Pitt
Street, appeared a strange figure of a man, roaring out a song in the
voice of one selling fish.  Every head turned.

"'Ello," said Mrs Jones, "Froggy's on the job to-day."

The singer was a Frenchman with a wooden leg, dressed as a sailor.  As
he hopped slowly down the street with the aid of a crutch, his grizzled
beard and scowling face turned mechanically to right and left, sweeping
the street with threatening eyes that gave him the look of a retired
pirate, begging the tribute that he had taken by force in better days.
The song ended abruptly, and he wiped the sweat from his face with an
enormous handkerchief.  Then he began another.

The women were silent, greedily drinking in the strange, foreign
sounds, touched for a moment with the sense of things forlorn and far
away. The singer still roared, though the tune was caressing,
languishing, a love song.  But his eyes rolled fiercely, and his
moustache seemed to bristle with anger.

  Le pinson et la fauvette
  Chantaient nos chastes amours,
  Que les oiseaux chantent toujours,
  Pauvre Colinette, pauvre Colinette.


When he reached the women he hopped to the pavement holding out his hat
like a collection plate, with a beseeching air.  The women were
embarrassed, grudging the pennies, but afraid of being thought mean.
Mrs Yabsley broke the silence.

"I don't know wot ye're singin' about, an' I  shouldn't like ter meet
yer on a dark night, but I'm always willin' ter patronize the opera, as
they say."

She fumbled in her pocket till she found tuppence.  The sailor took the
money, rolled his eyes, gave her a magnificent bow, and continued on
his way with a fresh stanza:

  Lorsque nous allions tous deux
  Dans la verdoyante allee,
  Comme elle etait essoufflee,
  Et comme j'etais radieux.


"The more fool you," said Mrs Jones, who was ashamed of having nothing
to give.  "I've 'eard 'e's got a terrace of 'ouses, an' thousands in
the bank.  My cousin told me 'e sees 'im bankin' 'is money reg'lar in
George Street every week."

And then a conversation followed, with instances of immense fortunes
made by organ-grinders, German bands, and street-singers--men who
cadged in rags for a living, and could drive their carriage if they
chose.  The women lent a greedy ear to these romances, like a page out
of their favourite novelettes.  They were interrupted by an
extraordinary noise from the French singer, who seemed suddenly to have
gone mad.  The Push had watched in ominous silence the approach of the
Frenchman.  But, as he passed them and finished a verse, a
blood-curdling cry rose from the group.  It was a perfect imitation of
a dog baying the moon in agony. The singer stopped and scowled at the
group, but the Push seemed to be unaware of his existence.  He moved
on, and began another verse.  As he stopped to take  breath the cry
went up again, the agonized wail of a cur whose feelings are harrowed
by music.  The singer stopped, choking with rage, bewildered by the
novelty of the attack.  The Push seemed lost in thought.  Again he
turned to go, when a stone, jerked as if from a catapult, struck him on
the shoulder.  As he turned, roaring like a bull, a piece of blue metal
struck him above the eye, cutting the flesh to the bone.  The blood
began to trickle slowly down his cheek.

Still roaring, he hopped on his crutch with incredible speed towards
the Push, who stood their ground for a minute and then, with the
instinct of the cur, bolted.  The sailor stopped, and shook his fist at
their retreating forms, showering strange, foreign maledictions on the
fleeing enemy.  It was evident that he could swear better than he could
sing.

"Them wretches is givin' Froggy beans," said Mrs Swadling.

"Lucky fer 'im it's daylight, or they'd tickle 'is ribs with their
boots," said Mrs Jones.

"Jonah and Chook's at the bottom o' that," said Mrs Swadling, looking
hard at Mrs Yabsley.

"Ah, the devil an' 'is 'oof!" said Mrs Yabsley grimly, and was silent.

The sailor disappeared round the corner, and five minutes later the
Push had slipped back, one by one, to their places under the veranda.
Mrs Jones was in the middle of a story:

"'Er breath was that strong, it nearly knocked me down, an' so I sez to
'er, 'Mark my words, I'll pocket yer insults no longer, an' you in a
temperance  lodge.  I'll make it my bizness to go to the sekertary this
very day, an' tell 'im of yer goin's on.' An' she sez...w'y, there she
is again," cried Mrs Jones, as she caught the sound of a shrill voice,
high-pitched and quarrelsome.  The women craned their necks to look.

A woman of about forty, drunken, bedraggled, dressed in dingy black,
was pacing up and down the pavement in front of the barber's.  She
blinked like a drunken owl, and stepped high on the level footpath as
if it were mountainous.  And without looking at anything, she threw a
string of insults at the barber, hiding behind the partition in his
shop.  For seven years she had passed as his wife, and then, one day,
sick of her drunken bouts, he had turned her out, and married Flash
Kate, the ragpicker's daughter.  Sloppy Mary had accepted her lot with
resignation, and went out charring for a living; but whenever she had a
drop too much she made for the barber's, forgetting by a curious lapse
of memory that it was no longer her home.  And as usual the barber's
new wife had pushed her into the street, staggering, and now stood on
guard at the door, her coarse, handsome features alive with contempt.

"Wotcher doin' in my 'ouse?" suddenly inquired Sloppy, blinking with
suspicion at Flash Kate.  "Yous go 'ome, me fine lady, afore yer git
yerself talked about."

The woman at the door laughed loudly, and pretended to examine with
keen interest a new wedding ring on her finger.

"Cum 'ere, an' I'll tear yer blasted eyes out," cried the drunkard,
turning on her furiously.

The ragpicker's daughter leaned forward, and inquired, "'Ow d'ye like
yer eggs done?"

At this simple inquiry the drunkard stamped her foot with rage, calling
on her enemy to prepare for instant death.  And the two women bombarded
one another with insults, raking the gutter for adjectives, spitting
like angry cats across the width of the pavement.

The Push gathered round, grinning from ear to ear, sooling the women on
as if they were dogs.  But just as a shove from behind threw Sloppy
nearly into the arms of her enemy, the Push caught sight of a
policeman, and walked away with an air of extreme nonchalance.  At the
same moment the drunkard saw the dreaded uniform, and, obeying the laws
of Cardigan Street, pulled herself together and walked away, mumbling
to herself. The three women watched the performance without a word,
critical as spectators at a play.  When they saw there would be no
scratching, they resumed their conversation.

"W'en a woman takes to drink, she's found a short cut to 'ell, an' lets
everybody know it," said Mrs Yabsley, briefly.  "But this won't git my
work done," and she tucked up her sleeves and went in.

The Push, bent on killing time, and despairing of any fresh diversion
in the street, dispersed slowly, one by one, to meet again at night.

The Cardigan Street Push, composed of twenty or thirty young men of the
neighbourhood, was a social wart of a kind familiar to the streets of
Sydney.  Originally banded together to amuse themselves at other
people's expenses, the Push found new cares  and duties thrust upon
them, the chief of which was chastising anyone who interfered with
their pleasures. Their feats ranged from kicking an enemy senseless,
and leaving him for dead, to wrecking hotel windows with blue metal, if
the landlord had contrived to offend them.  Another of their duties was
to check ungodly pride in the rival Pushes by battering them out of
shape with fists and blue metal at regular intervals.

They stood for the scum of the streets.  How they lived was a mystery,
except to people who kept fowls, or forgot to lock their doors at
night. A few were vicious idlers, sponging on their parents for a
living at twenty years of age; others simply mischievous lads, with a
trade at their fingers' ends, if they chose to work.  A few were
honest, unless temptation stared them too hard in the face.  On such
occasions their views were simple as A B C.  "Well, if yer lost a
chance, somebody else collared it, an' w'ere were yer?"

The police, variously named "Johns", "cops" and "traps", were their
natural enemies.  If one of the Push got into trouble, the others
clubbed together and paid his fine; and if that failed, they made it
hot for the prosecutors.  Generally their offences were disorderly
conduct, bashing their enemies, and resisting the police.

Both Jonah and Chook worked for a living--Chook by crying fish and
vegetables in the streets, Jonah by making and mending for Hans Paasch,
the German shoemaker on Botany Road.  But Chook often lacked the few
shillings to buy his stock-in-trade, and Jonah never felt inclined for
work till Wednesday.  Then he would stroll languidly down to the shop.
The old German would thrust out his chin, and blink at him over his
glasses.  And he always greeted Jonah with one of two set phrases:

"Ah, you haf come, haf you?  I vas choost going to advertise for a
man." This meant that work was plentiful.  When trade was slack, he
would shake his head sadly as if he were standing over the grave of his
last sixpence, and say:

"Ah, it vas no use; dere is not enough work to fill one mouth."

Jonah always listened to either speech with utter indifference, took
off his coat, put on his leather apron, and set to work silently and
swiftly like a man in anger.

Although he always grumbled, Paasch was quite satisfied.  He had too
much work for one, and not enough for two.  So Jonah, who was a good
workman, and content to make three or four days in a week, suited him
exactly. Besides, Jonah had started with him as an errand-boy at five
shillings a week, years ago, and was used to his odd ways.

Hans Paasch was born in Bavaria, in the town of Hassloch.  His father
was a shoemaker, and destined Hans for the same trade.  The boy
preferred to be a fiddler but his father taught him his trade
thoroughly with the end of a strap.

In his eighteenth year Hans suddenly ended the dispute by running away
from home with his beloved fiddle.  He made his way to the coast, and
got passage on a cargo tramp to England.  There he heard of the
wonderful land called Australia, where gold was to be had for the
picking up.  The fever took him, and he worked his passage out to
Melbourne on a sailing ship. He reached the goldfields, dug without
success, and would have starved but for his fiddle.  A year found him
back in Melbourne, penniless.  Here he met another German in the same
condition.  They decided to work their way overland to Sydney, Hans
playing the fiddle and his mate singing. Then began a Bohemian life of
music by the wayside inns, sleep in the open air, and meals when it
pleased God to send them.

This had proved to be the solitary sunlit passage in his life, for when
he reached Sydney he found that his music had no money value, and,
under the goad of hunger, took to the trade that he had learned so
unwillingly. Twenty years ago he had opened his small shop on the
Botany Road, and to-day it remained unchanged, dwarfed by larger
buildings on either side. He lived by himself in the room over the
shop, where he spent his time reading the newspaper as a child spells
out a lesson, or playing his beloved violin.  He was a good player, but
his music was a puzzle and a derision to Jonah, for his tastes were
classical, and sometimes he spent as much as a shilling on a back seat
at a concert in the Town Hall.  Jonah scratched his ear and listened,
amazed that a man could play for hours without finding a tune.  The
neighbours said that Paasch lived on the smell of an oil rag; but that
was untrue, for he spent hours cooking strange messes soaked in
vinegar, the sight of which turned Jonah's stomach.

Bob Fenner's dance-room, three doors away, was a thorn in his side.
Three nights in the week a brazen comet struck into a set of lancers,
drowning the  metallic thud of the piano and compelling his ear to
follow the latest popular air to the last bar.

His solitary life, his fiddling, and his singular mixture of gruffness
and politeness had bred legends among the women of the neighbourhood.
He was a German baron, who had forfeited his title and estates through
killing a man in a duel; and never a milder pair of eyes looked timidly
through spectacles.  He was a famous musician, who had chosen to blot
himself out of the world for love of a high-born lady; and, in his
opinion, women were useful to cook and sew, nothing more.




CHAPTER 4

JONAH DISCOVERS THE BABY


Joey the pieman had scented a new customer in Mrs Yabsley, and on the
following Saturday night he stopped in front of the house and rattled
the lids of his cans to attract her attention.  His voice, thin and
cracked with the wear of the streets, chanted his familiar cry to an
accompaniment faintly suggestive of clashing cymbals:

"Peas an' pies, all 'ot, all 'ot!"

His cart, a kitchen on wheels, sent out a column of smoke from its
stovepipe chimney; and when he raised the lids of the shining cans, a
fragrant steam rose on the air.  The cart, painted modestly in red,
bore a strange legend in yellow letters on the front:

  WHO'D HAVE THOUGHT IT,
  PEAS AND PIES WOULD HAVE BOUGHT IT!

This outburst of lyric poetry was to inform the world that Joey had
risen from humble beginnings to his present commercial eminence, and
was not ashamed of the fact.

He called regularly about ten o'clock, and Jonah and Ada spent a
delightful five minutes deciding which delicacy to choose for the
night. When they tired of green peas they chose hot pies, full of rich
gravy that ran out if you were not careful how you bit; or they
preferred the plump saveloy, smoking hot from the can, giving out a
savoury odour that made your mouth water.  Then Ada fetched a jug of
beer from the corner to wash it down.  Soon Jonah stayed at the house
on Saturday night as a matter of course.

But Jonah drew the line when the mother hinted that he might as well
stay there altogether.  He feared a trap; and when she pointed out the
danger of two women living alone in the house, he looked at her brawny
arms and smiled.

Haunted by her scheme for marriage, she set to work to undermine
Jonah's obstinacy.  She proceeded warily, and made no open attack; but
Jonah began to notice with uneasiness that he could not talk for five
minutes without stumbling on marriage.  In the midst of a conversation
on the weather, he would be amazed to find the theme turn to the praise
of marriage, brought mysteriously to this hateful word as a man is led
blindfold to a giddy cliff.  When his startled look warned the mother,
she changed the subject.

Still she persevered, sapping Jonah's prejudices with the terrible zeal
of a priest making a convert.  When he saw her drift, it set him
thinking, and he watched Ada with curious attention as she moved about
the house helping her mother.

It was Sunday morning, and Ada was shelling peas.  The pods split with
a sharp crack under her fingers, and the peas rattled into a tin basin.
She wore an old skirt, torn and shabby; her bodice  was split under the
arms, showing the white lining.  Her hair lay flat on her forehead,
screwed tightly in curling-pins, which brought into relief her fiat
face and high cheekbones, for she was no beauty.  By a singular
coquetry, she wore her best shoes, small and neat, with high French
heels.

Jonah looked at the girl with satisfaction, but she stirred no
sentiment, for all women were alike to him.  His view of them was
purely animal. The procession of Chook's loves crossed his mind, and he
smiled.  At regular intervals Chook "went balmy" over some girl or
other, and, while the fit lasted, worshipped her as a savage worships
an idol.  And Jonah was stupefied by this passionate preference for one
woman.  He had never felt that way for Ada.

He returned to his own affairs.  Marriage meant a wife, a family, and
steady work, for Ada would leave the factory if he married her.  The
thought filled him with weariness.  The vagabond in him recoiled from
the set labours and common burdens of his kind.  Ever since he could
remember he had been more at home in the streets than in the four walls
of a room. The Push, the corner, the noise and movement of the
streets--that was life for him.  And he decided the matter for ever;
there was nothing in it.

But, as the months slipped by, and Jonah remained impregnable to her
masked batteries, Mrs Yabsley attacked him openly.  Jonah stood his
ground, and pointed out, with cynical candour, his unfitness to keep a
wife.  But Mrs Yabsley seized the opportunity to sketch out a career
for him, with voluminous instances, for she had foreseen and arranged
all that.

"An' 'oo's ter blame fer that?" she cried, "a feller that oughter be
gittin' 'is three pounds a week.  W'y, look at Dave Brown.  Don't I
remember the time 'e used ter 'awk a basket o' fish on Fridays, an'
doss in park?  An' now 'e goes round in a white shirt, an' draws 'is
rents. An' mark me, it was gittin' married did that fer 'im.  W'en a
man's married, 'e's got somethin' better to do than smokin' cigarettes
an' playin' a mouth-orgin."

"Yes," said Jonah, grinning.  "Git up an' light the fire, an' graft 'is
bloomin' 'ead off."

Mrs Yabsley feigned deafness.

"Anyhow, 'e didn't git 'is 'ouses 'awkin' fish," pursued Jonah; "'e got
'em while 'e kep' a pub."

Then, with feverish vivacity, Mrs Yabsley mapped out half a dozen
careers for him, chiefly in connection with a shop, for to her, who
lived by the sweat of her brow, shopkeepers were aristocrats, living in
splendid ease.

"It's no go, missis," said Jonah.  "Marriage is all right fer them as
don't know better, but anyhow, it ain't wot it's cracked up ter be."

He avoided the house for some weeks after this conversation, patrolling
the streets with the gang, with the zest of a drunkard returning to his
cups.  Mrs Yabsley, who saw that she had pushed her attack too far,
waited in patience.

Jonah found the Push thirsting for blood.  One of them had got three
months for taking a fancy to a copper boiler that he had found in an
empty house, and they discovered that a bricklayer, who lived next
door, had put the police on his track.  The Push resolved to stoush
him, and had lain in wait for a  week without success.  Jonah took the
matter in hand, and inquired secretly into the man's habits.  He
discovered that the bricklayer, sober as a judge through the week, was
in the habit of fuddling himself on pay-day.  Jonah arranged a plan,
which involved a search of every hotel in the neighbourhood.

But one Saturday night, as they were stealthily scouting the streets
for their man, Jonah suddenly thought of Ada.  It was weeks since he
had last seen her.  He was surprised by a faint longing for her
presence, and, with a word to Chook, he slipped away.

The cottage was in darkness and the door locked; but after a moment's
hesitation, he took the key from under the flowerpot and went in.  He
struck a match and looked round.  The irons were on the table. Mrs
Yabsley had evidently gone out with the shirts.  He lit the candle and
sat down.

The room was thick with shadows, that fled and advanced as the candle
flickered in the draught.  He looked with quiet pleasure on the
familiar objects--the deal table, propped against the wall on account
of a broken leg, the ragged curtain stretched across the window, the
new shelf that he had made out of a box.  He studied, with fresh
interest, the coloured almanacs on the wall, and spelt out, with
amiable derision, the Scripture text over the door.  He felt vaguely
that he was at home.

Home!--the word had no meaning for him.  He had been thrown on the
streets when a child by his parents, who had rid themselves of his
unwelcome presence with as little emotion as they would have tossed an
empty can out of doors.

A street-arab, he had picked a living from the gutters, hardened to
exposure, taking food and shelter with the craft of an old soldier in
hostile country.  Until he was twelve he had sold newspapers, sleeping
in sheds and empty cases, feeding on the broken victuals thrown out
from the kitchens of hotels and restaurants, and then, drifting by
chance to Waterloo, had found a haven of rest with Paasch as an
errand-boy at five shillings a week.

His cigarette was finished, and there was no sign of Ada.  He swore at
himself for coming, picked up his hat, and turned to go.  But, at that
moment, from the corner of the room, came a thin, wailing cry.  Jonah
started violently, and then, as he recognized the sound, smiled grimly.
It was the baby, awakened by the light.  He remembered that Mrs Yabsley
often left it alone in the house.

But the infant, thoroughly aroused, gave out a querulous note, thin and
sustained.  Jonah stooped to blow out the candle, and then, with a
sudden curiosity, walked over to the cradle.

It was a box on rough rollers, made out of a packing-case, grimy with
dirt from the hands that had rocked it.  Jonah pulled it out of the
corner into the light, and the child, pacified by the sight of a face,
stopped crying.

Fearful of observation, he looked round, and then stared intently at
the baby.  It was a meeting of strangers, for Mrs Yabsley, aware of his
aversion from the child, had kept it out of the way.  It was the first
baby that he had seen at close quarters, for he had never lived in a
house with one.  And he looked at this with the curiosity with which
one looks at a foreigner--surprised that he, too, is a man.

The child blinked feebly under the light of the candle, which Jonah was
holding near.  Its fingers moved with a mechanical, crab-like motion.

With an odd sensation Jonah remembered that this was his child--flesh
of his flesh, bone of his bone--and, with a swift instinct, he searched
its face for a sign of paternity.

The child's bulging forehead bore no likeness to Jonah's which sloped
sharply from the eyebrows, and the nose was a mere dab of flesh; but
its eyes were grey, like his own.  His interest increased.  Gently he
stroked the fine silky down that covered its head, and then, growing
bolder, touched its cheek.  The delicate skin was smooth as satin under
his rough finger.

The child, pleased with his touch, smiled and clutched his finger,
holding it with the tenacity of a monkey.  Jonah looked in wonder at
that tiny hand, no bigger than a doll's.  His own fist, rough with
toil, seemed enormous beside it.

Flesh of his flesh, he thought, half incredulous, as he compared his
red, hairy skin with that delicate texture; amazed by this miracle of
life--the renewal of the flesh that perishes.

Then he remembered his deformity, and, with a sudden catch in his
breath, lifted the child from the cradle, and felt its back, a
passionate fear in his heart: it was straight as a die.  He drew a long
breath, and was silent, embarrassed for words before this mite,
searching his mind in vain for the sweet jargon used by women.

"Sool 'im!" he cried at last, and poked his son in the ribs.  The child
crowed with delight.  Jonah touched its mouth, and its teeth, like tiny
pegs, closed tightly on his fingers.  It lay contentedly on his knees,
its eyes closed, already fatigued.  And, as Jonah watched it, there
suddenly vibrated in him a strange, new sensation--the sense of
paternity, which Nature, crafty beyond man, has planted in him to
fulfil her schemes, the imperious need to protect and rejoice in its
young that preserves the race from extinction.

Jonah sat motionless, afraid to disturb the child, intoxicated by the
first pure emotion of his life, his heart filled with an immense pity
for this frail creature.  Absorbed in his emotions, he was startled by
a step on the veranda.

He rose swiftly to put the child in the cot, but it was too late, and
he turned to the door with the child in his arms, ashamed and defiant,
like a boy caught with the jam-pot.  He expected Mrs Yabsley or Ada; it
was Chook, breathless with haste.  He stood in the doorway, dumb with
amazement as his eye took in this strange picture; then his face
relaxed in a grin.

"Well, Gawd strike me any colour 'E likes, pink for preference," he
cried, and shook with laughter.

Jonah stared at him with a deepening scowl, till chuckles died away.

"Garn!" he cried at last, and his voice was between a whine and a
snarl; "yer needn't poke borak!"




CHAPTER 5

THE PUSH DEALS IT OUT


It was near eleven, and the lights were dying out along the Road as the
shopmen, fatigued by their weekly conflict with the people, fastened
the shutters.  At intervals trams and buses, choked with passengers
from the city, laboured heavily past.  Groups of men still loitered on
the footpaths, careless of the late hour, for to-morrow was Sunday, the
day of idleness, when they could lie a-bed and read the paper.  And
they gossiped tranquilly, no longer harassed by the thought of the
relentless toil, the inexorable need for bread, that dragged them from
their warm beds while the rest of the world lay asleep.

The Angel, standing at the corner, dazzled the eye with the glare from
its powerful lamps, their rays reflected in immense mirrors fastened to
the walls, advertising in frosted letters the popular brands of whisky.
And it stood alone in the darkening street, piercing the night with an
unwinking stare like an evil spirit, offering its warm, comfortable
bars to the passer-by, drawing men into its deadly embrace like a
courtesan, to reject them afterwards babbling, reeling, staggering, to
rouse  the street with quarrels, or to snore in the gutters like swine.

Cassidy the policeman, with the slow, leaden step of a man who is going
nowhere, stopped for a moment in front of the hotel, and examined the
street with a suspicious eye.  He saw nothing but some groups of young
men leaning against the veranda-posts at the opposite corner.  They
smoked and spat, tranquilly discussing the horses and betting for the
next Cup meeting.  Satisfied that the Road was quiet, he moved off,
dragging his feet as if they weighed a ton.  At once a sinister
excitement passed through the groups.

"That was Cassidy, now we shan't be long."

"Wot price Jonah givin' us the slip?"

"'Ow'll Chook perform, if 'e ain't at Ada's?"

It was the Push, who had run their man to earth at the Angel, where he
was drinking in the bar, alone.  Chook had posted them with the
instinct of a general, and then left in hurried search of Jonah.  And
they watched the swinging doors of the hotel with cruel eyes, their
nerves already vibrating with the ancestral desire to kill, the wild
beast within them licking his lips at the thought of the coming feast.

Meanwhile, in Cardigan Street, Chook was arguing with Jonah.  When told
that the Push was waiting for him, he had listened without interest;
the matter seemed foreign and remote.  The velvety touch of his son's
frail body still thrilled his nerves; its sweet, delicate odour was
still in his nostrils.  And he flatly refused to go.  Chook was beside
himself with excitement; tears stood in his eyes.

"W'y, y'ain't goin' ter turn dawg on me, Jonah, are yer?"

"No bleedin' fear," said Jonah; "but I feel--I dunno 'ow I feel.  The
blasted kid knocked me endways," he explained, in confusion.

As he looked down the street, he caught sight of Mrs Yabsley on the
other side.  She walked slowly on account of the hill, gasping for air,
the weekly load of meat and groceries clutched in her powerful arms.
His eyes softened with tenderness.  He felt a sudden kinship for this
huge, ungainly woman.  He wanted to run and meet her, and claim the
sweet, straight-limbed child that he had just discovered.  Chook,
standing at his elbow, like the devil in the old prints, was watching
him curiously.

"Well, I'm off," cried Chook at last.  "Wot'll I tell the blokes?"

Jonah was silent for a moment, with a sombre look in his eyes.  Then he
pulled himself together.

"Let 'er go," he cried grimly; "the kid can wait."

On the stroke of eleven, as they reached the "Angel", the huge lamps
were extinguished, the doors swung open and vomited a stream of men on
to the footpath, their loud voices bringing the noise and heat of the
bar into the quiet street.  They dispersed slowly, talking
immoderately, parting with the regret of lovers from the warm bar with
its cheerful light and pleasant clink of glasses.  The doors were
closed, but the bar was still noisy, and the laggards slipped out
cautiously by the side door, where a barman kept watch for the police.
Presently the bricklayer came out, alone.  He stood on the footpath,
slightly fuddled, his giddiness increased by the fresh air.
Immediately Chook lurched forward to meet him, with a drunken leer.

"'Ello, Bill, fancy meetin' yous!" he mumbled.

The man, swaying slightly, stared at him in a fog.

"I dunno you," he muttered.

"Wot, yer dunno me, as worked wid yer on that job in Kent Street?
Dunno Joe Parsons, as danced wid yer missis at the bricklayers' picnic?"

The man stopped to think, trying to remember, but his brain refused the
effort.

"Orl right," he muttered; "come an' 'ave a drink." And he turned to the
bar.

"No fear," cried Chook, taking him affectionately by the arm, "no more
fer me!  I'm full up ter the chin, an' so are yous."

"Might's well 'ave another," said the man, obstinately.

Chook pulled him gently away from the hotel, along the street.

"It's gittin' late; 'ow'll yer ole woman rous w'en yer git 'ome?"

"Sez anythin' ter me, break 'er bleedin' jaw," muttered the bricklayer.
And then his eyes flamed with foolish, drunken anger.  "I earn the
money, don' I, an' I spend it, don' I?" he inquired.  And he refused to
move till Chook answered his question.

The Push closed quietly in.

"'Oo are these blokes?" he asked uneasily.

"Pals o' mine, all good men an' true," said Chook, gaily.

They were near Eveleigh Station, and the street was clear.  The red
signal-lights, like angry, bloodshot eyes, followed the curve of the
line as it swept into the terminus.  An engine screamed hoarsely as  it
swept past with a rattle of jolting metal and the hum of swiftly
revolving wheels.  The time was come to strike, but the Push hesitated.
The show of resistance, the spark to kindle their brutal fury, was
wanting.

"Is this a prayer meetin'?" inquired Waxy Collins, with a sneer.  "Biff
him on the boko, an' we'll finish 'im in one act."

"Shut yer face," said Jonah, and he stepped up to the bricklayer.

"Ever 'ear tell of a copper boiler?" he inquired pleasantly.

"Ever meet a bleedin' bastard as put the cops on a bloke, an' got 'im
three months' 'ard?" he inquired again.

The bricklayer stared at him open-mouthed, surprised and alarmed by the
appearance of this misshapen devil with the glittering eyes.  Then a
sudden suspicion ran through the fuddled brain.

"I niver lagged 'im; s'elp me Gawd, I niver put nobody away to the
cops!" he cried.

"Yer rotten liar, take that!" cried Jonah, and struck him full on the
mouth with his fist.  The man clapped his hand to his cut lip, and
looked at the blood in amazement.  The shock cleared his brain, and he
remembered with terror the tales of deadly revenge taken by the pushes.
He looked wildly for help.  He was in a ring of mocking, menacing faces.

"Let 'im out," cried Jonah, in a sharp, strident voice.  "The swine
lives about 'ere; give 'im a run for 'is money."

The Push opened out, and the man, sobered by his danger, stood for a
moment with bewildered eyes.  Then, with the instinct of the hunted, he
turned for home and ran.  The Push gave chase, with Chook in the lead.
Again and again the quarry turned, blindly seeking refuge in the
darkest lanes.

As his pursuers gained on him he gave a hoarse scream--the dolorous cry
of a hunted animal.

But it was the cat playing with the mouse.  The bricklayer ran like a
cow, his joints stiffened by years of toil; the larrikins, light on
their feet as hares, kept the pace with a nimble trot, silent and
dangerous, conscious of nothing but the desire and power to kill.

As he turned into Abercrombie Street, Chook ran level with him, then
stooped swiftly and caught his ankle.  The bricklayer went sprawling,
and in an instant the Push closed in on the fallen man as footballers
form a scrum, kicking the struggling body with silent ferocity, drunk
with the primeval instinct to destroy.

"Nit!" cried Jonah; and the Push scattered, disappearing by magic over
fences and down lanes.

The bricklayer had ceased to struggle, and lay in a heap.  Five minutes
later some stragglers, noticing the huddled mass on the road, crossed
the street cautiously and stared.  Then a crowd gathered, each asking
the other what had happened, each amazed at the other's ignorance.

The excitement seemed to penetrate the houses opposite.  Heads were
thrust out of windows, doors were opened, and a stream of men and
women, wearing whatever they could find in the dark, shuffled across
the footpath.

Some still fumbled at their braces; others, draped like Greek statues,
held their garments on with both  hands.  A coarse jest passed round
when a tall, bony woman came up, a man's overcoat, thrown over her
shoulders, barely covering her nightdress.  They stood shivering in the
cold air, greedy to hear what sensation had come to their very doors.

"It's only a drunken man."

"They say 'e was knocked down in a fight."

"No; the Push stoushed 'im, an' then cleared."

Someone struck a match and looked at his face; it was smeared with
blood. Then the crowd rendered "first aid" in the street fashion.

"Wot's yer name?  W'ere d'yer live?  'Ow did it 'appen?"

And at each question they shook him vigorously, impatient at his
silence. The buzz of voices increased.

"W'ere's the perlice?"

"Not w'ere they're wanted, you may be sure."

"It's my belief they go 'ome an' sleep it out these cold nights."

"Well, I s'pose a p'liceman 'as ter take care of 'imself, like
everybody else," said one, and laughed.

"It's shameful the way these brutes are allowed to knock men about."

"An' the perlice know very well 'oo they are, but they're afraid of
their own skins."

The woman in the nightdress had edged nearer, craning her neck over the
shoulders of the men to see better.  As another match was struck she
saw the man's face.

"My Gawd, it's my 'usband!" she screamed.  "Bill, Bill, wot 'ave they
done ter yer?"

Her old affection, starved to death by years of neglect, sprang to life
for an instant in this cry of agony.  She dropped on her knees beside
the bruised body, wiping the blood from his face with the sleeve of her
nightdress.  A dark red stain spread over the coarse, common calico.
And she kissed passionately the bleeding lips, heedless of the sour
smell of alcohol that tainted his breath.  The bricklayer groaned
feebly. With a sudden movement she stripped the coat from her
shoulders, and covered him as if to protect him from further harm.

Her hair, fastened in an untidy knot, slipped from the hairpins, and
fell, grey and scanty, over her neck; her bony shoulders, barely
covered by the thin garment, moved convulsively.

"'Ere, missis, take this, or you'll ketch cold," said a man kindly,
pulling off his coat.

Then, with the quick sympathy of the people, they began to make light
of the matter, trying to persuade her that his injuries were not
serious. A friendly rivalry sprang up among them as they related
stories of wonderful recoveries made by men whose bodies had been
beaten to a jelly. One, carried away by enthusiasm, declared that it
did a man good to be shattered like glass, for the doctors, with
satanic cunning seized the opportunity to knead the broken limbs like
putty into a more desirable shape.  But their words fell on deaf ears.
The woman crouched over the prostrate man, stroking the bruised limbs
with a stupid, mechanical movement as an animal licks its wounded mate.

The crowd divided as a policeman came up with an important air.  Brisk
and cheerful, he made a few inquiries, enchanted with this incident
that broke the  monotony of the night's dreary round.  The crowd
breathed freely, feeling that the responsibility had shifted on to the
official shoulders. He blew shrilly on his whistle, and demanded a cab.

"Cab this time o' night?  No chance," was the common opinion.

But by great good luck a cab was heard rattling along the next street.
Two men ran to intercept it.

The woman clung desperately to the crippled body as they lifted it into
the cab, impeding the men in their efforts, imploring them to carry him
to his own house, with the distrust of the ignorant for the hospitals,
where the doctors amuse themselves by cutting and carving the bodies of
their helpless patients.  The policeman, a young man, embarrassed by
the sight of this half-dressed woman, swore softly to himself.

"'Ere, missis, you'd better get 'ome, you can't do any good 'ere," he
said, kindly.  "Don't you worry; I've seen worse cases than this go
'ome to breakfast the next day."

As the cab drove off, some neighbours led her away, her thin, angular
body shaken with sobs.

The street was quiet again, but some groups still lingered, discussing
with relish the details of the outrage, searching their memories for
stories of brutal stoushings that had ended in the death of the victim.




CHAPTER 6

THE BABY DISCOVERS JONAH


An hour later Jonah and Chook, picking the most roundabout way, reached
home.  The family was in bed, and the house in darkness.  The two mates
dropped silently over the fence, and, with the stealthy movements of
cats, clambered through the window of the room which they shared, for
Jonah believed that secrets were kept best by those who had none to
tell.

"Gawd, I'm dry," said Chook, yawning.  "I could do a beer."

"That comes of runnin' along the street so 'ard," said Jonah, grinning.
"It must 'ave bin a fire by the way I see yer run.  W'y was yer runnin'
so 'ard?"  Then his face darkened.  "I wonder 'ow the poor bloke feels,
that fell down an' 'urt 'imself?"

"D'ye think 'e knows enough ter give us away?" asked Chook, anxiously.

"No fear," said Jonah.  "I make the Ivy Street Push a present of that
little lot."

"Well, I s'pose a sleep's the next best thing," replied Chook, and in a
minute was snoring.

Jonah finished undressing slowly.  As he unlaced his boots, he noticed
a dark patch on one toe.  It looked as if he had kicked something wet.
He examined the stain without repugnance, and thought of the bricklayer.

"Serve the cow right," he thought.  "'Ope it stiffens 'im!"

Again he examined the patch of blood attentively, wondering if it would
leave a mark on his tan boots, of which he was very proud.  Dipping a
piece of rag in water, he washed it off carefully.  And, as he rubbed,
the whole scenes passed through his brain in rapid succession--the
Angel, bright and alluring with the sinister gleam of its powerful
lamps, the swaying man in the midst of the Push, the wild-beast chase,
and the fallen body that ceased to struggle as they kicked.

He lit a cigarette and stared at the candle, smiling with the pride of
a good workman at the thought of his plan that had worked so neatly.
The Push was secure, and the blame would fall on the Ivy Street gang,
the terror of Darlington.  For a moment he regretted the active part he
had taken in the stoushing, as his hunchback made him conspicuous.  He
wondered carelessly what had happened after the Push bolted.  These
affairs were so uncertain.  Sometimes the victim could limp home,
mottled with bruises; just as often he was taken to the hospital in a
cab, and a magistrate was called in to take down his dying words.  In
this case the chances were in favour of the victim recovering, as the
Push had been interrupted in dealing it out through Jonah's excessive
caution.  Still, they had no intention of killing the man; they merely
wished to teach him a lesson.

True, the lesson sometimes went too far; and he  thought with anxiety
of the Surry Hills affair, in which, through an accident, a
neighbouring push had disappeared like rats into a hole, branded with
murder.  The ugly word hung on his tongue and paralysed his thoughts.
His mind recoiled with terror as he saw where his lawless ways had
carried him, feeling already branded with the mark of Cain, which the
instinct of the people has singled out as the unpardonable crime,
destroying the life that cannot be renewed.  And suddenly he began to
persuade himself that the man's injuries were not serious, that he
would soon recover; for it was wonderful the knocking about a man could
stand.

He turned on himself with amazement.  Why was he twittering like an old
woman?  Quarrels, fights, and bloodshed were as familiar to him as his
daily bread.  With a sudden cry of astonishment he remembered the baby.
The affair of the bricklayer had driven it completely out of his mind.
His thoughts returned to Cardigan Street.  He remembered the quiet room
dimly lit with a candle, the dolorous cry of the infant, and the
intoxicating touch of its frail body in his arms.

His amazement increased.  What had possessed him to take the brat in
his arms and nurse it?  His lips contracted in a cynical grin as he
remembered the figure he cut when Chook appeared.  He decided to look
on the affair as a joke.  But again his thoughts returned to the child,
and he was surprised with a vibration of tenderness sweet as honey in
his veins. A strange yearning came over him like a physical weakness
for the touch of his son's body.

His eye caught his shadow on the wall, grotesque  and forbidding; the
large head, bunched beneath the square shoulders, thrust outwards in a
hideous lump.  Monster and outcast was he?  Well, he would show them
that only an accident separated the hunchback from his fellows.  He
thought with a fierce joy of his son's straight back and shapely limbs.
This was his child, that he could claim and exhibit to the world.  Then
his delight changed to a vague terror--the fear of an animal that
dreads a trap, and finds itself caught.  He blew out the candle and
fell asleep, to dream of enemies that fled and mocked at him,
embarrassed with an infant that hung like a millstone round his neck.

Within a month the affair of the bricklayer had blown over.  The police
made inquiries, and arrested some of the Ivy Street Push, but released
them for want of evidence.  In the hospital the bricklayer professed a
complete ignorance of his assailants and their motive.  It was
understood that he was too drunk to recognize anyone.

But it was his knowledge of Push methods that sealed his tongue.  No
one would risk his skin by giving evidence.  If the police had brought
the offenders to book, the magistrates, who seemed to regard these
outrages as the playful excesses of wanton blood, would have let them
off with a light punishment, and the streets would never have been safe
for him again.  So he held his tongue, thankful to have escaped so
easily.

But burnt on his brain was the vision of a misshapen devil who struck
at him, with snarling lips, and a desperate flight through avenues of
silent, impassive streets that heard with indifference his cry  for
help.  In six weeks he was back at work, with no mark of his
misadventure but a broken nose, caused by a clumsy boot.

So the Push took to the streets again, and Jonah resumed his visits to
Cardigan Street on Saturday nights.  He had concealed his adventure
with the baby from Ada and her mother, feeling ashamed, as if he had
discovered an unmanly taste for mud pies and dolls.  But the imperious
instinct was aroused, and he gratified it in secret, caressing the
child by stealth as a miser runs to his hoard.  In the women's presence
he ignored its existence, but he soon discovered that Ada shared none
of his novel sensations.  And he grew indignant at her indifference,
feeling that his child was neglected.

Mrs Yabsley, for ever on the alert, felt some change in his manner, and
one Sunday morning received a shock.  She was chopping wood in the
yard. She swung the axe with a grunt, and the billet, split in two,
left the axe wedged in the block.  As she was wrenching it out, Jonah
dropped his cigarette and cried:

"'Ere, missis, gimme that axe; I niver like ter see a woman chop wood."

She looked at him in amazement.  Times without number he had watched
her grunt and sweat without stirring a finger.  Bitten with her one
idea, she watched him curiously.

It was the baby that betrayed him at last.  Ada was carrying it past
him in furtive haste, when it caught sight of his familiar features.
Jonah, off his guard, smiled.  The child laughed joyously, and leaned
out of Ada's arms towards him.

"W'y, wot's the matter, Joe?" cried Mrs Yabsley, all eyes.

Jonah hesitated.  Denial was on his tongue, but he looked again at his
child, and a lump rose in his throat.

"Oh, nuthin', missis," he replied, reddening.  "Me an' the kid took a
fancy ter one another long ago."

He smiled blandly, in exquisite relief, as if he had confessed a sin or
had a tooth drawn.  He took the child from Ada, and it lay in his arms,
nestling close with animal content.

Ada looked in silence, astonished and slightly scornful at this
development, jealous of the child's preference, already regretting her
neglect.

Mrs Yabsley stood petrified with the face of one who has seen a
miracle. For a moment she was too amazed to think; then, with a rapid
change of front, she conquered her surprise and claimed the credit for
this result.

"I knowed all along the kid 'ud fetch yer, Joe.  I knowed yer'd got a
soft 'eart," she cried.  "An' 'e's the very image of yer, wi' the
sweetest temper mortal child ever 'ad."

From that time Sunday became a marked day for Jonah, and he looked
forward to it with impatience.  It was spring.  The temperate rays of
the sun fell on budding tree and shrub; the mysterious renewal of life
that stirred inanimate nature seemed to touch his pulse to a quicker
and lighter beat. He sat for hours in the backyard, once a garden,
screened from observation, with the child on his knees.  The blood ran
pleasantly in his veins; he felt in sympathy with the sunlight, the sky
flecked with clouds, and the warm breath of the winds.  It broke on him
slowly that he was taking his place among his fellows, outcast and
outlaw no longer.

Soon, he and the child were inseparable.  He learned to attend to its
little wants with deft fingers, listening with a smile to the kindly
banter of the women.  His manner changed to Ada and her mother; he was
considerate, even kind.  Then he began to drop in on Monday or Tuesday
instead of loafing with the Push at the corner.  Ada was at the
factory; but Mrs Yabsley, sorting piles of dirty linen, with her arms
bared to the elbow, welcomed him with a smile.  He remarked with
satisfaction that a change had come over the old woman.  She never
spoke of marriage; seemed to have given up the idea.

But one day, as he sat with the child on his knees, she stopped in
front of the pair, with a bundle of shirts in her arms, and regarded
them with a puzzling smile.  The baby lay on its back, staring into
space with solemn, unreflective eyes.  From time to time Jonah turned
his head to blow the smoke of his cigarette into the air.

"You'll be gittin' too fond of 'im, if y'ain't careful, Joe," she said
at last.

"Git work; wot's troublin' yer?" said Jonah, with a grin.

"Nuthin'; only I was thinkin' wot a fine child 'e'd be in a few years.
It's a pity 'e ain't got no real father."

"Wot d'yer mean?" said Jonah, looking up angrily.  "W'ere do I come in?
Ain't I the bloke?"

"Well, y'are an' y'ain't, yer know," said Mrs Yabsley.  "There's two
ways of lookin' at these things."

"'Strewth!  I niver thought o' that," said Jonah, scratching his ear.

"No, but other people do, worse luck," said Mrs Yabsley.

Jonah stared at the child in silence.  Mrs Yabsley turned and poked the
fire under the copper boiler.  Suddenly Jonah lifted his head and cried:

"I say, missis, I can see a hole in a ladder plain enough!  Yer mean
I've got ter marry Ada?"

The old woman left the fire and stood in front of him.

"Not a bit, Joe.  I've give up that idea.  Marriage wouldn't suit yous.
Your dart is ter be King of the Push, an' knock about the streets with
a lot of mudlarks as can't look a p'liceman straight in the face.  You
an' yer pals are seein' life now all right; but wait till yer bones
begin ter stiffen, an' yer can't run faster than the cop.  Then it'll
be jail or worse, an' yous might 'ave bin a good workman, with a wife
an' family, only yer knowed better--"

"'Ere, steady on the brake, missis," interrupted Jonah, with a frown.

"No, Joe, I don't mind sayin' that I 'ad some idea of marryin' yous an'
Ada, but ye're not the man I took yer for an' I give it up.  I don't
believe in a man marryin' because 'e wants a woman ter cook 'is meals.
My idea is a man wants ter git married because 'e's found out a lot o'
surprisin' things in the world 'e niver dreamt of before.  An' it's
only when 'e's found somethin' ter live for, an' work for, that 'e's
wot yer rightly call a man.  That's w'y I don't worry about you, Joe.
I can see your time ain't come."

"Don't be too bleedin' sure," cried Jonah, angrily.

"Of course I'm only a fat old woman as likes 'er joke an' a glass o'
beer. I'd be a fool ter lay down the law to a bloke as sharp as yous,
that thinks 'e can see everything.  But I wasn't always so fat I 'ad
ter squeeze through the door, an' I tell yer the best things in life
are them yer can't see at all, an' that's the feelin's.  So take a
fool's advice, an' don't think of marryin' till yer feel there's
somethin' wrong wi' yer inside, fer that's w'ere it ketches yer."

"'Ere, 'old 'ard!  Can't a bloke git a word in edgeways?"

Mrs Yabsley stopped, with an odd smile on her face.

Jonah stared at her with a perplexed frown, and then the words came in
a rush.

"Look 'ere, missis, I wasn't goin' ter let on, but since yer on fer a
straight talk, I tell yer there's more in me than yer think, an' if
it's up ter me ter git married, I can do it without gittin' roused on
by yous."

"Keep yer 'air on, Joe," said Mrs Yabsley, smiling.  "I didn't mean ter
nark yer, but yer know wot I say is true.  An' don't say I ever put it
inter yer 'ead ter git married.  You've studied the matter, an' yer
know it means 'ard graft an' plenty of worry.  There's nuthin' in it,
Joe, as yer said, an' besides, the Push is waitin' for yer.

"Of course, there's no 'arm in yer comin' 'ere ter see the kid, but I
'ope yer won't stand in Ada's way w'en she gits a chance.  There's Tom
Mullins, that  was after Ada before she ever took up wi' yous.  Only
last week 'e told Mrs Jones 'e'd take Ada, kid an' all, if he got the
chance.  I know yous don't want a wife, but yer shouldn't 'inder others
as do."

"Yer talkin' through yer neck," cried Jonah, losing his temper.

"Suppose I tell yer that the kid's done the trick, an' I want ter git
married, an' bring 'im up respectable?"

The old woman was silent, but a wonderful smile lit up her face.

"Yer've got a lot ter say about the feelin's.  Suppose I tell yer
there's somethin' in me trembles w'en I touch this kid?  I felt like a
damned fool at first, but I'm gittin' used to it."

"That's yer own flesh an' blood a-callin' yer, Joe," cried Mrs Yabsley,
in ecstasy--"the sweetest cry on Gawd's earth, for it goes to yer very
marrer."

"That's true," said Jonah, sadly; "an' 'e's the only relation I've got
in the wide world, as far as I know.  More than that, 'e's the only
livin' creature that looks at me without seein' my hump."

It was the first time in Mrs Yabsley's memory that Jonah had mentioned
his deformity.  A tremor in his voice made her look at him sharply.
Tears stood in his eyes.  With a sudden impulse she stopped and patted
his head.

"That's all right, Joe," she said, gently.  "I was only pullin' yer
leg. I wanted yer to do the straight thing by Ada, but I wasn't sure
yer'd got a 'eart, till the kid found it.  But wot will the Push say
w'en ..."

"The Push be damned!" cried Jonah.

"Amen ter that," said Mrs Yabsley.  "Gimme yer fist."

Jonah stayed to tea that night, contrary to his usual habit, for Mrs
Yabsley was anxious to have the matter settled.

"Wot's wrong wi' you an' me gittin' married, Ada?" he said.  Ada nearly
dropped her cup.

"Garn, ye're only kiddin'!" she cried with an uneasy grin.

"Fair dinkum!" said Jonah.

"Right-oh," said Ada, as calmly as if she were accepting an invitation
to a dance.

But she thought with satisfaction that this was the beginning of a
perpetual holiday.  For she was incorrigibly lazy and hated work, going
through the round of mechanical toil in a slovenly fashion, indifferent
to the shower of complaints, threats and abuse that fell about her ears.

"Where was yer thinkin' of gittin' married, Joe?" inquired Mrs Yabsley
after tea.

"I dunno," replied Jonah, suddenly remembering that he knew no more of
weddings than a crow.

"At the Registry Office, of course," said Ada.  "Yer walk in an' yer
walk out, an' it's all over."

"That's the idea," said Jonah, greatly relieved.  He understood vaguely
that weddings were expensive affairs, and he had thirty shillings in
his pocket.

"Don't tell me that people are married that goes ter the Registry
Office!" cried Mrs Yabsley.  "They only git a licence to 'ave a family.
I know all about them.  Yer sign a piece of paper, an' then the bloke
tells yer ye're married.  'Ow does 'e know ye're  married?  'E ain't a
parson.  I was married in a church, an' my marriage is as good now as
ever it was.  Just yous leave it to me, an' I'll fix yez up."

Ever since Ada was a child, Mrs Yabsley had speculated on her marriage,
when all the street would turn out to the wedding.  And now, after
years of planning and waiting, she was to be married on the quiet, for
there was nothing to boast about.

"Well, it's no use cryin' over skimmed milk," she reflected, adapting
the proverb to her needs.

But she clung with obstinacy to a marriage in a church, convinced that
none other was genuine.  And casting about in her mind for a parson who
would marry them without fuss or expense, she remembered Trinity
Church, and the thing was done.

Canon Vaughan, the new rector of Trinity Church, had brought some
strange ideas from London, where he had worked in the slums.  He had
founded a workman's club, and smoked his pipe with the members; formed
a brigade of newsboys and riff-raff, and taught them elementary
morality with the aid of boxing-gloves; and offended his congregation
by treating the poor with the same consideration as themselves.  And
then, astonished by the number of mothers who were not wives, that he
discovered on his rounds, he had announced that he would open the
church on the first Saturday night in every month to marry any couples
without needless questions.  They could pay, if they chose, but nothing
was expected.

Jonah and Ada jumped at the idea, but Mrs Yabsley thought with sorrow
of her cherished dream--Ada married on a fine day of sunshine, Cardigan
Street in an uproar, a feast where all could cut and come again, the
clink of glasses, and a chorus that shook the windows.  Well, such
things were not to be, and she shut her mouth grimly.  But she
determined in secret to get in a dozen of beer, and invite a few
friends after the ceremony to drink the health of the newly married,
and keep the secret till they got home.  And as she was rather
suspicious of a wedding that cost nothing, she decided to give the
parson a dollar to seal the bargain and make the contract more binding.




CHAPTER 7

A QUIET WEDDING


The following Saturday Mrs Yabsley astonished her customers by
delivering the shirts and collars in the afternoon.  There were cries
of amazement.

"No, I'm quite sober," she explained; "but I'm changin' the 'abits of a
lifetime just to show it can be done."

Then she hurried home to clean up the house.  After much thought, she
had decided to hold the reception after the wedding in the front room,
as it was the largest.  She spent an hour carrying the irons, boards,
and other implements of the laundry into the back rooms.  A neighbour,
who poked her head in, asked if she were moving.  But when she had
finished the cleaning, she surveyed the result with surprise.  The room
was scrubbed as bare as a shaven chin.  So she took some coloured
almanacs from the bedroom and kitchen, and tacked them on the walls,
studying the effect with the gravity of a decorative artist.  The crude
blotches of colour pleased her eye, and she considered the result with
pride.  "Wonderful 'ow a few pitchers liven a place up," she thought.

She looked doubtfully at the chairs.  There were only three, and, years
ago, her immense weight had made them as uncertain on their legs as
drunkards.  She generally sat on a box for safety.  Finally, she
constructed two forms out of the ironing-boards and some boxes.  Then
she fastened two ropes of pink tissue paper, that opened out like a
concertina, across the ceiling.  This was the finishing touch, and lent
an air of gaiety to the room.

For two hours past Ada and Pinkey had been decorating one another in
the bedroom.  When they emerged, Mrs Yabsley cried out in admiration,
not recognizing her own daughter for the moment.  Their white dresses,
freshly starched and ironed by her, rustled stiffly at every movement
of their bodies, and they walked daintily as if they were treading on
eggs. Both had gone to bed with their hair screwed in curling-pins,
losing half their sleep with pain and discomfort, but the result
justified the sacrifice.  Ada's hair, dark and lifeless in colour,
decreased the sullen heaviness of her features; Pinkey's, worn up for
the first time, was a barbaric crown, shot with rays of copper and gold
as it caught the light.

"Yous put the kettle on, an' git the tea, an' I'll be ready in no
time," said Mrs Yabsley.  "W'en I was your age, I used ter take 'arf a
day ter doll meself up, an' then git down the street with a brass band
playin' inside me silly 'ead; but now, gimme somethin' new, if it's
only a bit o' ribbon in me 'at, an' I feel dressed up ter the knocker."

At seven o'clock Jonah and Chook arrived.  They were dressed in the
height of larrikin fashion--tight-fitting suits of dark cloth, soft
black felt hats, and soft white shirts with new black mufflers round
their necks in place of collars--for the larrikin taste in dress runs
to a surprising neatness.  But their boots were remarkable, fitting
like a glove, with high heels and a wonderful ornament of perforated
toe-caps and brass eyelet-holes on the uppers.

Mrs Yabsley, moved by the solemn occasion, formally introduced Chook
and Pinkey.  They stared awkwardly, not knowing what to say.  In a
flash, Chook remembered her as the red-haired girl whom he had chiacked
at the corner.  As he stared at her in surprise, the impudence died out
of his face, and he thought with regret of his ferocious jest and her
stinging reply.  Pinkey grew uneasy under his eyes.  Again the curious
pink flush coloured her cheeks, and she turned her head with a light,
scornful toss. That settled Chook.  In five minutes he was looking at
her with the passionate adoration of a savage before an idol, for this
Lothario of the gutter brought to each fresh experience a surprising
virginity of emotion that his facile, ignoble conquests left untouched.
Jonah broke the silence by complimenting the ladies on their appearance.

"My oath, yer a sight fer sore eyes, yous are!" he cried.  "I'm glad
yer don't know 'ow giddy yer look, else us blokes wouldn't 'ave a
chance, would we, Chook?"

The girls bridled with pleasure at the rude compliments, pretending not
to hear them, feeling very desirable and womanly in their finery.

"Dickon ter you," said Mrs Yabsley.  "Yer needn't think they're got up
ter kill ter please yous.  It's  only ter give their clobber an airin',
an' keep out the moths."

When it was time to set out for the church, the five were quite at
their ease, grinning and giggling at the familiar jokes on marriage,
broad as a barn door, dating from the Flood.  Mrs Yabsley toiled in the
rear of the bridal procession, fighting for wind on account of the
hill.  She kept her fist shut on the two half-dollars for the parson;
the wedding ring, jammed on the first joint of her little finger for
safety, gave her an atrocious pain.  At length they reached Cleveland
street, and halted opposite the church.

The square tower of Trinity Church threw its massive outline against
the faint glow of the city lights, keeping watch and ward over the
church, that had grown grey in the service of God, like a fortress of
the Lord planted on hostile ground.  And they stood together, the grim
tower and the grey church, for a symbol of immemorial things--a
stronghold and a refuge.

The wedding party walked into the churchyard on tiptoe as if they were
trespassers.  Then, unable to find the door in the dark, they walked
softly round the building, trying to see what was going on inside
through the stained-glass windows.  Their suspicious movements
attracted the attention of the verger, and he followed them with
stealthy movements, convinced that they meditated a burglary.  When he
learned their errand, he took charge of the party.  They entered the
church like foreigners in a remote land.  Another wedding was in
progress, so they sat down in the narrow, uncomfortable pews, waiting
their turn.  When Chook caught sight of the Canon in his surplice and
bands, he uttered a cry of amazement.

"Look at the old bloke.  'E's wearin' 'is shirt outside!"

The two girls were convulsed, turning crimson with the effort to
repress their giggles.  Mrs Yabsley was annoyed, feeling that they were
treating the matter as a farce.

"I'm ashamed o' yer, Chook," she remarked severely.  "Yer the two ends
an' middle of a 'eathen.  That's wot they call 'is surplus, an' I wish
I 'ad the job of ironin' it."

Order was restored, but at intervals the girls broke into ripples of
hysterical laughter.  Then Chook saw the organ, with its rows of
painted pipes, and nudged Jonah.

"Wot price that fer a mouth-orgin, eh?  Yer'd want a extra pair o'
bellows ter play that."

Jonah examined the instrument with the interest of a musician,
surprised by the enormous tubes, packed stiffly in rows, the plaything
of a giant; but he still kept an eye on the pair that were being
married, with the nervous interest of a criminal watching an execution.
The women, to whom weddings were an afternoon's distraction, like the
matinees of the richer, stared about the building.  Mrs Yabsley, wedged
with difficulty in the narrow pew, pretended that they were made
uncomfortable on purpose to keep people awake during the sermon.
Presently Ada and Pinkey, who had been examining the memorial tablets
on the walls, began to argue whether the dead people were buried under
the floor of the church.  Pinkey decided they were, and  shivered at
the thought.  Ada called her a fool; they nearly quarrelled.

When their turn came, the Canon advanced to meet them, setting them at
their ease with a few kindly words, less a priest than a courteous host
welcoming his guests.  He seemed not to notice Jonah's deformity.  But,
as he read the service, he was the priest again, solemn and austere,
standing at the gates of Life and Death.  He followed the ritual with
scrupulous detail, scorning to give short measure to the poor.  In the
vestry they signed their names with tremendous effort, holding the pen
as if it were a prop.  Mrs Yabsley, being no scholar, made a mark.  The
Canon left them with an apology, as another party was waiting.

"Rum old card," commented Chook, when they got outside.  "I reckon 'e's
a man w'en 'e tucks 'is shirt in."

The party decided to go home by way of Regent Street, drawn by the
sight of the jostling crowd and the glitter of the lamps.  As they
threaded their way through the crowd, Jonah stopped in front of a
pawnshop and announced that he was going to buy a present for Ada and
Pinkey to bring them luck.  He ignored Ada's cries of admiration at the
sight of a large brooch set with paste diamonds, and fixed on a thin
silver bracelet for her, and a necklace of imitation pearls, the size
of peas, for Pinkey. Ada thrust her fat fingers through the rigid band
of metal; it slipped over the joints and hung loosely on her wrist.
Then Pinkey clasped the string of shining beads round her thin neck,
the metallic lustre of the false gems heightening the delicate pallor
of  her fine skin.  The effect was superb.  Ada, feeling that the bride
was eclipsed, pretended that her wedding ring was hurting her, and drew
all eyes to that badge of honour.

When they reached Cardigan Street, Mrs Yabsley went into the back room,
and returned grunting under the weight of a dozen bottles of beer in a
basket.  Then, one by one, she set them in the middle of the table like
a group of ninepins.  It seemed a pity to break the set, but they were
thirsty, and the pieman was not due for half an hour.  A bottle was
opened with infinite precaution, but the faint plop of the cork reached
the sharp ears of Mrs Swadling, who was lounging at the end of the
lane.  The unusual movements of Mrs Yabsley had roused her suspicions,
but the arrival of her husband, Sam fighting drunk for his tea, had
interrupted her observations.  She was accustomed to act promptly, even
if it were only to dodge a plate, and in an instant her sharp features
were thrust past the door, left ajar for the sake of coolness.

"I thought I'd run across an' ask yer about that ironmould, on Sam's
collar," she began.

Then, surprised by the appearance of the room, dressed for a festival,
she looked around.  Her eyes fell on the battalion of bottles, and she
stood thunderstruck by this extravagance.  But Ada, anxious to display
her ring, was smoothing and patting her hair every few minutes.
Already the movement had become a habit.  Unconsciously she lifted her
hand and flashed the ring in the eyes of Mrs Swadling.

"Well, I never!" she cried.  "I might 'ave known  wot yer were up to,
an' me see a weddin' in me cup only this very mornin."

Mrs Yabsley looked at Jonah and laughed.

"Might as well own up, Joe," she cried.  "The cat's out of the bag."

"Right y'are," cried Jonah.  "Let 'em all come.  I can't be 'ung fer
it."

Mrs Yabsley, delighted with her son-in-law's speech, invited Mrs
Swadling to a seat, and then stepped out to ask a few of her neighbours
in to drink a glass and wish them luck.  In half an hour the room was
full of women, who were greatly impressed by the bottles of beer, a
luxury for aristocrats.  When Joey the pieman arrived, some were
sitting on the veranda, as the room was crowded.  Mrs Yabsley anxiously
reckoned the number of guests; she had reckoned on twelve, and there
were twenty. She beckoned to Jonah, and they whispered together for a
minute.  He counted some money into her hand, and cried,

"Let 'er go; it's only once in a lifetime."

Then Mrs Yabsley, as hostess, went to each in turn, asking what they
preferred.  The choice was limited to green peas, hot pies, and
saveloys, and as each chose, she ticked it off on a piece of paper in
hieroglyphics known only to herself, as she was used to number the
shirts and collars. Joey, impressed by the magnitude of the order, got
down from his perch in the cart and helped to serve the guests.  And he
passed in and out among the expectant crowd, helping them to make a
choice, like a chef anxious to please even the most fastidious palates.

Cups, saucers, plates, and basins were pressed into service until Mrs
Yabsley's stock ran out; the last served were forced to hold their
delicacy wrapped in a scrap of paper in their hands, the hot grease
sweating through the thin covering on to their fingers.  The ladies
hesitated, fearful of being thought vulgar if they ate in their usual
manner; but Mrs Yabsley seeing their embarrassment, cried out that
fingers were made before forks, and bit a huge piece out of her pie.

Then the feast began in silence, except for the sound of chewing.  Joey
had surpassed himself.  The peas melted in your mouth, the piecrusts
were a marvel, and the saveloys were done to a turn.  And they ate with
solemn, serious faces, for it was not every day the chance came to fill
their bellies with such dainties.  Joey, with an eye to business,
decided to stay in the street on the chance of selling out, for the
crowd had now reached to the gutter.  He rattled the shining lids of
the hot cans from time to time to attract attention as his cracked
voice chanted his familiar cry,

"Peas an' pies, all 'ot, all 'ot!"

And he drove a brisk trade among the uninvited guests, who paid for
their own.  Inside, they drank the health of the married couple; but
the dozen of beer barely wet their throats.  Jonah and Chook went to
the "Woolpack" with jugs, and the company settled down to the spree.
At intervals the men offered to shout for a few friends, and, borrowing
a dead marine from the heap of empty bottles, shuffled off to the hotel
to get it filled. The noise grew to an uproar--a babel of tongues,
sudden explosions of laughter, and the shuffling of feet.

Suddenly Mrs Yabsley looked at the clock.

"Good Gawd!" she cried, "to-morrer's Sunday, an' there ain't a bite or
sup in the blessed 'ouse!"

In the excitement of the wedding she had forgotten her weekly shopping.
It was a catastrophe.  But Chook had an idea.

"Cum on, blokes," he cried, "'oo'll cum down the road wi' Mother, an'
'elp carry the tucker?  Blimey, I reckon it's 'er night out!"

A dozen volunteered, with a shout of applause.  Jonah and Ada were left
to entertain the guests, and the party set out.  The grocer was going
to bed, and the shop was in darkness, but they banged so fiercely on
the door that he leaned over the balcony in his shirt, convinced that
the Push had come to wreck his shop.  Yet he came down, distressed in
his shopkeeper's soul at the thought of losing his profit.  He served
her in haste, terrified by the boisterous noise of her escort.

Then they walked up the Road, shrieking with laughter, bumping against
the passengers, who hurried past with scared looks.  It was a triumphal
procession to the butcher's and the greengrocer's Mrs Yabsley, radiant
with beer, gave her orders royally, her bodyguard, seizing on every
purchase, fighting for the privilege of carrying it.  The procession
turned into Cardigan Street again, laden with provisions, yelling
scraps of song, rousing the street with ungodly clamour.

Old Dad met them at the corner of Cooper Street.  He stood for a
moment, lurching with unpremeditated steps to the front and rear,
astonished by the noise and the crowd.  Then he recognized Mrs Yabsley,
and became suddenly excited, under the impression that she was being
taken to the lock-up by the police.  He lurched gallantly into the
throng, calling on his friends to rescue the old girl from her captors.
When he learned that she was in no danger, he grew enthusiastic, and
insisted on helping to carry the provisions.

"'Ere, Dad, yer've lost yer 'ead.  Take this," said Chook, offering him
a cabbage.

"Keep it, sonny--keep it; you want it more than I do," cried Dad,
scornfully.

So saying, he tore a shoulder of mutton out of Waxy's hands, and,
carrying it in his arms as a woman carries a child, joined the
procession with sudden, zigzag steps.  When the party reached the
cottage, it was met with a howl of welcome from the crowd, which now
reached to the opposite footpath.  Barney Ryan, seized with an
inspiration, broke suddenly into "Mother Shipton".  The chorus was
taken up with a roar of discordant voices:

  Good old Mother has come again to prophesy
  Things that will surely occur as the days go rolling by,
  So listen to me if you wish to know,
  For I'll let you into the know, you know,
  And tell you some wonders before I go
  To home, sweet home.


Mrs Yabsley, delighted by the compliment, stood on her veranda, smiling
and radiant, like Royalty receiving homage from its subjects.  This set
the ball rolling.  Song followed song, the pick of the music-halls.
Jonah gave a selection on the mouth-organ.  Then Barney, who was
growing hoarse, winked maliciously at Jonah and Ada, and struck into
his masterpiece, "Trinity Church".  It was the success of the evening.

  She told me her age was five-and-twenty,
  Cash in the bank of course she'd plenty,
  I like a lamb believed it all,
  I was an M.U.G.;
  At Trinity Church I met my doom,
  Now we live in a top back room,
  Up to my eyes in debt for 'renty',
  That's what she's done for me.


The chorus rang out with a deafening roar.  The guests, tickled by the
words that fell so pat, twisted and squirmed with laughter, digging
their fingers into their neighbours' ribs to emphasize the details.
But Barney, in trying to imitate a stumpy man with an umbrella, as the
song demanded, tripped and lay where he fell, too fatigued to rise.

Then, saddened by the beer they had drunk, they grew sentimental. Mrs
Swadling, who never let herself be asked twice, for fear of being
thought shy, led off with a pathetic ballad.  She sang in a thin,
quavering voice, staring into, vacancy with glassy eyes like the blind
beggars at the corner, dragging the tune till it became a wail--a dirge
for lost souls.

  Some are gone from us for ever,
  Longer here they might not stay;
  They have reached a fairer region,
  Far away-ee, far away--
  They have reached a fairer region,
  Far away-ee, far away.


The guests listened with a beery sadness in their  eyes, suddenly
reminded that you were here to-day and gone to-morrow, pierced with a
sense of the tragic brevity of Life, their hearts oppressed with a
pleasant anguish at the pity and wonder of this insubstantial world.

Mrs Yabsley had put the baby in her bed, where it had slept calmly
through the night till awakened by the singing.  Then it grew fretful,
disturbed by the rude clamour.  At length, in a sudden pause, a lusty
yell from the bedroom fell on their ears.  Everyone smiled.  But, as
Mrs Yabsley crossed the room to pacify it, the women called for the
baby to be brought out. When Mrs Yabsley appeared with the infant in
her arms, she was greeted with yells of admiration.  Ada turned crimson
with embarrassment.  The women passed it from hand to hand, nursing it
for a few minutes with little cries of emotion.

But suddenly Jonah walked up to Mrs Swadling and took his child in his
arms.  And he stood before the crowd, his eyes glittering with pride as
he exhibited his own flesh and blood, the son whose shapely back and
limbs proved that only an accident separated the hunchback from his
fellows. The guests howled with delight, clapping their hands, stamping
their feet, trying to add to the din.  It was a triumph, the sensation
of the evening. Then Old Dad, shutting one eye to see more distinctly,
proposed the health of the baby.  It was given with a roar.  The noise
stimulated Dad to further effort and, swaying slightly, he searched his
memory for a suitable quotation.  A patent medicine advertisement
zigzagged across his brain, and with a sigh of relief, he muttered,

"The 'and that slaps the baby rocks the world,"

beaming on the guests with the air of a man who has Shakespeare at his
fingers' ends.  There was a dead silence, and Dad looked round in
wonder. Then a woman tittered, and a shout went up that rattled the
windows.

It was nearly twelve when the party broke up, chiefly because the
"Woolpack" was closed and the supply of beer was cut off.  Some of the
men had reached the disagreeable stage, maudlin drunk or pugnacious,
anxious to quarrel, but forgetting the cause of dispute.  The police,
who had looked on with a tolerant eye, began to clear the footpaths,
shaking the drowsy into wakefulness, threatening and coaxing the
obstinate till they began to stagger homewards.

There was nearly a fight in the cottage.  Pinkey's young man had called
to take her home, and Chook had recognized him for an old enemy, a
wool-washer, called "Stinky" Collins on account of the vile smell of
decaying skins that hung about his clothes.  Chook began to make love
to Pinkey under his very eyes.  And Stinky sat in sullen silence,
refusing to open his mouth.  Pinkey, amazed by Chook's impudence and
annoyed that her lover should cut so poor a figure, encouraged him,
with the feminine delight in playing with fire.  Then Chook, with an
insolent grin at Stinky, announced that he was going to see Pinkey
home.  Mrs Yabsley just parted them in time.  Chook went swearing up to
the corner on the chance of getting a final taste at the "Woolpack."

Mrs Yabsley stood on the veranda and watched his departing figure,
aching in every joint from the strain of the eventful day.  Cardigan
Street was silent and deserted.  The air was still hot and breathless,
but little gusts of wind began to rise, the first signs of a coming
"buster".  Then she turned to Jonah and Ada, who had followed her on to
the veranda, and summed up the day's events.

"All's well that ends well, as the man said when he plaited the horse's
tail, but this is a new way of gittin' married on the sly, with all the
street to keep the secret.  There's no mistake, secrets are dead funny.
Spend yer last penny to 'elp yer friend out of a 'ole, an' it niver
gits about, but pawn yer last shirt, an' nex' day all the bloomin'
street wants to know if yer don't feel the cold."




CHAPTER 8

JONAH STARTS ON HIS OWN


It was Monday morning.  Hans Paasch was at his bench cleaning up the
dirt and litter of last week, setting the tools in order at one end of
the bench, while he swept it clear of the scraps of leather that had
gathered through the week.  Then he set the heavy iron lasts on their
shelves, where they looked like a row of amputated feet.  The shining
knives and irons lay in order, ready to hand.  A light cloud of dust
from the broom made him sneeze, and he strewed another handful of wet
tea-leaves on the floor.  These he saved carefully from day to day to
lay the dust before sweeping.  When the bench and the shop were swept
clean, he looked round with mild satisfaction.

Once a week, in this manner, he gratified his passion for order and
neatness; but when work began, everything fell into disorder, and he
wasted hours peering over the bench with his short sight for tools that
lay under his nose, buried in a heap of litter.

The peculiar musty odour of leather hung about the shop.  A few pairs
of boots that had been mended stood in a row, the shining black rim of
the new soles contrasting with the worn, dingy uppers--the patched and
mended shoes of the poor, who must wear them while upper and sole hang
together. They betrayed the age and sex of the wearer as clearly as a
photograph. The shoddy slipper, with the high, French heels, of the
smart shop-girl; the heavy bluchers, studded with nails, of the
labourer; the light tan boots, with elegant, pointed toes, of the clerk
or counter-jumper; the shoes of a small child, with a thin rim of
copper to protect the toes.

For the first time since he was on piecework, Jonah set out for the
shop on Monday morning; but when he walked in, Paasch met him with a
look of surprise, thinking he had mistaken the day of the week.  He
blinked uneasily when Jonah reached for his apron.

"It vas no use putting on your apron.  Dere is not a stitch of work to
be done," he cried in amazement.

Jonah looked round, it was true.  He remembered that the repairs, which
were the backbone of Paasch's trade, began to come in slowly on Monday.
Paasch always began the week by making a pair of boots for the window,
which he sold at half price when the leather had perished.  In his
eagerness for work, he had forgotten that Paasch's business was so
small. He looked round with annoyance, realizing that he would never
earn the wages here that he needed for his child.  For he usually
earned about fifteen shillings, except in the Christmas season, when
trade was brisk. Then he drew more than a pound.  This sum of money,
which had formerly satisfied his wants, now seemed a mere flea-bite.

He looked round with a sudden scorn on the musty shop that had given
him work and food since he was a boy.  The sight of the old man,
bending over the last, with his simple, placid face, annoyed him.  And
he felt a sudden enmity for this man whose old-fashioned ways had let
him grow grey here like a rat in a hole.

He stared round, wondering if anything could be done to improve the
business.  The shop wanted livening up with a coat of paint.  He would
put new shelves up, run a partition across, and dress the windows like
the shops down town.  In his eager thoughts he saw the dingy shop
transformed under his touch, spick and span, alive with customers, who
jostled one another as they passed in and out, the coin clinking
merrily in the till.

He awoke as from a dream, and looked with dismay on the small, grimy
shop keeping pace with its master's old age.  Suddenly an idea came
into his head, and he stared at Paasch with a hard, calculating look in
his eyes. Then he got up, and walked abruptly out of the shop.  The old
German, who was used to his sudden humours and utter want of manners
peered after his retreating figure with a puzzled look.

Jonah had walked out of the door to look for work.  He saw that it was
useless to expect the constant work and wages that he needed from
Paasch, for the old man's business had remained stationary during the
twelve years that Jonah had worked for him.  And he had decided to
leave him, if a job could be found.  He stood on the footpath and
surveyed the Road with some anxiety.  There were plenty of shops, but
few of them in which he would be welcome, owing to his reputation as
leader of the Push.  For years he had been at daggers drawn with the
owners of the three largest shops, and the small fry could barely make
a living for themselves.

The street-arab in him, used to the freedom of a small shop, recoiled
from the thought of Packard's, the huge factory where you became a
machine, repeating one operation indefinitely till you were fit for
nothing else. Paasch had taught him the trade thoroughly, from cutting
out the insoles to running the bead-iron round the finished boot.  As a
forlorn hope, he resolved to call on Bob Watkins.  Bob, who always
passed the time of day with him, had been laid up with a bad cold for
weeks.  He might be glad of some help.  Jonah found the shop empty, the
bench and tools covered with dust.  Mrs Watkins came in answer to his
knock.

"Bob's done 'is last day's work 'ere," she said, using her
handkerchief. "'E 'ad a terrible cold all the winter, an' at last 'e
got so bad we 'ad to call the doctor in, an' 'e told 'im 'e was in a
gallopin' consumption, an' sent 'im away to some 'ome on the mountains."

"It's no use askin' fer a job, then?" inquired Jonah.

"None at all," said the woman.  "Bob neglected the work for a long
time, as 'e was too weak to do it, an' the customers took their work
away. In fact, I'm giving up the shop, an' going back to business.  I
was a dressmaker before I got married, and my sister's 'ad more work
than she could do ever since I left 'er.  And Bob wrote down last week
to say that I was to sell the lasts and tools for what they would
fetch.  And now I think of it, I wish you would run your eye over the
lasts and bench, an' tell me what  they ought to fetch.  A man offered
me three pounds for the lot, but I know that's too cheap."

"Yer'll niver get wot 'e gave fer 'em, but gimme a piece of paper, an'
I'll work it out," said Jonah.

In half an hour he made a rough inventory based on the cost and present
condition of the material.

"I make it ten pounds odd, but I don't think yer'll git it," he said at
last.  "Seven pounds would be a fair offer, money down."

"I'd be thankful to get that," said Mrs Watkins.

Jonah walked thoughtfully up Cardigan Street.  Here was the chance of a
lifetime, if a man had a few dollars.  With Bob's outfit, he could open
a shop on the Road, and run rings round Paasch and the others.  But
seven pounds!  He had never handled so much money in his life, and
there was no one to lend it to him.  Mrs Yabsley was as poor as a crow.
Well, he would fit up the back room as a workshop, and go on at
Packard's as an outdoor finisher, carrying a huge bag of boots to and
from the factory every week, like Tom Mullins.

When Jonah reached the cottage, he found Mrs Yabsley sorting the shirts
and collars; Ada was reading a penny novelette.  She had left Packard's
without ceremony on her wedding-day, and was spending her honeymoon on
the back veranda.  Her tastes were very simple.  Give her nothing to
do, a novelette to read, and some lollies to suck, and she was
satisfied. Ray, who was growing too big for the box-cradle, was lying
on a sugar-bag in the shade.

"W'y, Joe, yer face is as long as a fiddle!" cried Mrs Yabsley,
cheerfully.  "Wot's up?  'Ave yer got the sack?"

"No, but Dutchy's got nuthin' fer me till We'n'sday.  I might 'ave
known that.  An' anyhow, if I earned more than a quid, 'e'd break 'is
'eart."

"Well, a quid's no good to a man wi' a wife an' family," replied the
old woman.  "Wot do yer reckon on doin'?"

She knew that her judgment of Jonah was being put to the test, and she
remarked his gloomy face with satisfaction.

"I'm goin' ter chuck Dutchy, if I can git a job," said Jonah.  "I went
round ter Bob Watkins, but 'e's in the 'orspital, an' 'is wife's
sellin' 'is tools."

"Wot does she want for 'em?" asked Mrs Yabsley, with a curious look.

"Seven quid, an' they'd set a man up fer life," said Jonah.

"Ah!  that's a lot o' money," said Mrs Yabsley, raking the ashes from
under the copper.  "Wait till this water boils, an' we'll talk things
over."

Ada returned to her novelette.  Ray, sitting upright with an effort,
gurgled with pleasure to see his father.  Jonah tilted him on his back,
and tickled his fat legs, pretending to worry him like a dog.  The pair
made a tremendous noise.

"Oh, gi' the kid a bit o' peace!" cried Ada, angry at being disturbed.

"Yous git round, an' 'elp Mum wi' the clothes," snapped Jonah.

"Me?  No fear!" cried Ada, with a malicious grin.  "I didn't knock off
work to carry bricks.  Yous married me, an' yer got ter keep me."

Jonah looked at her with a scowl.  She knew quite well that he had
married her for the child's sake alone.   A savage retort was on his
tongue, but Mrs Yabsley stepped in.

"Well, Joe, now I see yer dead set on earnin' a livin', I don't mind
tellin' yer I've got somethin' up me sleeve.  No, I don't mean a
guinea-pig an' a dozen eggs, like the conjurer bloke I see once," she
explained in reply to his surprised look; "but if yer the man I take
yer for, we'll soon 'ave the pot a-boiling.  Many's the weary night
I've spent in bed thinkin' about you w'en I might 'ave bin snorin'.
That reminds me. Did y'ever notice yer can niver tell exactly w'en yer
drop off?  I've tried all I know, but ye're awake one minit, an'
chasin' a butterfly wi' a cow's 'ead the next.  But that ain't wot I'm
a-talkin' about.  Paasch 'e's blue mouldy, an' couldn't catch a snail
unless yer give 'im a start; an' if yer went ter Packard's, yer'd tell
the manager ter go to 'ell, an' git fired out the first week.  Yous
must be yer own boss, Joe.  I've studied yer like a book, an yer nose
wasn't made that shape for nuthin'."

"W'y, wot's wrong wi' it?" laughed Jonah, feeling his nose with its
powerful, predatory curve.

"Nuthin', if yer listen to me.  'Ave yer got pluck enough ter start on
yer own?" she inquired, suddenly.

"Wot's the use, w'en I've got no beans?" replied Jonah.

"I'll find the beans, an' yer can go an' buy Bob Watkins's shop out as
it stands," said Mrs Yabsley, proudly.

"Fair dinkum!" cried Jonah, in amazement.

Ada put down her novelette and stared, astonished  at the turn of the
conversation.  It flashed through her mind that her mother had some
mysterious habits.  Suppose she were like the misers she had read of in
books, who lived in the gutter, and owned terraces of houses?  For a
moment Ada saw herself riding in a carriage, with rings on every
finger, and feathers in her hat, with the childlike faith of the
ignorant in the marvellous.

But Mrs Yabsley was studying some strange hieroglyphics like Chinese,
pencilled on the cupboard.  She knitted her brows in the agony of
calculation.

"I can lay me 'ands on thirty pounds in solid cash," she announced.
She spoke as if it were a million.  Jonah cried out in amazement; Ada
felt disappointed.

"W'ere is it, Mum?  In the bank?" asked Jonah.

"No fear," said Mrs Yabsley, with a crafty smile.  "It's as safe as a
church.  I was niver fool enough ter put my money in the bank.  I know
all about them.  Yer put yer money in fer years, an' then, w'en they've
got enough, they shut the door, an' the old bloke wi' the white weskit
an' gold winkers cops the lot.  No banks fer me, thank yer!"

Then she explained that ever since she opened the laundry, she had
squeezed something out of her earnings as one squeezes blood out of a
stone.  She had saved threepence this week, sixpence that, sometimes
even a shilling went into the child's money-box that she had chosen as
a safe deposit.  When the coins mounted to a sovereign, she had changed
them into a gold piece.  Then, her mind disturbed by visions of thieves
bent on plunder, she had hit on a plan.  A floorboard was loose in the
kitchen. She had levered this up, and probed with a stick till she
touched solid earth.  Then the yellow coin, rolled carefully in a ball
of paper, was dropped into the hole.  And for years she had added to
her unseen treasure, dropping her precious coins into that dark hole
with more security than a man deposits thousands in the bank.  But the
time was come to unearth the golden pile.

She trembled with excitement when Jonah ripped up the narrow plank with
the poker.  Then he thrust his arm down till he touched the soft earth.
He seemed a long time groping, and Mrs Yabsley wondered at the delay.
At last he sat up, with a perplexed look.

"I can't feel nuthin'," he said.  "Are yez sure this is the place?"

"Of course it is," said Mrs Yabsley, sharply.  "I dropped them down
right opposite the 'ead of that nail."

Jonah groped again without success.

"'Ere, let me try," said Mum, impatiently.

She knelt over the hole to get her bearings, and then plunged her arm
into the gap.  Jonah and Ada, on their knees, watched in silence.

At last, with a cry of despair, Mrs Yabsley sat up on the floor.

There was no doubt, the treasure was gone!  In this extremity, her wit,
her philosophy, her temper, her very breath deserted her, and she wept.
She looked the picture of misery as the tears rolled down her face.
Jonah and Ada stared at one another in dismay, each wondering if this
story of a hidden treasure was a delusion of the old woman's mind.
Like her neighbours, who lived from hand to mouth, she was given to
dreaming of imaginary riches falling on her from the clouds.  But her
grief was too real for doubt.

"Well, if it ain't there, w'ere is it?" cried Jonah, angrily, feeling
that he, too, had been robbed.  "If it's gone, somebody took it.  Are
yer sure yer niver got a few beers in, an' started skitin' about it?"
He looked hard at Ada.

"Niver a word about it 'ave I breathed to a livin' soul till this day,"
wailed Mrs Yabsley, mopping her eyes with her apron.

"Rye buck!" said Jonah.  "'Ere goes!  I'll find it, if the blimey house
falls down.  Gimme that axe."

The floor-boards cracked and split as he ripped them up.  Small beetles
and insects, surprised by the light, scrambled with desperate haste
into safety.  A faint, earthy smell rose from the foundations.
Suddenly, with a yell of triumph, Jonah stooped, and picked up a dirty
ball of paper. As he lifted it, a glittering coin fell out.

"W'y, wot's this?" he cried, looking curiously at the wad of
discoloured paper.  One side had been chewed to a pulp by something
small and sharp. "Rats an' mice!" cried Jonah.

"They've boned the paper ter make their nests.  Every dollar's 'ere, if
we only look."

"Thank Gawd!" said Mrs Yabsley, heaving a tremendous sigh.  "Ada, go
an' git a jug o' beer."

In an hour Jonah had recovered twenty-eight of the missing coins; the
remaining two had evidently been dragged down to their nests by the
industrious vermin.  Late in the afternoon Jonah, who looked like a
sweep, gave up the search.  The kitchen was a  wreck.  Mrs Yabsley sat
with the coins in her lap, feasting her eyes on this heap of glittering
gold, for she had rubbed each coin till it shone like new.  Her peace
of mind was restored, but it was a long time before she could think of
rats and mice without anger.




CHAPTER 9

PADDY'S MARKET


Chook was standing near the entrance to the market where his mates had
promised to meet him, but he found that he had still half an hour to
spare, as he had come down early to mark a pak-ah-pu ticket at the
Chinaman's in Hay Street.  So he lit a cigarette and sauntered idly
through the markets to kill time.

The three long, dingy arcades were flooded with the glare from clusters
of naked gas-jets, and the people, wedged in a dense mass, moved slowly
like water in motion between the banks of stalls.  From the stone flags
underneath rose a sustained, continuous noise--the leisurely tread and
shuffle of a multitude blending with the deep hum of many voices, and
over it all, like the upper notes in a symphony, the shrill, discordant
cries of the dealers.

Overhead, the light spent its brightness in a gloomy vault, like the
roof of a vast cathedral fallen into decay, its ancient timbers
blackened with the smoke and grime of half a century.  On Saturdays the
great market, silent and deserted for six nights in the week, was a
debauch of sound and colour and smell.  Strange, pungent odours
assailed the  nostrils; the ear was surprised with the sharp, broken
cries of dealers, the cackle of poultry, and the murmur of innumerable
voices; the stalls, splashed with colour, astonished the eye like a
picture, immensely powerful, immensely crude.

The long rows of stalls were packed with the drift and refuse of a
great City.  For here the smug respectability of the shops were cast
aside, and you were deep in the romance of traffic in merchandise
fallen from its high estate--a huge welter and jumble of things
arrested in their ignoble descent from the shops to the gutter.

At times a stall was loaded with the spoils of a sunken ship or the
loot from a city fire, and you could buy for a song the rare fabrics
and costly dainties of the rich, a stain on the cloth, a discoloured
label on the tin, alone giving a hint of their adventures.  Then the
people hovered round like wreckers on a hostile shore, carrying off
spoil and treasure at a fraction of its value, exulting over their
booty like soldiers after pillage.

There was no caprice of the belly that could not be gratified, no want
of the naked body that could not be supplied in this huge bazaar of the
poor, but its cost had to be counted in pence, for those who bought in
the cheapest market came here.

A crowd of women and children clustered like flies round the lolly
stall brought Chook to a standstill; the trays heaped with sweets
coloured like the rainbow, pleased his eye, and, remembering Ada's
childish taste for lollies, he thought suddenly of her friend, Pinkey
the red-haired, and smiled.

Near at hand stood a collection of ferns and pot-plants, fresh and
cool, smelling of green gardens and moist earth.  Over the way, men
lingered with serious faces, trying the edge of a chisel with their
thumb, examining saws, planes, knives, and shears with a workman's
interest in the tools that earn his bread.

Chook stopped to admire the art gallery, gay with coloured pictures
from the Christmas numbers of English magazines.  On the walls were
framed pictures of Christ crucified, the red blood dropping from His
wounds, or the old rustic bridge of an English village, crude as
almanacs, printed to satisfy the artistic longings of the people.

Opposite, a cock crowed in defiance; the hens cackled loudly in the
coops; the ducks lay on planks, their legs fastened with string, their
eyes dazed with terror or fatigue.

A cargo of scented soap and perfume, the damaged rout of a chemist's
shop, fascinated the younger women, stirring their instinctive delight
in luxury; and for a few pence they gratified the longing of their
hearts.

The children pricked their ears at the sudden blare of a tin trumpet,
the squeaking of a mechanical doll.  And they stared in amazement at
the painted toys, surprised that the world contained such beautiful
things. The mothers, harassed with petty cares, anxiously considered
the prices; then the pennies were counted, and the child clasped in its
small hands a Noah's ark, a wax doll, or a wooden sword.

Chook stared at the vegetable stalls with murder in his eyes, for here
stood slant-eyed Mongolians behind heaps of potatoes, onions, cabbages,
beans, and cauliflowers, crying the prices in broken English,  or
chattering with their neighbours in barbaric, guttural sounds.  To
Chook they were the scum of the earth, less than human, taking the
bread out of his mouth, selling cheaply because they lived like vermin
in their gardens.

But he forgot them in watching the Jews driving bargains in second-hand
clothes, renovated with secret processes handed down from the Ark.
Coats and trousers, equipped for their last adventure with mysterious
darns and patches, cheated the eye like a painted beauty at a ball.
Women's finery lay in disordered heaps--silk blouses covered with
tawdry lace, skirts heavy with gaudy trimming--the draggled plumage of
fine birds that had come to grief.  But here buyer and seller met on
level terms, for each knew to a hair the value of the sorry garments;
and they chaffered with crafty eyes, each searching for the silent
thought behind the spoken lie.

Chook stared at the bookstall with contempt, wondering how people found
the time and patience to read.  One side was packed with the forgotten
lumber of bookshelves--an odd volume of sermons, a collection of
scientific essays, a technical work out of date.  And the men, anxious
to improve their minds, stared at the titles with the curious reverence
of the illiterate for a printed book.  At their elbows boys gloated
over the pages of a penny dreadful, and the women fingered penny
novelettes with rapid movements, trying to judge the contents from the
gaudy cover.

The crowd at the provision stall brought Chook to a standstill again.
Enormous flitches hung from the posts, and the shelves were loaded with
pieces of bacon tempting the eye with a streak of lean in a wilderness
of fat.  The buyers watched hungrily as the keen knife slipped into the
rich meat, and the rasher, thin as paper, fell on the board like the
shaving from a carpenter's plane.  The dealer, wearing a clean shirt
and white apron, served his customers with smooth, comfortable
movements, as if contact with so much grease had nourished his body and
oiled his joints.

When Chook elbowed his way to the corner where Joe Crutch and Waxy
Collins had promised to meet him, there was no sign of them, and he
took another turn up the middle arcade.  It was now high tide in the
markets, and the stream of people filled the space between the stalls
like a river in flood. And they moved at a snail's pace, clutching in
their arms fowls, pot-plants, parcels of groceries, toys for the
children, and a thousand odd, nameless trifles, bought for the sake of
buying, because they were cheap.  A babel of broken conversation,
questions and replies, jests and laughter, drowned the cries of the
dealers, and a strong, penetrating odour of human sweat rose on the hot
air.  From time to time a block occurred, and the crowd stood
motionless, waiting patiently until they could move ahead.  In one of
these sudden blocks Chook, who was craning his neck to watch the
vegetable stalls, felt someone pushing, and turning his head, found
himself staring into the eyes of Pinkey, the red-haired.

"'Ello, fancy meetin' yous," cried Chook, his eyes dancing with
pleasure.

The curious pink flush spread over the girl's face, and then she found
her tongue.

"Look w'ere ye're goin'.  Are yer walkin' in yer sleep?"

"I am," said Chook, "an' don't wake me; I like it."

But the twinkle died out of his eyes when he saw Stinky Collins,
separated from Pinkey by the crowd, scowling at him over her shoulder.
He ignored Chook's friendly nod, and they stood motionless, wedged in
that sea of human bodies until it chose to move.

Chook felt the girl's frail body pressed against him.  His nostrils
caught the odour of her hair and flesh, and the perfume mounted to his
brain like wine, The wonderful red hair, glittering like bronze, fell
in short curls round the nape of her neck, where it had escaped from
the comb.  A tremor ran through his limbs and his pulse quickened.  And
he was seized with an insane desire to kiss the white flesh, pale as
ivory against her red hair. The crowd moved, and Pinkey wriggled to the
other side.

"I'll cum wid yer, if yer feel lonely," said Chook as she passed.

"Yous git a move on, or yer'll miss the bus," cried Pinkey, as she
passed out of sight.

When Chook worked his way back to the corner, little Joe Crutch and
Waxy Collins stepped forward.

"W'ere the 'ell 'ave yer bin?  We've bin waitin' 'ere this 'arf 'our,"
they cried indignantly.

"Wot liars yer do meet," said Chook, grinning.

The three entered the new market, an immense red-brick square with a
smooth, cemented floor, and a lofty roof on steel girders.  It is here
the people amuse themselves with the primitive delights of an English
fair after the fatigue of shopping.

The larrikins turned to the chipped-potato stall as a hungry dog jumps
at a bone, eagerly sniffing the smell of burning fat as the potatoes
crisped in the spitting grease.

"It's up ter yous ter shout," cried Joe and Waxy.

"Well, a tray bit won't break me," said Chook, producing threepence
from his pocket.

The dealer, wearing the flat white cap of a French cook, and a clean
apron, ladled the potatoes out of the cans into a strainer on the
counter. His wife, with a rapid movement, twisted a slip of paper into
a spill, and, filling it with chips, shook a castor of salt over the
top. Customers crowded about, impatient to be served, and she went
through the movements of twisting the paper, filling it with chips, and
shaking the castor with the automatic swiftness of a machine.

When they were served, the larrikins stood on one side crunching the
crisp slices of potato between their teeth with immense relish as they
watched the cook stirring the potatoes in the cauldron of boiling fat.
Then they licked the grease off their fingers, lit cigarettes, and
sauntered on. But the chips had whetted their appetites, and the sight
of green peas and saveloys made their mouths water.

Men, women, and children sat on the forms round the stall with the
stolid air of animals waiting to be fed.  When each received a plate
containing a squashy mess of peas and a luscious saveloy, they began to
eat with slow, animal satisfaction, heedless of the noisy crowd.  The
larrikins sat down and gave their order, each paying for his own.

"Nothin' like a feed ter set a man up," said Chook, wiping his mouth
with the back of his hand.

As he turned, he was surprised to see Stinky Collins and Pinkey in
front of the electric battery.  These machines had a singular
attraction for the people.  The mysterious fluid that ran silently and
invisibly through the copper wires put them in touch with the mysteries
of Nature.  And they gripped the brass handles, holding on till the
tension became too great, with the conscientious air of people taking
medicine.

Stinky, full of jealous fear, had dragged Pinkey to the new market,
where he meant to treat her to green peas and ice-cream.  But as they
passed the battery, a sudden desire swept through him to give an
exhibition of his strength and endurance to this girl, to force her
admiration with the vanity of a cock strutting before his hens.

He took hold of the brass handles, and watched the dial, like a
clock-face, that marked the intensity of the current.  The muscles of
his face contracted into a rigid stare as the electric current ran
through his limbs.  He had the face of one visiting the dentist, but he
held on until the pointer marked half-way.  Then he nodded, and dropped
the handles with a sigh of relief as the current was turned off.

But as he looked to Pinkey for the applause that he had earned, Chook
stepped up to the machine and, with an impudent grin at Pinkey, grasped
the handles.  The pointer moved slowly round, and passed Stinky's mark,
but Chook held on, determined to eclipse his rival.  His muscles seemed
to be cracking with pain, the seconds lengthened into intolerable
hours. Suddenly, as the dial marked three-quarters, he dropped the
handles with a grin of triumph at Pinkey.

Stinky, smarting with defeat, instantly took up the challenge.

"That's no test of strength," he cried angrily.  "Women can stand a lot
more than men."

"Orl right; choose yer own game, an' I'm after yer," said Chook.

Behind them a hammer fell with a tremendous thud, and a voice cried,
"Try yer strength--only a penny, only a penny."

"'Ow'll that suit yer?" inquired Stinky, with a malicious grin, for he
counted on his superior weight and muscle to overcome his rival.

"Let 'er go!" cried Chook.

Stinky spat on his hands, and seized the wooden mallet.  Cripes, he
would show Pinkey which was the better man of the two!  He tightened
his muscles with tremendous effort as he swung the hammer, turning red
in the face with the exertion.  The mallet fell, and a little manikin
flew up the pillar, marking the weight of the blow.  It was a good
stroke, and he threw down the hammer with the air of a Sandow.

Then Chook seized the mallet, still with his provoking grin at Pinkey,
and swung it with the ease of a man using an axe.  The manikin flew
level with Stinky's mark.  And they disputed angrily which was the
heavier blow. But Stinky, whose blood was up, seized the mallet again,
and forced every ounce of his strength into the blow.  The manikin flew
a foot higher than the previous mark.  The contest went on, each
striving to beat the other's mark, with blows that threatened to
shatter the machine, till both were tired.  But Stinky's second blow
held the record.  Chook was beaten.

"Is there any other game yer know?" sneered Stinky.

Near them were the shooting-galleries, looking like enormous chimneys
that had blown down.  A sharp, spitting crack came from each rifle as
it was fired.

"A dollar even money yer can't ring the bell in six shots," cried Chook.

"Done!" shouted Stinky.

The stakes, in half-crowns, were handed to the proprietor of the
gallery, and they took turns with the pea-rifle, resting their elbows
on the ledge as they stared down the black tube at a white disc that
seemed miles away. Each held the gun awkwardly like a broom-handle,
holding their breath to prevent the barrel from wobbling.  At the fifth
shot, by a lucky fluke, Chook rang the bell.  When he put down the
rifle, Stinky was already dragging Pinkey away, his face black with
anger.  But Chook cried out,

"'Ere, 'arf a mo'--this is my shout!"

They were near the ice-cream stall, where trade was brisk, for the
people's appetite for this delicacy is independent of the season.
Pinkey, who adored ice-cream, looked with longing eyes, but Stinky
turned angrily on his heel.

"'Ave a bit o' common, an' don't make a 'oly show  of yerself 'cause
yer lost a dollar," she whispered in disgust.

She pulled him to a seat, and the party sat down to wait their turn.
Then the dealer scooped the frozen delicacy out of the can, and
plastered it into the glasses as if it were mortar.  And they swallowed
the icy mixture in silence, allowing it to melt on the tongue to
extract the flavour before swallowing.  All but Stinky, who held his
glass as if it belonged to someone else, disdaining to touch it.
Chook's gorge rose at the sight.

"Don't eat it, if it chokes yer," he cried.

With an oath Stinky threw the glass on the ground, where it broke with
a noisy crash that jerked every head in their direction as if pulled by
strings.

"I can pay fer wot I eat," he cried.  "Come on, Liz."

The others had sprung to their feet, astonished at this prodigal waste
of a delicacy fit for kings.  Chook stood for a moment, glowering with
rage, and then ran at his enemy; but Pinkey jumped between them.

"You do!--you do!" she cried, pushing him away with the desperate
valour of a hen defending her chickens.

"Orl right, not till next time," said Chook, smiling grimly.

She pulled Stinky by the arm, and they disappeared in the crowd.

"It's all right, missis; I'll pay fer the glass," said Chook to the
dealer, who began to jabber excitedly in Italian.  The woman began to
scrape the pieces of broken glass together, and the sight reminded
Chook of the insult.  His face darkened.

"Cum on, blokes, an' see a bit o' fun," he cried with a mirthless grin
that showed he was dangerously excited.  The three larrikins caught up
with Stinky and the girl as they were crossing into Belmore Park.
Stinky was explaining to some sympathizers the events that had led up
to the quarrel.

"Wot would yous do if a bloke tried to sneak yer moll?" he inquired in
an injured tone.

"Break 'is bleedin' neck," said Chook as he stepped up.

"When I want yer advice, I'll ask fer it," cried Stinky.

"Yer'll git it now without askin'," said Chook.  "Don't open yer mouth
so wide, or yer'll ketch cold."

"I don't want ter talk ter anybody as 'awks rotten cabbages through the
streets," cried Stinky.

"The cabbages don't stink worse than some people I've met," Chook
replied.

Stinky, who was very touchy on the score of the vile smell of his
trade, boiled over.

"Never mind my trade," he shouted, "I'm as good a man as yous."

"Garn, that's only a rumour!  I wouldn't let it git about," sneered
Chook.

The smouldering hate of months burst suddenly into flame, and the two
men rushed at each other.  The others tried to separate them.

"Don't be a fool."

"Yer'll only git lumbered."

"'Ere's the traps." But the two enemies, with a sudden twist, broke
away from their advisers, and threw off their hats and coats.

And as suddenly, the others formed a ring round the two antagonists,
who faced each other with the savage intensity of gamecocks, with no
thought but to maim and kill the enemy in front of them.

A crowd gathered, and Pinkey was pushed to the outside of the ring,
where she could only judge the progress of the fight by the cries of
the onlookers.

"Use yer left, Chook."

"Wot price that?"

"Time!"

"Wait fer 'is rush, an' use yer right."

"Foller 'im up, Chook."

"Oh, dry up!  I tell yer 'e slipped."

"Not in the same class, I tell yer."

"Mix it, Chook--mix it.  Yer've got 'im beat."

The last remark was true, for Stinky, in spite of his superior weight
and height, was no match for Chook, the cock of Cardigan Street.  It
was the fifth round, and Chook was waiting for an opening to finish his
man before the police came up, when a surprising thing happened.  As
Stinky retreated in exhaustion before the fists that rattled on his
face like drumsticks, his hand struck his enemy's lower jaw by chance,
and the next minute he was amazed to see Chook drop to the ground as if
shot.  And he stared with open mouth at his opponent, wondering why he
didn't move.

"Gawd, 'e's stiffened 'im!"

"I 'eard 'is neck crack!"

Stinky stood motionless, his wits scattered by this sudden change--the
stillness of his enemy, who a moment ago was beating him down with
murderous fists.

"'Ere's the johns," cried someone.

"Come on, Liz," cried Stinky, and turned to run.

"Cum with yous, yer great 'ulkin', stinkin' coward," cried Pinkey, her
face crimson with passion, "yer'll be lucky if y'ain't hung fer murder."

Stinky listened in amazement.  Here was another change that he was too
dazed to understand, and, hastily grabbing his coat, he ran.

Pinkey ran to Chook's prostrate body, and listened.  "I can 'ear 'im
breathin'," she cried.

The others listened, and the breathing grew louder, a curious, snoring
sound.

"Gorblimey!  A knock-out!"

"'E'll be right in a few minutes."

It was true.  Stinky, with a haphazard blow, had given Chook the
dreaded knock-out, a jolt beside the chin that, in the expressive
phrase, "sent him to sleep".

But now the police came up, glad of this chance to show their authority
and order the people about.  The crowd melted.

Chook's mates had pulled him into a sitting position, when, to Pinkey's
delight, he opened his eyes and spat out a mouthful of blood.

"W'ere the 'ell am I?" he muttered, like a man awaking from a dream.

"What's this?  You've been fighting," said the policeman.

"Me?  No fear," growled Chook.  "I was walkin' along, quiet as a lamb,
when a bloke come up an' landed me on the jaw."

"Well, who was he?" asked the policeman.

"I dunno.  I never set eyes on 'im before," said Chook, lying without
hesitation to their common enemy, the police.

The policeman looked hard at him, and then cried roughly,

"Get out of this, or I'll lock you up."

Chook's mates helped him to his feet, and he staggered away like a
drunken man.  Suddenly he became aware that someone was crying softly
near him, and, turning his head, found that it was Pinkey, who was
holding his arm and guiding his steps.  He wrenched his arm free with
an oath, remembering that she was the cause of his fight and defeat.
"Wot the 'ell are yous doin' 'ere?  Go an' tell yer bloke I nearly got
lumbered."

"I ain't got no bloke," sobbed Pinkey.

"Wotcher mean?" cried Chook.

"I don't run after people I don't want," said Pinkey, smiling through
her tears.

"Fair dinkum?" cried Chook.

Pinkey nodded her head, with its crown of hair that glittered like
bronze.

Chook stopped to think.

"I'm orl right," he said to Waxy and Joe; "I'll ketch up with yer in a
minit."  They understood and walked on.

He stood and stared at Pinkey with a scowl that softened imperceptibly
into a smile, and then a passionate flame leapt into his eyes.

"Cum 'ere," he said; and Pinkey obeyed him like a child.

He looked at her with a gloating fondness in his eyes, and then caught
her in his arms and kissed her with his bleeding lips.

"Ugh, I'm all over blood!" cried the girl with a shuddering laugh, as
she wiped her lips with her handkerchief.




CHAPTER 10

JONAH DECLARES WAR


As it promised to be a slack week, Paasch had decided to dress the
window himself, as he felt that the goods were not displayed to their
proper advantage.  This was a perquisite of Jonah's, for which he was
paid eighteenpence extra once a fortnight; but Jonah had deserted
him--a fact which he discovered by finding that Jonah's tools, his only
property, were missing.

So he had spent a busy morning in renovating his entire stock with
double coats of Peerless Gloss, the stock that the whole neighbourhood
knew by sight--the watertight bluchers with soles an inch thick that a
woolwasher from Botany had ordered and left on his hands; the pair of
kangaroo tops that Pat Riley had ordered the week he was pinched for
manslaughter; the pair of flash kid lace-ups, high in the leg, that
Katey Brown had thrown at his head because they wouldn't meet round her
thick calves; and half a dozen pairs of misfits into which half the
neighbourhood had tried to coax their feet because they were dirt cheap.

But the pride of the collection was a monstrous abortion of a boot,
made for a clubfoot, with a sole and heel six inches deep, that had
cost Paasch weeks of endless contrivance, and had only one fault--it
was as heavy as lead and unwearable.  But Paasch clung to it with the
affection of a mother for her deformed offspring, and gave it the pride
of place in the window.  And daily the urchins flattened their noses
against the panes, fascinated by this monster of a boot, to see it
again in dreams on the feet of horrid giants.  This melancholy
collection was flanked by odd bottles of polish and blacking, and cards
of bootlaces of such unusual strength that elephants were shown vainly
trying to break them.

The old man paused in his labours to admire the effect of his new
arrangement, and suddenly noticed a group of children gathered about a
man painting a sign on the window opposite.  Paasch stared; but the
words were a blur to his short sight, and he went inside to look for
his spectacles, which he had pushed up on his forehead in order to
dress the window.  By the time he had looked everywhere without finding
them, the painter had finished the lettering, and was outlining the
figure of something on the window with rapid strokes.

Paasch itched with impatience.  He would have crossed the street to
look, but he made it a rule never to leave the shop, even for a minute,
lest someone should steal the contents in his absence.  As he fidgeted
with impatience, it occurred to him to ask a small boy, who was
passing, what was being painted on the window.

"Why, a boot of course," replied the child.

Paasch's amazement was so great that, forgetting the caution of a
lifetime, he walked across until the words came into range.  What he
saw brought him to a standstill in the middle of Botany Road, heedless
of the traffic, for the blur of words had resolved themselves into:

  JOSEPH JONES, BOOTMAKER.
  Repairs neatly executed.

And, underneath, the pattern of a shoe, which the painter was finishing
with rapid strokes.

So, thought Paasch, another had come to share the trade and take the
bread out of his mouth, and he choked with the egotistical dread of the
shopkeeper at another rival in the struggle for existence.  Who could
this be? he thought, with the uneasy fear of a man threatened with
danger. For the moment he had forgotten Jonah's real name, and he
looked into the shop to size up his adversary with the angry curiosity
of a soldier facing the enemy.  Then, through the open door, he spied
the familiar figure of the hunchback moving about the shop and placing
things in order.  He swallowed hastily, with the choking sensation of a
parent whose child has at last revolted, for his rival was the
misshapen boy that he had taken off the streets, and clothed and fed
for years.  Jonah came to the door for a moment, and, catching sight of
the old man, stared at him fixedly without a sign of recognition.

And suddenly, with a contraction at his heart, a fear and dread of
Jonah swept through Paasch, the vague, primeval distrust and suspicion
of the deformed that lurks in the normal man, a survival of the ancient
hostility that in olden times consigned them to the stake as servants
of the Evil One.

He forgot where he was till the warning snort of a steam tram made him
jump aside and miss the wheels of a bus from the opposite direction by
the skin of his teeth.

And the whole street smiled at the sight of the bewildered old man,
with his silvery hair and leather apron, standing in the middle of the
Road to stare at a dingy shop opposite.

Paasch crossed the street and entered his door again with the air of a
man who has been to a funeral.  He had never made any friends, but, in
his gruff, reserved way, he liked Jonah.  He had taught him his trade,
and here, with a sudden sinking in his heart, he remembered that the
pupil had easily surpassed the master in dexterity.  Then another fear
assailed him.  How would he get through his work? for most of it had
passed through Jonah's nimble fingers.  Ah well, it was no matter!  He
was a lonely old man with nothing but his fiddle to bring back the
memories of the Fatherland.

The week ran to an end, and found Jonah out of pocket.  He had planted
himself like a footpad at the door of his old master to rob him of his
trade and living; and day by day he counted the customers passing in
and out of the old shop, but none came his way.  As he stared across
the street at his rival's shop, his face changed; it was like a hawk's,
threatening and predatory, indifferent to the agony of the downy breast
and fluttering wings that it is about to strike.

It maddened him to see the stream of people pass his shop with
indifference, as if it were none of their business whether he lived or
starved.  The memory of his boyish days returned to him, when every
man's hand was against him, and he took food and shelter with the craft
of an old soldier in hostile country.  Even the shop which he had
furnished and laid out with such loving care, seemed a cunning trap to
devour his precious sovereigns week by week.

True, he had drawn some custom, but it was of the worst sort--that of
the unprincipled rogues who fatten upon tradesmen till the back of
their credit is broken, and then transfer their sinister custom to
another. Jonah recognized them with a grim smile, but he had taken
their work, glad of something to do, although he would never see the
colour of their money.

Meanwhile the weeks ran into a month, and Jonah had not paid expenses.
He could hold out for three months according to his calculation, but he
saw the end rapidly approaching, when he must retire covered with
ignominious defeat.  He would have thrown up the sponge there and then,
but for the thought of the straight-limbed child in Cardigan Street,
for whom he wanted money--money to feed and clothe him for the world to
admire.

One Saturday night, weary of waiting for the custom that never came, he
closed the shop, and joined Ada, who was waiting on the footpath. They
sauntered along, Ada stopping every minute to look into the shop
windows, while Jonah, gloomy and taciturn, turned his back on the
lighted windows with impatience.  Presently Ada gave a cry of delight
before the draper's.

"I say, Joe, that bonnet would suit the kid all to pieces.  An' look at
the price!  Only last week they was seven an' a kick."

Jonah turned and looked at the window.  The bonnet, fluffy and absurd,
was marked with a ticket bearing an enormous figure 4 in red ink, and
beside it, faintly marked in pencil, the number 11.

"W'y don't yer say five bob, an' be done with it?" said Jonah.

"But it ain't five bob; it's only four an' eleven," insisted Ada,
annoyed at his stupidity.

"An' I suppose it 'ud be dear at five bob?" sneered Jonah.

"Any fool could tell yer that," snapped Ada.

Jonah included the whole feminine world in a shrug of the shoulders,
and turned impatiently on his heel.  But Ada was not to be torn away.
She ran her eye over the stock, marvelling at the cheapness of
everything. Jonah, finding nothing better to do, lit a cigarette, and
turned a contemptuous eye on the bales of calico, cheap prints, and
flimsy lace displayed.  Presently he began to study the tickets with
extraordinary interest.  They were all alike.  The shillings in
gigantic figures of red or black, and across the dividing line
elevenpence three-farthings pencilled in strokes as modest as the shy
violet.  When Jonah reached Cardigan Street, he was preoccupied and
silent, and sat on the veranda, smoking in the dark, long after Ada and
her mother had gone to bed.

About one o'clock Mrs Yabsley, who was peacefully ironing shirts in her
sleep, was awakened by a loud hammering on the door.  She woke up, and
instantly recognized what had happened.  Ada had left the candle
burning and had set the house on fire, as her mother had daily
predicted for the last ten years.  Then the hammering ceased.

"Are yez awake, Mum?" cried Jonah's voice.

"No," said Mrs Yabsley firmly.  "'Ow did it 'appen?"

"'Appen wot?" cried Jonah roughly.

"'Ow did the 'ouse ketch fire?" said Mrs Yabsley, listening for the
crackling.

"The 'ouse ain't a-fire, an' ye're talkin' in yer sleep."

"Wot!" cried Mrs Yabsley, furiously, "yer wake me up out o' me sleep to
tell me the 'ouse ain't a-fire.  I'll land yer on the 'ead wi' me
slipper, if yer don't go to bed."

"I say, Mum," entreated Jonah, "will yer gimme five quid on Monday, an
ask no questions?"

Mrs Yabsley's only answer was a snore.

But a week later the morning procession that trudged along Botany Road
towards the city was astonished at the sight of a small shop, covered
with huge calico signs displaying in staring red letters on a white
ground the legend:

  WHILE U WAIT.
  Boots and Shoes Soled and Heeled.
  GENTS, 2/11; LADIES, 1/11; CHILDS, 1/6.

The huge red letters, thrown out like a defiance and a challenge,
caused a sensation in the Road.  The pedestrians stopped to read the
signs, looked curiously at the shop, and went on their way.  The
passengers in the trams and buses craned their necks, anxious to read
the gigantic advertisement before they were carried out of sight.  A
group of urchins, stationed at the door, distributed handbills to the
curious, containing the same announcement in bold type.

Across the street hung Paasch's dingy sign from which the paint was
peeling:

  Repairs neatly executed
  GENTS, 3/6; LADIES, 2/6; CHILDS, 1/9

--the old prices sanctioned by usage, unchangeable and immovable as the
laws of nature to Paasch and the trade on Botany Road.

The shop itself was transformed.  On one side were half a dozen new
chairs standing in a row on a strip of bright red carpet.  Gay festoons
of coloured tissue paper, the work of Mrs Yabsley's hands, stretched in
ropes across the ceiling.  The window had been cleared and at a bench
facing the street Jonah and an assistant pegged and hammered as if for
dear life. Another, who bore a curious likeness to Chook, with his back
to the street and a last on his knees, hammered with enthusiasm.  A
tremendous heap of old boots, waiting to be repaired, was thrown
carelessly in front of the workers, who seemed too busy to notice the
sensation they were creating.

The excitement increased when a customer, Waxy Collins by name, entered
the shop, and, taking off his boots, sat down while they were repaired,
reading the morning paper as coolly as if he were taking his turn at
the barber's.  The thing spread like the news of a murder, and through
the day a group of idlers gathered, watching with intense relish the
rapid movements of the workmen.  Jonah had declared war.

Six weeks after he had opened the shop, Jonah found twelve of Mrs
Yabsley's sovereigns between him and ignominious defeat.  Then the
tickets in the draper's window had given him an idea, and, like a
general who throws his last battalion at the enemy, he had resolved to
stake the remaining coins on the hazard.  The calico signs, then a
novelty, the fittings of the shop, and the wages for a skilful
assistant, had swallowed six of his precious twelve pounds.  With the
remaining six he hoped to hold out for a fortnight.  Then, unless the
tide turned, he would throw up the sponge.  Chook, amazed and delighted
with the idea, had volunteered to disguise himself as a snob, and help
to give the shop a busy look; and Waxy Collins jumped at the chance of
getting his boots mended for the bare trouble of walking in and
pretending to read the newspaper.

The other shopkeepers were staggered.  They stared in helpless anger at
the small shop, which had suddenly become the most important in their
ken. Already they saw their families brought to the gutter by this
hunchback ruffian, who hit them below the belt in the most
ungentlemanly fashion in preference to starving.  But the simple
manoeuvre of cutting down the prices of his rivals was only a taste of
the unerring instinct for business that was later to make him as much
feared as respected in the trade.  By a single stroke he had shown his
ability to play on the weakness as well as the needs of the public,
coupled with a pitiless disregard for other interests than his own,
which constitutes business talent.

The public looked on, surprised and curious, drawn by the novelty of
the idea and the amazing prices, but hesitating like an animal that
fears a tempting bait.  The ceaseless activity of the shop reassured
them.  One by one the customers arrived.  Numbers bred numbers, and in
a week a rush had set in.  It became the fashion on the Road to loll in
the shop, carelessly reading the papers for all the world to see, while
your boots were being mended.  On Saturday for the first time Jonah
turned a profit, and the battle was won.

Among the later arrivals Jonah noticed with satisfaction some of
Paasch's best customers, and every week, with an apologetic smile,
another handed in his boots for repair.  Soon there was little for
Paasch to do but stand at his door, staring with frightened,
short-sighted eyes across the Road at the octopus that was slowly
squeezing the life out of his shop.  But he obstinately refused to
lower his prices, though his customers carried the work from his
counter across the street.  It seemed to him that the prices were
something fixed by natural laws, like the return of the seasons or the
multiplication table.

"I haf always charge tree an' six for men's, an' it cannot be done
cheaper without taking de bread out of mine mouth," he repeated
obstinately.

In three months Jonah hired another workman, and the landlord came down
to see if the shop could be enlarged to meet Jonah's requirements.
Then a traveller called with an armful of samples.  He was travelling
for his brother, he explained, who had a small factory.  Jonah looked
longingly, and confessed that he wanted to stock his shop, but had no
money to buy. Then the traveller smiled, and explained to Jonah, alert
and attentive, the credit system by which his firm would deliver fifty
pounds' worth of boots at three months.  Jonah was quick to learn, but
cautious.

"D'ye mean yer'd gimme the boots, an' not want the money for three
months?"

The traveller explained that was the usual practice.

"An' can I sell 'em at any price I like?"

The man said he could give them away if he chose.  Jonah spent a pound
on brass rods and glass stands, and sold the lot in a month at sixpence
a pair profit.  His next order ran into a hundred pounds, and Jonah had
established a cash retail trade.  Meanwhile, he worked in a way to
stagger the busy bee.  Morning and night the sound of his hammer never
ceased, except the three nights a week he spent at a night school,
where he discovered a remarkable talent for mental arithmetic and
figures.  Jonah the hunchback had found his vocation.

And in the still night, when he stopped to light a cigarette, Jonah
could hear the mournful wail of a violin in Paasch's bedroom across the
street. In his distress the old man had turned to his beloved
instrument as one turns to an old friend.  But now the tunes were never
merry, only scraps and fragments of songs of love and despair, the
melancholy folk-songs of his native land, long since forgotten, and now
returning to his memory as its hold on the present grew feebler.




CHAPTER 11

THE COURTING OF PINKEY


It was Monday morning, and, according to their habit, the Partridges
were moving.  Every stick of their furniture was piled on the van, and
Pinkey, who was carrying the kerosene lamp for fear of breakage,
watched the load anxiously as the cart lurched over a rut.  A cracked
mirror, swinging loosely in its frame, followed every movement of the
cart, one minute reflecting Pinkey's red hair and dingy skirt, the next
swinging vacantly to the sky.

The cart stopped outside a small weatherboard cottage, and the vanman
backed the wheels against the kerbstone, cracking his whip and swearing
at the horse, which remained calm and obstinate, refusing to move
except of its own accord.  The noise brought the neighbours to their
doors. And they stood with prying eyes, ready to judge the social
standing of the newcomers from their furniture.

It was the old battered furniture of a poor family, dragged from the
friendly shelter of dark corners into the naked light of day, the back,
white and rough as a packing-case, betraying the front, varnished and
stained to imitate walnut and cedar.  Every scratch and stain showed
plainly on the tables and chairs fastened to their companions in
misery, odd, nameless contrivances made of boxes and cretonne, that
took the place of the sofas, wardrobes, and toilet-tables of the rich.
Every mark and every dint was noted with satisfaction by the furtive
eyes.  The new arrivals had nothing to boast about.

Mrs Partridge, who collected gossip and scandal as some people collect
stamps, generally tired of a neighbourhood in three months, after she
had learned the principal facts--how much of the Brown's money went in
drink, how much the Joneses owed at the corner shop, and who was really
the father of the child that the Smiths treated as a poor relation.
When she had sucked the neighbourhood dry like an orange, she took a
house in another street, and Pinkey lost a day at the factory to move
the furniture.

Pinkey's father was a silent, characterless man, taking the lead from
his wife with admirable docility, and asking nothing from fortune but
regular work and time to read the newspaper.  He had worked for the
same firm since he was a boy, disliking change; but since his second
marriage he had been dragged from one house to another.  Sometimes he
went home to the wrong place, forgetting that they had moved.  Every
week he planned another short cut to Grimshaw's works, which landed him
there half an hour late.

Her mother had died of consumption when Pinkey was eleven, and two
years later her father had married his housekeeper.  She proved to be a
shiftless slattern, never dressed, never tidy, and selfish to the core
under the cloak of a good-natured smile.  She was always resting from
the fatigue of imaginary labours, and her house was a pigsty.  Nothing
was in its place, and nothing could be found when it was wanted.  This,
she always explained with a placid smile, was owing to the fact that
they were busy looking for a house where they could settle down.

The burden of moving fell on Pinkey, for her father had never lost a
day at Grimshaw's in his life; and after Mrs Partridge had hindered for
half an hour by getting in the way and mislaying everything, Pinkey
usually begged her in desperation to go and wait for the furniture in
the new house.

Meanwhile, lower down the street, Chook was slowly working his way from
house to house, hawking a load of vegetables.  In the distance he
remarked the load of furniture, and resolved to call before a rival
could step in and get their custom.  As he praised the quality of the
peas to a customer, he found time to observe that the unloading went on
very slowly. The vanman stood on the cart and slid the articles on to
the shoulders of a girl, who staggered across the pavement under a load
twice her size. It looked like an ant carrying a beetle.  Five minutes
later Chook stood at the door and rapped with his knuckles.

"Any vegetables to-day, lydy?" he inquired, in his nasal, professional
sing-song.

The answer to his question was Pinkey, dishevelled, sweating in beads,
covered with dust, her sleeves tucked up to the elbows, showing two
arms as thick  as pipe-stems.  She flushed pink under the sweat and
grime, feeling for her apron to wipe her face.  They had not seen each
other since the fight, for in a sudden revulsion of feeling Pinkey had
decided that Chook was too handy with his fists to make a desirable
bloke, and a change of address on the following Monday had enabled her
to give him the slip easily.  And after waiting at street corners till
he was tired, Chook had returned to his old love, the two-up school.
Pinkey broke the silence with a question that was furthest from her
thoughts.

"'Ow are yez sellin' yer peas?"

Chook dropped his basket and roared with laughter.

"If yer only come ter poke borak, yer better go," cried Pinkey, with an
angry flush.

Chook sobered instantly.

"No 'arm meant," he said, quite humbly, "but yer gimme the knock-out
every time I see yer.  But wot are yez doin'?" he asked.

"We're movin'," said Pinkey, with an important air.

"Oh, are yez?" said Chook, looking round with interest.  "Yous an' old
Jimmy there?"  He nodded familiarly to the vanman, who was filling his
pipe.  "Well, yer must excuse me, but I'm on in this act."

"Wotcher mean?" said Pinkey, looking innocent, but she flushed with
pleasure.

"Nuthin'," said Chook, seizing the leg of a table; "but wait till I put
the nosebag on the moke."

"Whose cart is it?" inquired Pinkey.

"Jack Ryan's," answered Chook; "'e's bin shickered since last
We'n'sday, an' I'm takin' it round fer 'is missis an' the kids."

Mrs Partridge received Chook very graciously when she learned that he
was a friend of Pinkey's and had offered to help in passing.  She had
been reading a penny novelette under great difficulties, and furtively
eating some slices of bread-and-butter which she had thoughtfully put
in her pocket.  But now she perked up under the eyes of this vigorous
young man, and even attempted to help by carrying small objects round
the room and then putting them back where she found them.  In an hour
the van was empty, and Jimmy was told to call next week for his money.
It was well into the afternoon when Chook resumed his hawking with the
cart and then only because Pinkey resolutely pushed him out of the door.

Chook's previous love-affairs had all been conducted in the open air.
Following the law of Cardigan Street, he met the girl at the street
corner and spent the night in the park or the dance-room.  Rarely, if
she forgot the appointment, he would saunter past the house, and
whistle till she came out.  What passed within the house was no concern
of his.  Parents were his natural enemies, who regarded him with the
eyes of a butcher watching a hungry dog.  But his affair with Pinkey
had been full of surprises, and this was not the least, that chance had
given him an informal introduction to Pinkey's stepmother and the
furniture.

He had called again with vegetables, and when he adroitly remarked that
no one would have taken Mrs Partridge to be old enough to be the mother
of Pinkey, she had spent a delightful hour leaning against the doorpost
telling him how she came to marry Partridge, and the incredible number
of offers she had refused in her time.  Charmed with his wit and
sympathy, she forgot what she was saying, and invited him to tea on the
following Sunday.  Chook was staggered.  He knew this was the custom of
the law-abiding, who nodded to the police and went to church on Sunday.
But here was the fox receiving a pressing invitation from the lamb.  He
decided to talk the matter over with Pinkey.  But when he told her of
the invitation, she flushed crimson.

"She asked yous to tea, did she?  The old devil!"

"W'y," said Chook mortified.

"W'y?  'Cause she knows father 'ud kill yer, if yer put yer nose inside
the door."

"Oh! would 'e?" cried Chook, bristling.

"My word, yes!  A bloke once came after Lil, an' 'e run 'im out so
quick 'e forgot 'is 'at, an' waited at the corner till I brought it."

"Well, 'e won't bustle me," cried Chook.

"But y'ain't goin'?" said Pinkey, anxiously.

"My oath, I am!" cried Chook.  "I'm doin' the square thing this time,
don't yous fergit, an' no old finger's goin' ter bustle me, even if
'e's your father."

"Yous stop at 'ome while yer lucky," said Pinkey.  "Ever since Lil
cleared out wi' Marsden, 'e swears 'e'll knife the first bloke that
comes after me."

"Ye're only kiddin'," said Chook, cheerfully; "an' wot'll 'e do ter
yous?"

"Me!  'E niver rouses on me.  W'en 'e gits shirty, I just laugh, an' 'e
can't keep it up."

"Right-oh!" said Chook.  "Look out fer a song an' dance nex' Sunday."

About five o'clock on the following Sunday afternoon, Chook,
beautifully attired in the larrikin fashion, sauntered up to the door
and tried the knocker.  It was too stiff to move, and he used his
knuckles.  Then he heard footsteps and a rapid whispering, and Pinkey,
white with anxiety, opened the door.  Mrs Partridge, half dressed,
slipped into the bedroom and called out in a loud voice:

"Good afternoon, Mr Fowles!  'Ave yer come to take Elizabeth for a
walk?"

Ignoring Pinkey's whispered advice, he pushed in and looked round.  He
was in the parlour, and a large china dog welcomed him with a fixed
grin.

"W'ere's the old bloke?" muttered Chook.

Pinkey pointed to the dining-room, and Chook walked briskly in.  He
found Partridge in his arm-chair, scowling at him over the newspaper.

"Might I ask 'oo you are?" he growled.

"Me name's Fowles--Arthur Fowles," replied Chook, picking a seat near
the door and smoothing a crease in his hat.

"Ah! that's all I wanted to know," growled Partridge.  "Now yer can go."

"Me?  No fear!" cried Chook, affecting surprise.  "Yer missis gave me
an invite ter tea, an' 'ere I am.  Besides, I ain't such a stranger as
I look; I 'elped move yer furniture in."

"An' yer shove yer way into my 'ouse on the strength of wot a pack o'
silly women said ter yer?"

"I did," admitted Chook.

"Now you take my advice, an' git out before I break every bone in yer
body."

Chook stared at him with an unnatural stolidity for fear he should
spoil everything by grinning.

"Well, wot are yer starin' at?" inquired Partridge, with irritation.

"I was wonderin' 'ow yer'd look on the end of a rope," replied Chook,
quietly.

"Me on the end of a rope?" cried Partridge in amazement.

"Yes.  They said yous 'ud stiffen me if I cum in, an' 'ere I am."

"An' yet you 'ad the cheek?"

"Yes," said Chook; "I niver take no notice o' wot women say."

Partridge glared at him as if meditating a spring, and then, with a
rapid jerk, turned his back on Chook and buried his nose in the
newspaper. Pinkey and her stepmother, who were listening to this
dialogue at the door, ready for flight at the first sound of breaking
glass or splintered wood, now ventured to step into the room.  Chook,
secure of victory, criticized the weather, but Partridge remained
silent as a graven image. Mrs Partridge set the table for tea with
nervous haste.

"Tea's ready, William," she cried at last.

William took his place, and, without lifting his eyes, began to serve
the meat.  Mrs Partridge had made a special effort.  She had bought a
pig's cheek, some German sausage, and a dozen scones at seven for
threepence. This was flanked by bread-and-butter, and a newly opened
tin of jam with the jagged lid of the tin standing upright.  She
thought, with pride, that the young man would see he was in a house
where no expense was spared.  She requested Chook to sit next to
Pinkey, and talked with feverish haste.

"Which do yer like, Mr Fowles?  Lean or fat?  The fat sometimes melts
in yer mouth.  Give 'im that bit yer cut for me, William."

"If 'e don't like it, 'e can leave it," growled Partridge.

"Now, that'll do, William.  I always said yer bark was worse than yer
bite.  You'll be all right w'en yer've 'ad yer beer.  'E's got the
temper of an angel w'en 'e's 'ad 'is beer," she explained to Chook, as
if her husband were out of hearing.

Partridge sat with his eyes fixed on his plate with the face of a sulky
schoolboy.  His long features reminded Chook of a horse he had once
driven.  When he had finished eating, he pulled his chair back and
buried his silly, obstinate face in the newspaper.  He had evidently
determined to ignore Chook's existence.  Mrs Partridge broke the
silence by describing his character to the visitor as if he were a
naughty child.

"William always sulks w'en 'e can't get 'is own way.  Not another word
will we 'ear from 'im tonight.  'E knows 'e ought to be civil to people
as eat at 'is own table, an' that only makes 'im worse.  But for all
'is sulks, 'e's got the temper of an angel w'en 'e's 'ad 'is beer.
I've met all sorts--them as smashes the furniture for spite, an' them
as bashes their wives 'cause it's cheaper, but gimme William every
time."

Partridge took no notice, except to bury his nose deeper in the paper.
He had reached the advertisements, and a careful study of these would
carry him safely to bed.  After tea, Pinkey set to work and washed up
the dishes, while Mrs Partridge entertained the guest.  Chook took out
his cigarettes, and asked if Mr Partridge objected to smoke.  There was
no answer.

"You must speak louder, Mr Fowles," said Mrs Partridge.  "William's
'earing ain't wot it used to be."

William resented this remark by twisting his chair farther away and
emitting a grunt.

Pinkey, conscious of Chook's eyes, was bustling in and out with the
airs of a busy housewife, her arms, thin as a broomstick, bared to the
elbow. His other love-affairs had belonged to the open-air, with the
street for a stage and the park for scenery, and this domestic setting
struck Chook as a novelty.  Pinkey, then, was not merely a plaything
for an hour, but a woman of serious uses, like the old mother who
suckled him and would hear no ill word of him.  And as he watched with
greedy eyes the animal died within him, and a sweeter emotion than he
had ever known filled his ignorant, passionate heart For the first time
in his life he understood why men gave up their pals and the freedom of
the streets for a woman. Mrs Partridge saw the look in his eyes, and
wished she were twenty years younger.  When Pinkey got her hat and
proposed a walk, Chook, softened by his novel emotions, called out
"Good night, boss!"

For a wonder, Partridge looked up from his paper and grunted "Night!"

"There now," cried Mrs Partridge, delighted, "William wouldn't say that
to everybody, would you, William?  Call again any time you like, an'
'e'll be in a better temper."

When they reached the park, they sat on a seat facing the asphalt path.
Near them was another pair, the donah, with a hat like a tea-tray,
nursing her bloke's head in her lap as he lay full length along the
seat.  And they exchanged caresses with a royal indifference to the
people who were sauntering along the paths.  But, without knowing why,
Chook and Pinkey sat as far apart as if they had freshly studied a book
on etiquette.  For to Chook this frail girl with the bronze hair and
shabby clothes was no longer a mere donah, but a laborious housewife
and a potential mother of children; and to Pinkey this was a new Chook,
who kept his hands to himself, and looked at her with eyes that made
her forget she was a poor factory girl.

Chook looked idly at the stars, remote and lofty, strewn like sand
across the sky, and wondered at one that gleamed and glowed as he
watched. A song of the music-hall about eyes and stars came into his
head.  He looked steadily into Pinkey's eyes, darkened by the broad
brim of her hat, and could see no resemblance, for he was no poet.  And
as he looked, he forgot the stars in an intense desire to know the
intimate details of her life--the mechanical, monotonous habits that
fill the day from morning till night, and yet are too trivial to tell.
He asked some questions about Packard's factory where she worked, and
Pinkey's tongue ran on wheels when she found a sympathetic listener.
Apart from the boot factory, the great events of her life had been the
death of her mother, her father's second marriage, and the night of her
elder sister, Lil, who had gone to the bad.  She blamed her stepmother
for that.  Lil had acted like a fool, and Mrs Partridge, with her
insatiable greed for gossip, had gathered hints and rumours from the
four corners of Sydney, and Lil had bolted rather than argue it out
with her father.  That and the death of Pinkey's mother had soured his
temper, and his wits, never very powerful, had grown childish under the
blow.

"So don't yous go pokin' borak at 'im," she cried, flushing pink.
"'E's a good father to me, if she lets 'im alone.  But she's got 'im
under 'er thumb with 'er nasty tongue."

Chook thought Mrs Partridge was an agreeable woman.  Instantly Pinkey's
eyes blazed with anger.

"Is she?  You ought ter 'ear 'er talk.  She's got a tongue like a dog's
tail; it's always waggin'.  An' niver a good word for anybody.  I wish
she'd mind 'er own business, an' clean up the 'ouse.  W'en my mother
was alive, you could eat yer dinner off the floor, but Sarah's too
delicate for 'ousework.  She'd 'ave married the greengrocer, but she
was too delicate to wait in the shop.  We niver see a bit o' fresh meat
in the 'ouse, an' if yer say anythin' she bursts into tears, an' sez
somethin' nasty about Lil.  She makes believe she's got no more
appetite than a canary, but she lives on the pick of the 'am shop w'en
nobody's lookin'. Look 'ow fat she is.  W'en she married Dad, you could
'ear 'er bones rattle.  I wouldn't mind if she did the washin'.  But
she puts the things in soak on Monday, an' then on Saturday I 'ave ter
turn to an' do the lot, 'cause she's delicate.  I ain't delicate.  I'm
only skin an' bone."

Her face was flushed and eager; her eyes sparkled.  Chook remembered
the song about eyes and stars, and agreed with the words.  And as
suddenly the sparkle died out of her eyes, her mouth drooped, and the
colour left her face, pale as ivory in the faint gleam of the stars.

"Yous don't think any worse o' me 'cause Lil's crook, do yer?" she
asked piteously.

Chook swore a denial.

"P'raps yer think it runs in the family; but Lil 'ud 'a' gone straight
if she 'adn't been driven out o' the 'ouse by Sarah's nasty tongue."

Chook declared that Lil was spotless.

"No, she ain't," said Pinkey; "she's as bad as they make 'em now;
but...wot makes yer tail up after me?" she inquired suddenly.

Chook answered that she had sent him fair off his dot.

"Oh yes, that's wot yer said to Poll Corcoran, an' then went skitin'
that she'd do anythin' yer liked, if yer lifted yer finger.  I've 'eard
all about yous."

Chook swore that he would never harm a hair of her head.

"The worst 'arm is done without meanin' it," said Pinkey wisely, "an'
that's w'y I'm frightened of yer."

"Wotcher got ter be frightened o' me?" asked Chook, softly.

"I'm frightened o' yer...'cause I like yer," said Pinkey, bursting into
tears.

Mrs Partridge was disappointed in Chook.  He was too much taken up with
that red-headed cat, and he ate nothing when he came to tea on Sunday,
although she ransacked the ham-and-beef shop for dainties--black
pudding, ham-and-chicken sausage, and brawn set in a mould of
appetizing jelly. She flattered herself she knew her position as
hostess and made up for William's sulks by loading the table with her
favourite delicacies.  And Chook's healthy stomach recoiled in dismay
before these doubtful triumphs of the cookshop.  His mother had been a
cook before she married, and, as a shoemaker believes in nothing but
leather, she pinned her faith to good cooking.  The family might go
without clothes or boots, but they always had enough to eat.  Chook's
powerful frame, she asserted, was due entirely to careful nourishment
in his youth.  "Good meals keep people out of jail," was her favourite
remark.  Chook had learned this instead of the catechism, and the sight
of Pinkey's starved body stirred his anger.  What she wanted was proper
nourishment to cover her bones.

The next Sunday, while Pinkey was frying some odds and ends in the pan
to freshen them up for breakfast, Mrs Partridge, who was finishing a
novelette in bed, heard a determined knock on the door.  It was only
eight o'clock.  She called Pinkey, and  ran to the window in surprise.
It was Chook, blushing as nearly as his face would permit, and carrying
two plates wrapped in a towel.  He pushed through to the kitchen with
the remark "I'll just 'ot this up agin on the stove."

"But wot is it?" cried Pinkey, in astonishment.

Chook removed the upper plate, and showed a dish of sheep's brains,
fried with eggs and breadcrumbs--a thing to make the mouth water.

"Mother sent these; she thought yer might like somethin' tasty fer yer
breakfast," he muttered gruffly, in fear of ridicule.

Pinkey tried to laugh, but the tears welled into her eyes.

"Oh, Sarah will be pleased!" she cried.

"No, she won't," said Chook, grimly.  "Wot yer can't eat goes back fer
the fowls."

While Mrs Partridge was dressing, they quarrelled fiercely, because
Chook swore she must eat the lot.  Sarah ended the dispute by eating
half, but Chook watched jealously till Pinkey declared she could eat no
more.

The next Sunday it was a plate of fish fried in the Jewish fashion--a
revelation to Pinkey after the rancid fat of the fish shop--then a
prime cut off the roast for dinner, or the breast and wing of a fowl;
and he made Pinkey eat it in his presence, so that he could take the
plates home to wash.  One Sunday he was so late that Mrs Partridge fell
back on pig's cheek; but he arrived, with a suspicious swelling under
his eye.  He explained briefly that there had been an accident.  They
learned afterwards than an ill-advised wag in the street had asked him
if he were feeding Pinkey up for the show.  During the two rounds that
followed, Chook had accidentally stepped on the plates.

Whenever Ada met Pinkey, she wanted to know how things were
progressing; but Pinkey could turn like a hare from undesirable
questions.

"Are you an' 'im goin' to git spliced?" she inquired, for the hundredth
time.

"I dunno," said Pinkey, turning scarlet; "'e sez we are."




END OF PART I.




PART 2



THE SIGN OF THE "SILVER SHOE"




CHAPTER 12

THE SIGN OF THE "SILVER SHOE"


The suburban trains slid into the darkness of the tunnel at Cleveland
Street, and, as they emerged into daylight on the other side, paused
for a moment like intelligent animals before the spider's web of
shining rails that curved into the terminus, as if to choose the pair
that would carry them in safety to the platform.  It was in this pause
that the passengers on the left looked out with an upward jerk of the
head, and saw that the sun had found a new plaything in Regent Street.

It was the model of a shoe, fifteen feet long, the hugest thing within
sight, covered with silver leaf that glittered like metal in the
morning sun.  A gang of men had hoisted it into position last night by
the flare of naphtha lamps, and now it trod securely on air above the
new bootshop whose advertisement sprawled across half a page of the
morning paper.

In Regent Street a week of painting and hammering had prepared them for
surprises; two shops had been  knocked into one, with two plate-glass
windows framed in brass, and now the shop with its triumphant sign
caught the eye like a check suit or a red umbrella.  Every inch of the
walls was covered with lettering in silver leaf, and across the front
in huge characters ran the sign:

  JONAH'S SILVER SHOE EMPORIUM

Meanwhile, the shop was closed, the windows obscured by blinds; but the
children, attracted by the noise of hammering, flattened their noses
against the plate glass, trying to spy out the busy privacy within.
Evening fell, and the hammering ceased.  Then, precisely on the stroke
of seven, the electric lights flashed out, the curtains were withdrawn,
and the shop stood smiling like a coquette at her first ball.

Everything was new.  The fittings glistened with varnish, mirrors and
brass rods reflected the light at every angle, and the building was
packed from roof to floor with boots.  The shelves were loaded with
white cardboard boxes containing the better sort of boot.  But there
was not room enough on the shelves, and boots and shoes hung from the
ceiling like bunches of fruit; they clung to brass rods like swarming
bees.  The strong, peculiar odour of leather clogged the air.  The
shopmen stood about, whispering to one another or changing the position
of a pair of boots as they waited for the customers.

A crowd had gathered round the window on the left, which was fitted out
like a workshop.  On one  side a clicker was cutting uppers from the
skin; beside him a girl sat at a machine stitching the uppers together
at racing speed.  On the other side a man stood at a bench lasting the
uppers to the insoles, and then pegging for dear life; near him sat a
finisher, who shaved and blackened the rough edges, handing the
finished article to a boy, who gave it a coat of gloss and placed it in
the front of the window for inspection.  A placard invited the public
to watch the process of making Jonah's Famous Silver Shoes.  The people
crowded about as if it were a play, delighted with the novelty,
following the stages in the growth of a boot with the pleasure of a boy
examining the inside of a watch.

At eight o'clock another surprise was ready.  A brass band began to
play popular airs on the balcony, hung about with Chinese lanterns, and
a row of electric bulbs flashed out, marking the outline of the
wonderful silver shoe, glittering and gigantic in the white light.

The crowd looked up, and made bets on the length of the shoe, and
recalled the time, barely five years ago, when the same man--Jonah the
hunchback--had astonished Botany Road with his flaring signs in red and
white.  True, his shop was still on the Road, for Regent Street is but
the fag end of a long, dusty road where it saunters into town,
snobbishly conscious of larger buildings and higher rents.  Since then
his progress had been marked by removals, and each step had carried him
nearer to the great city. He had outgrown his shops as a boy outgrows
his trousers.

It was reported that everything turned to gold that he touched.  It was
certain that he had captured the trade of the Road, and this move meant
that he had fastened his teeth in the trade of the roaring city.  And
not so long ago people could remember when he was a common larrikin,
reputed leader of the Cardigan Street Push, and working for old Paasch,
whose shop was now empty, his business absorbed by Jonah with the ease
one swallows a lozenge.  And they say he began life as a street-arab,
selling papers and sleeping in the gutter.  Well, some people's luck
was marvellous!

The crowd became so dense that the police cleared a passage through it,
and the carts and buses slackened to a walk as they passed the shop,
where the electric lights glittered, the Chinese lanterns swung gaily
in the breeze, and the band struck noisily into the airs from a comic
opera.

Meanwhile the shop was crowded with customers, impatient to be served,
each carrying a coupon cut from the morning paper, which entitled the
holder to a pair of Jonah's Famous Silver Shoes at cost price.  And
near the door, in an interval of business, stood the proprietor, a
hunchback, his grey eyes glittering with excitement at seeing his dream
realized, the huge shop, spick and span as paint could make it, the
customers jostling one another as they passed in and out, and the coin
clinking merrily in the till.

Yes, they were quite right.  Everything that he touched turned to gold.
Outsiders confused his fortune with the luck of the man who draws the
first prize in a sweep, enriched without effort by a chance turn of
Fortune's wrist.  They were blind to the  unresting labour, the
ruthless devices that left his rivals gaping, and the fixed idea that
shaped everything to its needs.  In five years he had fought his way
down the Road, his line of march dotted with disabled rivals.

Old Paasch, the German, had been his first victim.  Bewildered and
protesting, he had succumbed to Jonah's novel methods of attack as a
savage goes down under the fire of machine-guns.  His shop was closed
years ago, and he lived in a stuffy room, smelling vilely of
tobacco-smoke, where he taught the violin to hazardous pupils for
little more than a crust.  He always spoke of Jonah with a vague terror
in his blue eyes, convinced that he had once employed Satan as an
errand-boy.

People were surprised to find that Jonah meant to live in the rooms
over the new shop, when he could well afford to take a private house in
the suburbs.  It was said he treated his wife like dirt; that they
lived like cat and dog; that he grudged her bare living and clothing.
Jonah set his lips grimly on a hint of these rumours.

Three years ago he had planted Ada in a house of her own, and had gone
home daily to rooms choked with dirt, for with years of ease she had
grown more slovenly.  Servants were a failure, for she made a friend of
them, and their families lived in luxury at her expense.  And when Ada
was left alone, the meals were never ready, the house was like a
pigsty, and she sat complacently amidst the dirt, reading penny
novelettes in a gaudy dressing-jacket, or entertaining her old pals
from the factory.

These would sit through an afternoon with envy in their hearts, and
cries of wonder on their lips at the sight of some useless and costly
article, which Ada, with the instinct of the parvenu, had bought to
dazzle their eyes.  For she remained on the level where she was born,
and the gaping admiration of her poorer friends was the only profit she
drew from Jonah's success.  If Jonah arrived without warning, they
tumbled over one another to get out unseen by the back door, but never
forgot to carry away some memento of their visit--a tin of salmon, a
canister of tea, a piece of bacon, a bottle whose label puzzled
them--for Ada bestowed gifts like Royalty, with the invariable formula
"Oh! take it; there's plenty more where that comes from."

But the worst was her neglect of Ray, now seven years old, and the
apple of Jonah's eye.  She certainly spent part of the morning in
dressing him up in his clothes, which were always new, for they were
discarded by Jonah when the creases wore off; but when this duty, which
she was afraid to neglect, was ended, she sent him out into the street
to play in the gutter.  His meals were the result of hazard, starving
one day, and over-eating the next.  And then, one day, some stains
which Ada had been unable to sponge out elicited a stammering tale of a
cart-wheel that had stopped three inches from the prostrate child.

This had finished Jonah, and with an oath he had told Ada to pack up,
and move into the rooms over the shop, when they could be got ready.
Ada made a scene, grumbled and sulked, but Jonah would take no more
risks. His son and his shop, he had fathered both, and they should be
brought together under his watchful eye, and Ada's parasites could
sponge elsewhere.

It had happened in time for him to have the living-rooms fitted up over
the shop, for the part which was required as a store-room left ample
space for a family of three.  Ada gave in with a sullen anger, refusing
to notice the splendours of the new establishment.  But she had a real
terror, besides her objection to being for ever under Jonah's sharp
eyes.

Born and bred in a cottage, she had a natural horror of staircases,
looking on them as dangerous contrivances on which people daily risked
their lives.  She climbed them slowly, feeling for safety with her
feet, and descended with her heart in her mouth.  The sight of others
tripping lightly up and down impressed her like a dangerous performance
on the tight-rope in a circus.  And the new rooms could only be reached
by two staircases, one at the far end of the shop, winding like a
corkscrew to the upper floor, and another, sickening to the eye,
dropping from the rear balcony in the open air to the kitchen and the
yard.

Mrs Yabsley continued to live in the old cottage in Cardigan Street.
Jonah made her an allowance, but she still worked at the laundry, not
for a living, as she carefully explained to every new customer, but for
the sake of exercise.  And she had obstinately refused to be pensioned
off.

"I've seen too many of them pensioners, creepin' an' coughin' along the
street, because they thought they was too old fer work, an' one fine
mornin' they fergit ter come down ter breakfust, an' the neighbours are
invited to the funeral.  An' but for that  they might 'ave lived fer
years, drawin' their money an' standin' in the way of younger men.  No
pensions fer me, thank yer!"

When Jonah had pointed out that she could not live alone in the
cottage, she had listened with a mysterious smile.  With Jonah's
allowance and her earnings, she was the rich woman, the lady chatelaine
of the street, and she chose a companion from the swarm of houseless
women that found a precarious footing in the houses of their
relations--women with raucous voices, whose husbands had grown tired of
life and fled; ladies who were vaguely supposed to be widows; comely
young women cast on a cold world with a pitiful tale and a handbag.
And she fed them till they were plump and vicious again, when they
invariably disappeared, taking everything of value they could lay hands
on.  When Jonah, exasperated by these petty thefts, begged her to come
and live with them, she shook her head, with a humorous twinkle in her
eyes.

"No, yer'd 'ave ter pull me up by the roots like that old tree if yer
took me out of this street.  I remember w'en 'arf this street was open
paddicks, an' now yer can't stick a pin between the 'ouses.  I was a
young gell then, an' a lot better lookin' than yer'd think.  Ada's
father thought a lot o' me, I tell yer.  That was afore 'e took ter
drink.  I was 'is first love, as the sayin' is, but beer was 'is
second.  'E was a good 'usbind ter me wot time 'e could spare from the
drink, an' I buried 'im out of this very 'ouse, w'en Ada could just
walk.  I often think life's a bloomin' fraud, Joe, w'ichever way yer
look at it.  W'en ye're young, it promises yer everythin' yer  want, if
yer only wait.  An' w'en ye're done waitin', yer've lost yer teeth an'
yer appetite, or forgot wot yer were waitin' for.  Yes, Joe, the street
an' me's old pals.  We've seen one another in sickness an' sorrer an'
joy an' jollification, an' it 'ud be a poor job ter part us now.
Funny, ain't it?  This street is more like a 'uman bein' ter me than
plenty I know.  Yer see, I can't read the paper, an' see 'oo's bin
married and murdered through the week, bein' no scholar, but I can read
Cardigan Street like a book.  An' I've found that wot 'appens in this
street 'appens everywhere else, if yer change the names an' addresses."

About a week after the triumphant opening of the Silver Shoe, Jonah was
running his eye down some price-lists, when he was disturbed by a loud
noise.  He looked round, and was surprised to see Miss Giltinan, head
of the ladies' department, her lips tight with anger, replacing a heap
of cardboard boxes with jerks of suppressed fury.

She was his best saleswoman, gathered in from the pavement a week after
she had been ejected from Packard's factory for cheeking the boss.  She
had spent a few weeks dusting shoes and tying up parcels, and then,
brushing the old hands aside, had taken her place as a born saleswoman.
Sharp as a needle, the customers were like clay in her hands.  She
recognized two classes of buyers--those who didn't know what they
wanted, and always, under her guidance, spent more than they intended,
and those who knew quite well what they wanted, the best quality at an
impossible price.  Both went away satisfied, for she took them into her
confidence, and, with covert glances for fear she should be overheard,
gave them her private opinion of the articles in a whisper.  And they
went away satisfied that they had saved money, and made a friend who
would always look after their interests.  But this morning she was
blazing.

"Save the pieces, Mary," said Jonah, "wot's the matter?"

"A woman in there's got me beat," replied the girl savagely--"says she
must 'ave Kling & Wessel's, an' we 'aven't got a pair in the place.
Not likely either, when the firm's gone bung; but I wasn't goin' to
tell 'er that.  Better come an' try 'er yourself, or she'll get away
with 'er money."

As Jonah entered, the troublesome customer looked up with an air of
great composure.  She was a young woman of five-and-twenty, tall, dark,
and slight, with features more uncommon than beautiful.  Her face
seemed quite familiar to Jonah.

"Good mornin', Miss.  Can I 'elp you in any way?" he said, trying to
remember where he had seen her before.

"So sorry to trouble you, but my feet are rather a nuisance," she said,
in a voice that broke like the sound of harps and flutes on Jonah's ear.

Jonah noted mechanically that her eyes were brown, peculiar, and
luminous as if they glowed from within.  They were marked by dark
eyebrows that formed two curves of remarkable beauty.  She showed her
teeth in a smile; they were small and white and even, so perfect that
they passed for false with strangers.  She explained that she had an
abnormally high instep, and could only be fitted by one brand of shoe.
She showed her foot, cased in a black stocking, and the sight of it
carried Jonah back to Cardigan Street and the push, for the high instep
was a distinguished mark of beauty among the larrikins, adored by them
with a Chinese reverence.

"I can only wear Kling & Wessel's, and your assistant tells me you are
out of them at present," she continued, "so I am afraid I must give it
up as a bad job." She picked up her shoe, and Jonah was seized with an
imperious desire to keep her in the shop at any cost.

"I'm afraid yer've worn yer last pair of that make," said Jonah.  "The
Americans 'ave driven them off the market, and the agency's closed."

"How annoying!  I must wear shoes.  Whatever shall I do?" she replied,
staring at the shelves as if lost in thought.

Jonah marked with an extraordinary pleasure every detail of her face
and dress.  The stuff was a cheap material, but it was cut and worn
with a daintiness that marked her off from the shopgirls and others
that Jonah was most familiar with.  And as he looked, a soft glow swept
through him like the first stage of intoxication.  Sometimes at the
barber's a similar hypnotic feeling had come over him, some electric
current stirred by the brushing of his hair, when common sounds and
movements struck on his nerves like music.  Again his nerves vibrated
tunefully, and he became aware that she was speaking.

"So sorry to have troubled you," she said, and prepared to go.

He felt he must keep her at any cost.  "A foot like yours needs a
special last shaped to the foot.  I don't make to order now, as a rule,
but I'll try wot I can do fer yer, if yer care to leave an order," he
said. He spoke like one in a dream.

She looked at him with a peculiar, intense gaze.  "I should prefer
that, but I'm afraid they would be too expensive," she said.

"No, I can do them at the same price as Kling & Wessel's," said Jonah.

Miss Giltinan started and looked sharply from Jonah to his customer.
She knew that was impossible.  And she looked with a frown at this
woman who could make Jonah forget his business instincts for a minute.
For she worshipped him in secret, grateful to him for lifting her out
of the gutter, and regarded him as the arbiter of her destiny.

He went to the desk and found the sliding rule and tape.  As he passed
the tape round the stranger's foot, he found that his hands were
trembling. And as he knelt before her on one knee, the young woman
studied, with a slight repugnance, the large head, wedged beneath the
shoulders as if a giant's hand had pressed it down, and the hump
projecting behind, monstrous and inhuman.  Suddenly Jonah looked up and
met her eyes. She coloured faintly.

"Wot sort of fit do yer like?" he asked.  His voice, usually sharp and
nasal, was rather hoarse.

All her life she remembered that moment.  The huge shop, glittering
with varnish, mirrors, and brass rods, the penetrating odour of
leather, the saleswoman silently copying the figures into the book, and
the misshapen hunchback kneeling before her and looking  up into her
face with his restless grey eyes, grown suddenly steady, that asked one
question and sought another.  She frowned slightly, conscious of some
strange and disagreeable sensation.

"I prefer them as tight as possible without hurting me," she replied
nervously; "but I'm afraid I'm giving you too much trouble."

"Not a bit," replied Jonah, clearing his throat.

As he finished measuring, a small boy, dressed in a Fauntleroy velvet
suit, with an enormous collar and a flap cap, ran noisily into the
shop, dragging a toy train at his heels.

"Get upstairs at once, Ray," said Jonah, without looking round.

The child, puffing and snorting like an engine, took no notice of the
command.

"Did yez 'ear me speak?" cried Jonah, angrily.

The child laughed, and stopped with his train in front of the customer,
staring at her with unabashed eyes.

"What a pretty boy!" said the young woman.  "Won't you tell me your
name?"

"My name's Ray Jones, and I'll make old bones," he cried, with the
glibness of a parrot.

The young woman laughed, and Jonah's face changed instantly.  It wore
the adoring gaze of the fond parent, who thinks his child is a marvel
and a prodigy.

"Tell the lady 'ow old yer are," he said.

"I'm seven and a bit old-fashioned," cried the child, looking into the
customer's face for the amused look that always followed the words. The
young woman smiled pleasantly as she laced her shoe.

"'E's as sharp as a needle," said Jonah, with a proud look, "but I
'aven't put 'im to school yet, 'cause 'e'll get enough schooling later
on.  But I'll 'ave ter do somethin' with 'im soon; 'e's up ter 'is neck
in mischief.  I wish 'e was old enough ter learn the piano.  'E's got a
wonderful ear fer music."

"But he is old enough," said the young woman with a sudden interest. "I
have two pupils the same age as he."

"Ah?" said Jonah, inquiringly.

"I am a teacher of music," continued the young woman, "and in my
opinion, they can't start too early, if they have any gift."

"An' 'ow would yer judge that?" said Jonah, delighted at the turn of
the conversation.

"I generally go by the width of the forehead at the temples.
Phrenologists always look for that, and I have never found it fail.
Come here," she said to the child, in a sharp, businesslike tone.  She
passed her hand over his forehead, and pointed out to Jonah a fullness
over the corner of the eye.  "That is the bump of music.  You have it
yourself," she said, suddenly looking at Jonah's face.  "I'm sure
you're fond of music.  Do you sing or play?"

"I can do a bit with the mouth-organ," said Jonah, off his guard.  He
turned red with shame at this vulgar admission but the young woman only
smiled.

"Well, about the boy," said Jonah, anxious to change the subject, "I'd
like yer to take 'im in 'and, if yer could make anythin' of 'im."

"I should be very pleased," said the young woman.

"Very well, we'll talk it over on Thursday, when yer come fer yer
shoes," said Jonah, feeling that he was making an appointment with this
fascinating stranger.

As she left the shop she handed Jonah a card, on which was printed:

  MISS CLARA GRIMES,
  TEACHER OF MUSIC.
  Terms: 1 pound 1 shilling per quarter.

"Well, I'm damned!" said Jonah.  "Old Grimes's daughter, of course."
And as he watched her crossing the street with a quick, alert step, an
intense yearning and loneliness came over him.  Something within him
contracted till it hurt.  And suddenly there flashed across his mind
some half-forgotten words of Mrs Yabsley's:

"Don't think of marryin' till yer feel there's somethin' wrong wi' yer
inside, for that's w'ere it ketches yer."

He sighed heavily, and went into the shop, preoccupied and silent for
that day.




CHAPTER 13

A FAMILY IN EXILE


Dad Grimes had just finished the story of his nose and the cabman, and
the group in the bar of the Angel exploded like a shell.  Dicky
Freeman's mouth seemed to slip both ways at once till it reached his
ears.  The barman put down the glass he was wiping and twisted the
cloth in his fingers till the tears stood in his eyes.  The noise was
deafening.

"An' 'e sez, 'Cum on, you an' yer nose, an' I'll fight the pair o'
yez,'" spluttered Dicky, with hysterical gasps, and went off again.
His chuckles ended in a dead silence.  There was no sound but the rapid
breathing of the men.  The barman flattened a mosquito on his cheek,
the smack sounded like a kiss.  Dicky Freeman emptied his glass, and
then stared through the bottom as if he wondered where the liquor had
gone.

"I assure you for the moment I was staggered," said Dad, rounding off
his story.  "I am aware that my nose has added to the gaiety of
nations, but it was the first time that it had been reckoned as a
creature distinct from myself with an individuality of its own."

Dad Grimes was a man of fifty, wearing a frock coat that showed a faint
green where the light fell on the shoulders, and a tall silk hat that
had grown old with the wearer.  But for his nose he might have been an
undertaker.  It was an impossible nose, the shape and size of a potato,
and the colour of pickled cabbage--the nose for a clown in the Carnival
of Venice.  Its marvellous shape was none of Dad's choosing, but the
colour was his own, laid on by years of patient drinking as a man
colours a favourite pipe.  Years ago, when he was a bank manager, his
heart had bled at the sight of this ungainly protuberance; but since
his downfall, he had led the chorus of laughter that his nose excited,
with a degraded pride in his physical defect.

It was Dicky Freeman's turn to shout, and he began another story as Dad
sucked the dregs of beer off his moustache.  Dad recognized the opening
sentence.  It was one of the interminable stories out of the Decameron
of the bar-room, realistic and obscene, that circulate among drinkers.
Dad knew it by heart.  He looked at his glass, and remembered that it
was his fourth drink.  Instantly he thought of the Duchess.  With his
usual formula "'Scuse me; I'm a married man, y'know," he hurried out of
the bar in search of his little present.

It was nine o'clock, and the Duchess would be waiting for him with his
tea since six.  And always when he stopped at the "Angel" on his way
home, he tried to soften her icy looks with a little present.
Sometimes it was a bunch of grapes that he crushed to a pulp by rolling
on them; sometimes a dozen apples that he spilt out of the bag, and
recovered from the gutter with lurching steps.  But tonight he happened
to stop in front of the fish shop, and a lobster caught his eye.  The
beer had quickened the poetry in his soul, and the sight of this
fortified inhabitant of the deep pleased him like a gorgeous sunset.
He shuffled back to the Angel with the lobster under his arm, wrapped
in a piece of paper.

One more drink and he would go home.  He put the lobster carefully at
his elbow and called for drinks.  But Dicky was busy with a new trick
with a box of matches, and Dad, who was a recognized expert in the idle
devices of bar-room loafers--picking up glasses and bottles with a
finger and thumb, opening a footrule with successive jerks from the
wrist, drinking beer out of a spoon--forgot the lapse of time with the
new toy.

Punctually on the stroke of eleven the swinging doors of the Angel were
closed and the huge street lamps were extinguished.  Dad's eye was
glassy, but he remembered the lobster.

"Whersh my lil' present?" he wailed.  "Mush 'ave lil' present for the
Duchess, y'know.  'Ow could I g'ome, d'ye think?"

He made so much noise that the landlord came to see what was the
matter, and then the barman pointed to where he had left the lobster on
the counter.  He tucked it under his arm and lurched into the street.
Now, Dad could run when he couldn't walk.  He swayed a little, then
suddenly broke into a run whose speed kept him from falling and
preserved his balance like a spinning top.

The Duchess, seen through a haze, seemed unusually stern tonight; but
with beery pride he produced his  little present, the mail-clad
delicacy, the armoured crustacean.  But Dicky Freeman, offended by
Dad's sudden departure in the middle of the story, had taken a mean
revenge with the aid of the barman, and, as Dad unfastened the
wrapping, there appeared, not the shellfish in its vermilion armour,
but something smooth and black--an empty beer-bottle!  Dad stared and
blinked.  A look at the Duchess revealed a face like the Ten
Commandments.  The situation was too abject for words; he grinned
vacantly and licked his lips.

The Grimes family lived in the third house in the terrace, counting
from the lamp-post at the corner of Buckland Street, where, running
parallel to Cardigan Street, it tumbles over the hill and is lost to
sight on its way to Botany Road.  It was a long, ugly row of two-storey
houses, the model lodging-houses of the crowded suburbs, so much alike
that Dad had forced his way, in a state of intoxication, into every
house in the terrace at one time or another, under the impression that
he lived there.

Ten years ago the Grimes family had come to live in Waterloo, when the
Bank of New Guinea had finally dispensed with Dad's services as manager
at Billabong.  His wife had picked on this obscure suburb of working
men to hide her shame, and Dad who could make himself at home on an
ant-hill, had cheerfully acquiesced.  He had started in business as a
house-agent, and the family of three lived from hand to mouth on the
profits that escaped the publican.  Not that Dad was idle.  He was for
ever busy; but it was the busyness of a fly.  He would call for the
rent, and spend half the morning fixing a tap for Mrs Brown, instead of
calling in the plumber; he would make a special journey to the other
end of Sydney for Mrs Smith, to prove that he had a nose for bargains.

Mrs Grimes forgot with the greatest ease that her neighbours were made
of the same clay as herself, but she never forgot that she had married
a bank manager, and she never forgave Dad for lowering her pride to the
dust. True, she was only the governess at Nullah Nullah station when
Dad married her, but her cold aristocratic features had given her the
pick of the neighbouring stations, and Dad was reckoned a lucky man
when he carried her off.  It was her fine, aquiline features and a
royal condescension in manner that had won her the title of "Duchess"
in this suburb of workmen. She tried to be affable, and her visitors
smarted under a sense of patronage.  The language of Buckland Street,
coloured with oaths, the crude fashions of the slop-shop, and the
drunken brawls, jarred on her nerves like the sharpening of a saw.  So
she lived, secluded as a nun, mocked and derided by her inferiors.

She was born with the love of the finer things that makes poverty
tragic. She kept a box full of the tokens of the past--a scarf of
Maltese lace, yellow with age, that her grandmother had sent from
England; a long chain of fine gold, too frail to be worn; a brooch set
with diamonds in a bygone fashion; a ring with her father's seal carved
in onyx.

Her daughter Clara was the image of herself in face and manner, and her
grudge against her husband hardened every time she thought of her only
child's future.  Clara was fifteen when they descended to Buckland
Street, a pampered child, nursed in luxury.  The Duchess belonged to
the Church of England, and it had been one of the sights of Billabong
to see her move down the aisle on Sunday like a frigate of Nelson's
time in full sail; but she had overcome her scruples, and sent Clara to
the convent school for finishing lessons in music, dancing, and
painting.

We each live and act our parts on a stage built to our proportions, and
set in a corner of the larger theatre of the world, and the revolution
that displaces princes was not more surprising to them than the
catastrophe that dropped the Grimes family in Buckland Street was to
Clara and her mother.

Clara had been taught to look on her equals with scorn, and she stared
at her inferiors with a mute contempt that roused the devil in their
hearts. She had lived in the street ten years, and was a stranger in
it.  Buckland Street was never empty, but she learned to pick her time
for going in and out when the neighbours were at their meals or asleep.
She attended a church at an incredible distance from Waterloo, for fear
people should learn her unfashionable address.  Her few friends lived
in other suburbs whose streets she knew by heart, so that they took her
for a neighbour.

When she was twenty-two she had become engaged to a clerk in a
Government office, who sang in the same choir.  A year passed, and the
match was suddenly broken off.  This was her only serious love-affair,
for, though she was handsome in a singular way, her flirtations never
came to anything.  She belonged to the type of woman who can take her
pick of the men, and remains unmarried while her plainer friends are
rearing families.

The natural destiny of the Waterloo girls was the factory, or the
workshops of anaemic dressmakers, stitching slops at racing speed for
the warehouses.  A few of the better sort, marked out by their face and
figure, found their way to the tea-rooms and restaurants.  But the
Duchess had encouraged her daughter's belief that she was too fine a
lady to soil her hands with work, and she strummed idly on the
dilapidated piano while her mother roughened her fine hands with
washing and scrubbing.  This was in the early days, when Dad,
threatened with starvation, had passed the hotels at a run to avoid
temptation, for which he made amends by drinking himself blind for a
week at a time.  Then, after years of genteel poverty, the Duchess had
consented to Clara giving lessons on the piano--that last refuge of the
shabby-genteel.  But pupils were scarce in Waterloo, and Clara's manner
chilled the enthusiasm of parents who only paid for lessons on the
understanding that their child was to become the wonder of the world
for a guinea a quarter.

This morning Clara was busy practising scales, while her mother dusted
and swept with feverish haste, for Mr Jones, the owner of the great
boot-shop, was bringing his son in the afternoon to arrange for lessons
on the piano. The Duchess knew the singular history of Jonah, the boot
king, and awaited his arrival with intense curiosity.  She had married
a failure, and adored success.  She decided to treat Jonah as an equal,
forgiving his lowly origin with a confused idea that it was the proper
thing for millionaires to spring from the gutter, the better to show
their contempt for the ordinary advantages of education and family.
She had decided to wear her black silk, faded and darned, but by
drawing the curtains; she hoped it would pass.  From some receptacle
unknown to Dad she had fished out a few relics of her former
grandeur--an old-fashioned card-tray of solid silver, and the quaint
silver tea-set with the tiny silver spoons that her grandmother had
sent as a wedding present from England.

Clara had just finished a variation with three tremendous fortissimo
chords when she heard the wheels of a cab.  This was an event in
itself, for cabs in Buckland Street generally meant doctors, hospitals,
or sudden death.  She ran to the window and saw the hunchback and the
boy stepping out.  Clara opened the door with an air of surprise, and
led them to the parlour where the Duchess was waiting.  Years and
misfortune had added to her dignity, and Jonah felt his shop and
success and money slip away from him, leaving him the street-arab
sprung from the gutter before this aristocrat.  Ray took to her at
once, and climbed into her lap, bringing her heart into her mouth as he
rubbed his feet on the famous black silk.

"I have never had the pleasure of meeting you, but I have heard of your
romantic career," she said.

"Well, I've got on, there's no denying that," said Jonah.  "Some people
think it's luck, but I tell 'em it's 'ard graft."

"Exactly," said the Duchess, wondering what he meant by graft.

Jonah looked round the stuffy room.  It had an indescribable air of
antiquity.  Every piece of furniture was of a pattern unknown to him,
and there was a musty flavour in the air, for the Duchess, valuing
privacy more than fresh air, never opened the windows.  On the wall
opposite was a large picture in oils, an English scene, with the old
rustic bridge and the mill in the distance, painted at Billabong by
Clara at an early age. The Duchess caught Jonah's eye.

"That was painted by my daughter ten years ago.  Her teachers
considered she had a wonderful talent, but misfortune came, and she was
unable to follow it up," she said.

Jonah's amazement increased.  It was a mere daub, but to his untrained
eye it was like the pictures in the Art Gallery, where he had spent a
couple of dull afternoons.  Over the piano a framed certificate
announced that Clara Grimes had passed the junior grade of Trinity
College in 1890.  And Jonah, who had an eye for business like a Jew,
who moved in an atmosphere of profit and loss, suddenly felt ill at
ease.  His shop, his money, and his success must seem small things to
these women who lived in the world of art.  His thoughts were brought
back to earth by a sudden crash.  Ray was sitting on a chair, impatient
for the music to begin, and, as he never sat on a chair in the ordinary
fashion, he had paralysed the Duchess with a series of gymnastic feats,
twining his legs round the chair, sitting on his feet, kneeling on the
seat with his feet on the back of the chair, until at last an unlucky
move had tilted the chair backwards into a pot-stand.  The jar fell
with  a crash, and Ray laughed.  The Duchess uttered a cry of terror.

"Yer young devil, keep still," cried Jonah, angrily.  "Yer can pay fer
that out of yer pocket-money," he added.

"It was of no value," said the Duchess, with frigid dignity.

"Perhaps Miss Grimes will play something," said Jonah.  "Ray's talked
of nothing else since daylight this morning."

Clara sat down at the piano and ran her fingers over the keys.  She had
selected her masterpiece, "The Wind Among the Pines", a tone-picture
from a shilling album.  Her fingers ran over the keys with amazing
rapidity as she beat out the melody with the left hand on the groaning
bass, while with the right she executed a series of scales to the top
of the keyboard and back.  Jonah listened spellbound to the clap-trap
arrangement.  He had the native ear for music, and he recognized that
he was in the presence of a born musician.  Ray crept near, and
listened with open mouth to this display of musical fireworks.  When
she had finished, Clara turned to Jonah with a languid smile, the look
of the artist conscious of divine gifts.

"My daughter was considered the best player at the convent where she
was educated," said the Duchess--"a great talent wasted in this
dreadful place."

"I niver 'eard anythin' like that in my natural," said Jonah with
enthusiasm.  "If yer can teach Ray ter play like that, I'm satisfied."

"You may depend upon her doing her best with  your son, but it is not
everyone who has Clara's talent," said the Duchess.

"Play some more," said Ray.

This time she selected a grand march, striking the dilapidated piano a
series of stunning blows with both hands, filling the air with the
noise of battle.

"That must be terrible 'ard," said Jonah.

"It takes it out of one," replied Clara, with the simplicity of an
artist.

Then she gave Ray his first lesson, showing him how to sit and place
his hands, anxious to impress the parent that she was a good teacher.
She declared that Ray was very apt, and would learn rapidly.  An hour
later, Jonah paid for Ray's first quarter.  Clara's terms were a
guinea, but Jonah insisted on two guineas on the understanding that Ray
would receive special attention.

But in spite of her promises, Ray's progress was slow.  As Jonah had no
piano, the boy came half an hour early to his lesson to practise, but
the twenty minutes' journey from the Silver Shoe occupied the best part
of an hour, for Ray, who took to the streets as a duck takes to water,
could spend a morning idling before shop windows, following fiddlers on
their rounds, watching navvies dig a drain, with a frank, sensuous
delight in the sights and sounds of the streets, an inheritance from
Jonah's years of vagabondage.  Then the street-arabs fell on him,
annoyed by his new clothes and immense white collar, and at the end of
the third week he reached home after dark with a cut on his forehead
and spattered with mud.

The next day Jonah called on Clara to make some other arrangements.
His tone was brusque, and Clara noticed with surprise that he was
inclined to blame her for Ray's mishap.  He seemed to forget everything
when it was a question of his son.  But all of the Duchess in Clara
came to the surface in her annoyance, and she suggested that the
lessons had better come to an end.  Absorbed in his egotistic feelings,
Jonah looked up in surprise, and his anger vanished.  He saw that he
had offended her, and apologized. Then he remembered what had brought
him.  His overpowering desire to see this woman had surprised him like
the first symptoms of an illness. He had not seen her for three weeks,
and in the increased flow of business at the Silver Shoe had half
forgotten his amazing emotions as one forgets a powerful dream.  Women,
he repeated, were worse than drink for taking a man's mind off his work.

In his experience he had observed with some curiosity that drink and
women were alike in throwing men off their balance.  Drink,
fortunately, had no power over him.  Beer only fuddled his brain, and
he looked on its effect with the curious dislike women look on smoking,
blind to its fascinations. As for women, Ada was the only one he had
ever been on intimate terms with, and, judging by his sensations,
people who talked about love were either fools or liars.  True, he had
heard Chook talking like a fool about Pinkey, swearing that he couldn't
live without her, but thought naturally that he lied.  And they had
quarrelled so fiercely over the colour of her hair, that for years each
looked the other way when they met in the street.  But as he looked at
Clara again, something vibrated within him, and he was conscious of
nothing but a desire to look at her and hear her speak.

"My idea was to buy a piano, an' then yer could give Ray 'is lessons at
'ome," he said.

"That is the only way out of the difficulty," said Clara.

Jonah thought awhile, and made up his mind with a snap.

"Could yer come with me now, an' pick me a piano?  I can tell a boot by
the smell of the leather, but pianos are out of my line.  Clara's
manner changed instantly as she thought of the commission she would get
from Kramer's, where she had a running account for music."

"I shall be only too pleased," she said.

As they left the house she remembered, with a slight repugnance,
Jonah's deformity.  She hoped people wouldn't notice them as they went
down the street.  But to her surprise and relief, Jonah hailed a
passing cab.

"Time's money to me," he said, with an apologetic look.

Cabs were a luxury in Buckland Street, and Clara was delighted.  She
felt suddenly on the level of the rich people who could afford to ride
where others trudged afoot.  She leaned forward, hoping that the people
would notice her.

At Kramer's she took charge of Jonah as a guide takes charge of
tourists in a foreign land, anxious to show him that she was at home
among this display of expensive luxuries.  The floor was packed with
pianos, glittering with varnish which reflected the  strong light of
the street. From another room came a monotonous sound repeated
indefinitely, a tuner at work on a piano.

The salesman stepped up, glancing at the hunchback with the quick look
of surprise which Clara had noticed in others.  They stopped in front
of an open piano, and Clara, taking off her gloves, ran her fingers
over the keys.  The rich, singing notes surprised Jonah, they were
quite unlike those he had heard on Clara's piano.  Clara played as much
as she could remember of "The Wind Among the Pines", and Jonah decided
to buy that one.

"'Ow much is that?" he inquired.

"A hundred guineas," replied the shopman, indifferently.

"Garn!  Yer kiddin'?" cried Jonah, astounded.

The salesman looked in surprise from Jonah to Clara.  She coloured
slightly.  Jonah saw that she was annoyed.  The salesman led them to
another instrument, and, with less deference in his tone, remarked that
this was the firm's special cheap line at fifty guineas.  But Jonah had
noticed the change in Clara's manner, and decided against the cheaper
instrument instantly.  They thought he wasn't good for a hundred quid,
did they?  Well, he would show them.  But, to his surprise, Clara
opposed the idea.  The Steinbech, she explained, was an instrument for
artists. It would be a sacrilege for a beginner to touch it.  Jonah
persisted, but the shopman agreed with Clara that the celebrated Ropp
at eighty guineas would meet his wants.  A long discussion followed,
and Jonah listened while Clara tried to beat the salesman down below
catalogue price for cash.   Here was a woman after his own heart, who
could drive a bargain with the best of them.  At the end of half an
hour Jonah filled in a cheque for eighty guineas, and the salesman,
reading the signature, bowed them deferentially out of the shop.

Clara walked out of the shop with the air of a millionaire.  To be
brought in contact even for a moment with this golden stream of
sovereigns excited her like wine.  All her life she had desired things
whose price put them beyond her reach, and she felt suddenly friendly
to this man who took what he wanted regardless of cost.  She thought
pleasantly of the ride home in the cab, but she was pulled up with a
jerk when Jonah led the way to the tram.  He wore an anxious look, as
if he had spent more than he could afford, and yet the money was a mere
flea-bite to him.  But whenever he spent money, a panic terror seized
him--a survival of the street-arab's instinct, who counted his money in
pennies instead of pounds.




CHAPTER 14

ADA MAKES A FRIEND


Ada moved uneasily, opened her eyes and stared at the patch of light on
the opposite wall.  As she lay half awake, she tried to remember the
day of the week, and, deceived by the morning silence, decided that it
was Sunday.  She thought, with lazy pleasure, that a day of idleness
lay before her, and felt under the pillow for the tin of lollies that
she hid there every night.  This movement awakened her completely, and
stretching her limbs luxuriously between the warm sheets, she began to
suck the lollies, at first slowly revolving the sticky globules on her
tongue, and then scrunching them between her firm teeth with the
tranquil pleasure of a quadruped.

This was her only pleasure and the only pleasant hour of the day.  She
looked at Jonah, who lay on his side with his nose buried in the
pillow, without repugnance and without liking.  That had gone long ago.
And as she looked, she remembered that he was to be awakened early and
that it was Friday the hardest day of the week, when she must make up
her arrears of scrubbing and dusting.  Her luxurious mood changed to
one of dull irritation, and she looked sullenly  at the enormous
wardrobe and dressing-table with their speckled mirrors.  These had
delighted her at first, but in her heart she preferred the battered,
makeshift furniture of Cardigan Street.  A few licks with the duster
and her work was done; but here the least speck of dust showed on the
polished surface.  Jonah, too, had got into a nasty habit of writing
insulting words on the dusty surface with his finger.

Well, let him!  There had been endless trouble since he bought the
piano. As sure as Miss Grimes came to give Ray his lesson, he declared
the place was a pigsty and tried to shame her by taking off his coat
and dusting the room himself.  Not that she blamed Miss Grimes.  She
was quite a lady in her way, and had won Ada's heart by telling her
that she hated housework. She thought Ada must be a born housekeeper to
do without a servant, and Ada didn't trouble to put her right.  Anyhow,
Jonah should keep a servant. He pretended that their servants in
Wyndham Street had made game of her behind her back, and robbed her
right and left.  What did that matter? she thought--Jonah could afford
it.

The real reason was that he wanted no one in the house to see how he
treated his wife.  She cared little herself whether she had a girl or
not, for she had always been accustomed to make work easy by neglecting
it. If Jonah wanted a floor that you could eat your dinner off, let him
get a servant.  He was as mean as dirt.  A fat lot she got out of his
money. Here she was, shut up in these rooms, little better than a
prisoner, for her old pals never dared show their noses in this house,
and she could never go out without all the shop-hands knowing it.  She
never bought a new dress, but Jonah stormed like a madman, declaring
that she looked like a servant dressed up.  Well, her clothes knocked
Cardigan Street endways when she paid her mother a visit, and that was
all she wanted.

There was her mother, too.  She had never been a real mother to her;
you could never tell what she was thinking about.  Other people took
their troubles to her, but she treated her own daughter like a
stranger.  And, of course, she sided with Jonah and talked till her jaw
ached about her duty to her child and her husband.  She would have
married Tom Mullins if it hadn't been for the kid, and lived in
Cardigan Street like her pals. Her thoughts travelled back to Packard's
and the Road.  She remembered with intense longing the group at the
corner, the drunken rows, and the nightly gossip on the doorstep.  That
was life for her.  She had been like a fish out of water ever since she
left it.  She thought with singular bitterness of Jonah's attempts to
introduce her to the wives of the men he met in business, women who
knew not Cardigan Street, and annoyed her by staring at her hands, and
talking of their troubles with servants till they made her sick.

Her thoughts were suddenly interrupted by Jonah.  He turned in his
sleep and pushed the sheet from his face, but a loud scrunch from Ada's
jaw woke him completely.  He tugged at the pillow and his hand fell on
the tin of sticky lollies.

"Bah!" he cried in disgust, and rubbed his fingers on the sheet.  "Only
kids eat that muck."

"Kid yerself!" cried Ada furiously.  "Anybody 'ud  think I was eatin'
di'monds.  Yer'd grudge me the air I breathe, if yer thought it cost
money."

"Yah, git up an' light the fire!" replied Jonah.

"Yes, that's me all over.  Anybody else 'ud keep a servant; but as long
as I'm fool enough ter slave an' drudge, yer save the expense."

"You slave an' drudge?" cried Jonah in scorn--"that was in yer dream.
Are yer sure ye're awake?"

"Yes, I am awake, an' let me tell yer that it's the talk of the
neighbourhood that yer've got thousands in the bank, an' too mean ter
keep a servant."

"That's a lie, an' yer know it!" cried Jonah.  "Didn't yez 'ave a girl
in Wyndham Street, an' didn't she pinch enough things to set up 'er
sister's 'ouse w'en she got married?"

"Yous couldn't prove it," said Ada, sullenly.

"No, I couldn't prove it without showing everybody wot sort of wife I'd
got."

"She's a jolly sight too good fer yous, an' well yer know it."

"Yes, that's wot I complain of," said Jonah.  "I'd prefer a wife like
other men 'ave that can mind their 'ouse, an' not make a 'oly show of
themselves w'en they take 'em out."

"A fat lot yer take me out!"

"Take yous out!  Yah!  Look at yer neck!"

Ada flushed a sullen red.  So far the quarrel had been familiar and
commonplace, like a conversation about the weather, but her neck,
hidden under grubby lace, was Ada's weak point.

"Look at the hump on yer back before yer talk about my neck," she
shouted. It was the first time  she had ever dared to taunt Jonah with
his deformity, and the sound of her words frightened her.  He would
strike her for certain.

Jonah's face turned white.  He raised himself on his elbow and clenched
his fist, the hard, knotty fist of the shoemaker swinging at the end of
the unnaturally long arms, another mark of his deformity.  Jonah had
never struck her--contrary to the habit of Cardigan Street--finding
that he could hit harder with his tongue; but it was coming now, and
she nerved herself for the blow.  But Jonah's hand dropped helplessly.

"You low, dirty bitch," he said.  "If a man said that to me, I'd
strangle him.  I took yer out of the factory, I married yer, an' worked
day an' night ter git on in the world, an' that's yer thanks.  Pity I
didn't leave yer in the gutter w'ere yer belonged.  I wonder who yer
take after?  Not after yer mother.  She is clean an' wholesome.  Any
other woman would take an interest in my business, an' be a help to a
man; but you're like a millstone round my neck.  I thought I'd done
with Cardigan Street, an' the silly loafers I grew up with, but s'elp
me Gawd, when I married you I married Cardigan Street.  I could put up
with yer want of brains--you don't want much brains ter git through
this world--but it's yer nasty, sulky temper, an' yer bone idleness.  I
suppose yer git them from yer lovely father.  The 'ardest work 'e ever
did was to drink beer.  It's a wonder yer don't take after 'im in that.
I suppose I've got something to be thankful for."

"Yes, I suppose yer'd like me ter drink meself ter death, so as yer
could marry again.  But yer needn't fear I'll last yous out," cried
Ada, recovering her tongue now that she was no longer in fear of a blow.

"Ah well, yer can't make a silk purse out of a sow's ear they say,"
said Jonah.  There was an intense weariness in his voice as he turned
his back on Ada.

"No more than yer can make a man out of a monkey on a stick," muttered
Ada to herself as she got out of bed.

Ada got the breakfast and went about the house in sullen silence.
Jonah was used to this.  For days together after a quarrel she would
sulk without speaking, proud of her stubborn temper that forced others
to give in first.  And they would sit down to meals and pass one
another in the rooms, watching each other's movements to avoid the
necessity for speaking.  The day had begun badly for Ada, and her anger
increased as she brooded over her wrongs.  Heavy and sullen by nature,
her wrath came to a head hours after the provocation, burning with a
steady heat when others were cooling down.

But as she was pegging out some towels in the yard she heard a discreet
cough on the other side of the fence.  Ada recognized the signal.  It
was her neighbour, the woman with the hairy lip, housekeeper to Aaron
the Jew. It had taken Ada weeks to discover Mrs Herring's physical
defect, which she humoured by shaving.  Now Ada could tell in an
instant whether she was shaven or hairy, for when her lip bristled with
hairs for lack of the razor, she peered over the fence so as to hide
the lower part of her face. Ada, being used to such things, thought at
first she was hiding a black eye.  But who was there to give her one?
Aaron the pawnbroker, not being her husband, could not take such a
liberty.

She had introduced herself over the fence the week of Ada's arrival,
giving her the history of the neighbourhood in an unceasing flow of
perfect English, her voice never rising above a whisper.  For days she
would disappear altogether, and then renew the conversation by coughing
gently on her side of the fence.  This morning her lip was shaven, and
she leaned over the fence, full of gossip.  But Ada's sullen face
caught her eye, and instantly she was full of sympathy, a peculiar look
of falsity shining in her light blue eyes.

"Why, what's the matter, dearie?" she inquired.

"Oh, nuthin'," said Ada roughly.

"Ah, you mustn't tell me that!  When my poor husband was alive, I've
often looked in my glass and seen a face like that.  He was my husband,
and I suppose I should say no more, but men never brought any happiness
to me or any other woman that I know of.  The first day I set eyes on
you, I said, 'That's an unhappy woman.'"

"Well, yer needn't tell the bloomin' street," growled Ada.

"What you want is love and sympathy, but I suppose your husband is too
busy making money to spare the time for that.  Ah, many's the time,
when my poor dear husband was alive, did I pine for a kind word, and
get a black look instead!  And a woman can turn to no one in a trouble
like that.  She feels as if her own door had been slammed in her face.
What you want is a cheerful outing with a  sympathetic friend, but I
hear you're little more than a prisoner in your own house."

"Who told yer that?" cried Ada, flushing angrily.

"A little bird told me," said the woman, with a false grin.

"Well, I'd wring its neck, if I 'eard it," cried Ada.  "And as fer
bein' a prisoner, I'm goin' out this very afternoon."

"Why, how curious!" cried Mrs Herring.  "This is my afternoon out.  We
could have a pleasant chat, if you have nothing better to do."

Ada hesitated.  Jonah always wanted to know where she was going, and
had forbidden her to make friends with the neighbours, for in Cardigan
Street friendship with neighbours generally ended in a fight or the
police court. She had never defied Jonah before, but her anger was
burning with a steady flame.  She'd show him!

"I'll meet yer at three o'clock opposite the church," she cried, and
walked away.

She gave Jonah his meal in silence, and sent Ray off on a message
before two o'clock.  But Jonah seemed to have nothing to do this
afternoon, and sat, contrary to custom, reading the newspaper.  Ada
watched the clock anxiously, fearing she would be baulked.  But, as
luck would have it, Jonah was suddenly called into the shop, and the
coast was clear.  It never took Ada long to dress; her clothes always
looked as if they had been thrown on with a pitchfork, and she slipped
down the outside stairs into the lane at the back.  It was the first
time she had gone out without telling Jonah where she was going and
when she would be back.  And afterwards she could never understand why
she crept out in this furtive manner.  Mrs Herring was waiting, dressed
in dingy black, a striking contrast to Ada's flaring colours.  They
walked up Regent Street, as Mrs Herring said she wanted to buy a
thimble.

But when they reached Redfern Street, Mrs Herring put her hand suddenly
to her breast and cried "Oh, dearie, if you could feel how my heart is
beating!  I really feel as if I am going to faint.  I've suffered for
years with my heart, and the doctor told me always to take a drop of
something soothing, when I had an attack."

They were opposite the "Angel", no longer sinister and forbidding in
the broad daylight.  The enormous lamps hung white and opaque; the huge
mirrors reflected the cheerful light of the afternoon sun.  The
establishment seemed harmless and respectable, like the grocer's or
baker's.  But from the swinging doors came a strong odour of alcohol,
enveloping the two women in a vinous caress that stirred hidden desires
like a strong perfume.

"Do you think we could slip in here without being seen?" said the
housekeeper.

"If ye're so bad as all that, we can," replied Ada.

Mrs Herring turned and slipped in at the side door with the dexterity
of customers entering a pawnshop, and Ada followed, slightly
bewildered. The housekeeper, seeming quite familiar with the turnings,
led the way to a small room at the back.  Ada looked round with great
curiosity.  She had never entered a hotel before in this furtive
fashion.  In Cardigan Street she had always fetched her mother's beer
in a jug from the bar.  On the walls were two sporting prints of dogs
chasing a hare, and a whisky calendar.  On the table was a small gong,
which Mrs Herring rang.  Cassidy himself, the landlord, answered the
ring.

"Good dey, good dey to you, Mrs Herring," he said briskly.  "The same
as usual, I suppose?  And what'll your friend take?" he added, grinning
at Ada.

"My friend, Mrs Jones," said the housekeeper.

"Glad to meet you," cried Cassidy.  "A terrible hill this," he
continued, winking at Ada.  "We should never see Mrs Herring, if it
wasn't for the hill."

"Nothing for me," said Ada, shaking her head.

"Now just a drop to keep me company," begged Mrs Herring.

As Ada continued to shake her head, Cassidy went out, and returned with
a bottle of brandy and three glasses on a tray.

"Sure, I forgot to tell you I'm a father again; father number nine,
unless I've lost count.  Sure your friend will join us in a glass to
wet the head of the baby?"

He filled three glasses as he spoke, and winked at Mrs Herring.  Ada's
brain was in a whirl.  She saw that she had been trapped, and that Mrs
Herring was a liar and a comedian.  She might as well drink now she was
here.  But Jonah would kill her, if he smelt drink on her.  Well, let
him!  It was little enough fun she got out of life anyhow.  She nodded
to Cassidy.  They clinked the three glasses and drank, the landlord and
Mrs Herring at a gulp, Ada with tiny sips as if it were poison.

"Well, I'll leave you to your bit of gossip; I think  I hear the child
crying," said the landlord, backing out of the door with a grin.

Mrs Herring, who had forgotten her palpitations, filled her glass
again, and sipped slowly to keep Ada company.  In half an hour Ada
finished her second glass.  A pleasant glow had spread through her
body.  The weight was lifted off her mind, and she felt calm and happy.
She thought of Jonah with indifference.  What did he matter?  She
listened cheerfully to Mrs Herring's ceaseless whisper, only catching
the meaning of one word in ten.

"And many's the time, when my poor dear husband was alive, have I gone
out meaning to throw myself into the harbour, and a drop of cordial has
changed my mind."

Ada nodded to show that she understood that the late Mr Herring was a
brute and a tyrant.

"And then he went with the contingent to South Africa, and the next I
heard was that he was dead.  And the thought of my poor dear lying with
his face turned to the skies would have driven me mad, if the doctor
hadn't insisted on my taking a drop of cordial to bear my grief.  And
when I recovered, I vowed I would never marry again.  The men dearie,
are all alike.  They marry one woman, and want twenty.  And if you as
much as look at another man, they smash the furniture and threaten to
get a divorce. I can see you've found that out."

"Ye're barkin' up the wrong tree," said Ada.  "My old man's as 'ard as
nails, but 'e don't run after women.  'E's the wrong shape, see."

Ada had never spent such a pleasant time in her life.  She had never
tasted brandy till that afternoon.   Cardigan Street drank beer, and
the glasses Ada had drunk at odd times had only made her sleepy without
excitement.  But this seductive liquid leapt through her veins,
bringing a delicious languor and a sense of comfort.  Her mind, dull
and heavy by habit, ran on wheels.  She wanted to interrupt Mrs Herring
to make some observations of her own which seemed too good to lose.
She felt a silly impulse to ask her whether she was born with a
moustache, who taught her to shave, whether she could grow a moustache
if she left it alone.  She wanted to ask why her palpitations had gone
off so quickly, and why she seemed perfectly at home in the "Angel",
but her thoughts crowded heel on heel so fast that she had forgotten
them before she could speak.

She remembered that a few weeks ago the housekeeper's husband had died
of typhoid in the Never Never country, and Mrs Herring had nursed him
bravely to the end.  She tried to reconcile this with his death this
afternoon in the Boer War, and decided that it didn't matter.  He must
have died somewhere, for no one had ever seen him.  She was discovering
slowly that this woman was a consummate liar, who lied as the birds
sing, but forgot her many inventions, a born liar without a memory.
Suddenly Mrs Herring said she must be going, and Ada got up to leave.
She lurched as she stood, and pushed her chair over with a clumsy
movement.

"I b'lieve I'm drunk," she muttered, with a foolish titter.




CHAPTER 15

Mrs PARTRIDGE LENDS A HAND


Since ten o'clock in the morning the large house, standing in its own
grounds, had been invaded by a swarm of dealers, hook-nosed and
ferret-eyed, prying into every corner, searching each lot for hidden
faults, judging at a glance the actual value of every piece of
furniture, their blood stirred with the hereditary joy in chaffering,
for an auction is as full of surprises as a battle, the prices rising
and falling according to the temper of the crowd.  And they watched one
another with crafty eyes that had long lost the power to see anything
but the faults and defects in the property of others.  Those who had
commissions from buyers marked the chosen lots in their catalogue with
a stumpy pencil.

Mother Jenkins was one of these.  She was the auctioneer's scavenger,
snapping up the dishonoured, broken remnants disdained by the others,
buying for a song the job lots on the way to the rubbish-heap.  All was
fish that came to her net, for her second-hand shop in Bathurst Street
had taught her to despise nothing that had an ounce of wear left in it.
Her bids never ran beyond a few shillings, but to-day she had an
important commission, twenty pounds to lay out on the furnishing of
three rooms for a married couple.  These were her windfalls.  Sometimes
she got a wedding order, and furnished the house out of her amazing
collection, supplemented by her bargains at the next auction sale.
This had brought her to the sale early, for the young couple, deciding
to furnish in style, had exhausted her resources by demanding
wardrobes, dressing-tables, and washstands with marble tops.

The young woman with the mop of red hair followed on her heels, amazed
by the luxury of the interior harmonized in a scheme of colour.  Her
day-dreams, coloured by the descriptions of ducal mansions in penny
novelettes, came suddenly true.  And she lingered before carved
cabinets, strange vases like frozen rainbows, and Oriental tapestry
with the instinctive delight in luxury planted in women.

But Mother Jenkins had no time to spare.  She had found the very thing
for Pinkey, and led the way to the servants' quarters, hidden at the
back of the house.  Pinkey's visions of grandeur fled at the sight.
The rooms were small, and a sour smell hung on the air, the peculiar
odour of servants' rooms where ventilation is unknown.  Pinkey
recognized the curtains and drapes at a glance, the pick of a suburban
rag-shop.  One room was as bare as a prison cell, merely a place to
sleep in, but the next was royally furnished with a wardrobe,
toilet-table, and washstand, solid and old-fashioned like the
generation it had outlived.  By its look it had descended in regular
stages from the bedrooms of the family to the casual guests' room and
then to the servants.   But Pinkey had seen nothing so beautiful at
home, and her heart swelled at the thought of possessing such genteel
furniture.  Mother Jenkins explained that with a lick of furniture
polish they would look as good as new, but Pinkey's only fear was that
they would be too expensive.  Then the dealer reckoned that she could
get the lot for seven pounds.  The only rivals she feared were women
who, if they set their heart on anything, sometimes forced the price up
till you could buy it for less in the shop.

Meanwhile the sale had begun, and in the distance Pinkey could hear the
monotonous voice of the auctioneer forcing the bids up till he reached
the limit.  From time to time there was a roar of laughter as he
cracked a joke over the heads of his customers.  The buyers stood
wedged like sardines in the room, craning their necks to see each lot
as it was put up.  As the crowd moved from room to room, Pinkey's
excitement increased. Mother Jenkins had gone to the kitchen, where she
always found a few pickings.  She came back and found Pinkey's husband,
the young man with the ugly face and dancing eyes, who was waiting
outside with the cart, watching while Pinkey polished a corner of the
wardrobe to show him its quality.  She hurried them down to the kitchen
to examine the linoleum on the floor, as it would fit their
dining-room, if the worn parts were cut out.

The crowd moved like a mob of sheep into the servants rooms, standing
in each other's way, tired of the strain on their attention.  Mother
Jenkins whispered that things would go cheap because the auctioneer was
in a hurry to get to his lunch.  Pinkey stood behind her, ready to poke
her in the ribs if she wished her to keep on bidding.

"Now, gentlemen," said the auctioneer, "lot one hundred and
seventy-five. Duchesse wardrobe, dressing-table with bevelled mirrors,
and marble-top washstand, specially imported from England by Mrs
Harper.  What am I offered?"

"Specially imported from England?" cried a dealer.  "Yes, came out in
the first fleet."

"What's that?" cried the auctioneer.  "Thank you for telling me, Mr
Isaacs." And he began again: "What offer for this solid ash bedroom
suite, imported in the first fleet, guaranteed by Mr Isaacs, who was in
leg-irons and saw it."

There was a roar of laughter at the dealer's discomfiture.

"Now, Mr Isaacs, how much are you going to bid, for old times' sake?"
cried the auctioneer, pushing his advantage.  But Isaacs had turned
sulky.

"A pound," said Mother Jenkins.

"No, mother, you don't mean it," cried the auctioneer, grinning.

"That'll leave you nothing to pay your tram fare home." But he went on:
"I'm offered a pound for this solid ash bedroom suite that cost thirty
guineas in London."

The bids crawled slowly up to six pounds.

"It's against you, mother," cried the auctioneer; "don't let a few
shillings stand in the way of your getting married.  I knew the men
couldn't leave you alone with that face.  Thank you, six-five."

The old hag showed her toothless gums in a hideous smile, the woman
that was left in the dried shell still tickled at the reference to
marriage. But her look changed to one of intense pain as Pinkey,
trembling with excitement, nudged her violently in the ribs as a signal
to keep on bidding.  However, there was no real opposition, and the
bidding stopped suddenly at seven pounds, forced up to that price by a
friend of Mother Jenkins's to increase her commission.

In the kitchen the auctioneer lost his temper, and knocked down to
Mother Jenkins enough pots and pans to last Pinkey a lifetime for ten
shillings before the others could get in a bid.  Chook, who had
borrowed Jack Ryan's cart for the day, drove off with his load in
triumph, while Pinkey went with Mother Jenkins to her shop in Bathurst
Street to sort out her curtains, bed-linen, and crockery from that
extraordinary collection. Twenty pounds would pay for the lot, and
leave a few shillings over.

One Saturday morning, two years ago, Pinkey had set out for the factory
as usual, and had come home to dinner with her wages in her
handkerchief and a wedding ring on her finger.  Mrs Partridge gave up
novelettes for a week when she learned that her stepdaughter had
married Chook that morning at the registry office.  Partridge had taken
the news with a look that had frightened the women; the only sign of
emotion that he had given was to turn his back without a word on his
favourite daughter.  Since then they had lived with Chook's mother, as
he had no money to furnish; but last month Chook had joined a syndicate
of three to buy a five-shilling sweep ticket, which, to their
amazement, drew a hundred-pound prize.  With Chook's share they had
decided to take Jack Ryan's shop in Pitt Street just round the corner
from Cardigan Street.  It was a cottage that had been turned into a
shop by adding a false front to it.  The rent, fifteen shillings a
week, frightened Chook, but he reserved ten pounds to stock it with
vegetables, and buy the fittings from Jack Ryan, who had tried to
conduct his business from the bar of the nearest hotel, and failed.  If
the money had run to Jack's horse and cart, their fortunes would have
been made.

Mrs Partridge's wanderings had ended with the marriage of Pinkey.  Only
once had she contrived to move, and the result had frightened her, for
William had mumbled about his lost time in his sleep.  And she had
lived in Botany Street for two years, a stone's throw from the new shop
in Pitt Street.  She remembered that Chook had helped to move her
furniture in at their first meeting, and, not liking to be out-done in
generosity, resolved to slip round after tea and lend a hand.  She
knew, if any woman did, the trouble of moving furniture and setting it
straight.  She prepared for her labours by putting on her black silk
blouse and her best skirt, and as William was anchored by the fireside
with the newspaper, she decided to wear her new hat with the ostrich
feathers, twenty years too young for her face, which she had worn for
three months on the quiet out of regard for William's feelings, for it
had cost the best part of his week's wages, squeezed out in shillings
and sixpences, the price of imaginary pounds of tea, butter, and
groceries.

She found Chook with his mouth full of nails, hanging pictures at five
shillings the pair; Pinkey, dishevelled, sweating in beads, covered
with dust, her sleeves tucked up to the elbows, ordering Chook to raise
or lower the picture half an inch to increase the effect.  It was some
time before Mrs Partridge could find a comfortable chair where she ran
no risk of soiling her best clothes, but when she did she smiled
graciously on them, noting with intense satisfaction Pinkey's stare of
amazement at the black hat, twenty years too young for her face.

"I thought I'd come round and give you a hand," she explained.

"Thanks, Missis," said Chook, thankful for even a little assistance.

Pinkey stared again at the hat, and Mrs Partridge felt a momentary
dissatisfaction with life in possessing such a hat without the right to
wear it in public.  In half an hour Chook and Pinkey had altered the
position of everything in the room under the direction of Mrs
Partridge, who sat in her chair like a spectator at the play.  At last
they sat down exhausted and Mrs Partridge, who felt as fresh as paint,
gave them her opinion on matrimony and the cares of housekeeping.  But
Pinkey, unable to sit in idleness among this beautiful furniture, got
to work with her duster.

"Ah," said Mrs Partridge, "it's natural to take a pride in the bit of
furniture you start with, but when you've been through the mill like I
'ave, you'll think more of your own comfort.  There was yer Aunt Maria
wore 'er fingers to the bone polishing 'er furniture on the
time-payment plan, an' then lost it all through the death of 'er
'usband, an' the furniture man thanked 'er kindly fer keepin' it in
such beautiful order when 'e took it away.  An' Mrs Ross starved
'erself to buy chairs an' sofas, which she needed, in my opinion, being
too weak to walk about; an' then 'er 'usband dropped a match, an' they
'ad the best fire ever seen in the street, an' 'ave lived in lodgings
ever since."

"That's all right," said Chook uneasily, "but this ain't time-payment
furniture, an' I ain't goin' ter sling matches about like some people
sling advice."

"That's very true," said Mrs Partridge, warming up to her subject, "but
there's no knowin' 'ow careless yer may git when yer stomach's
undermined with bad cookin'."

"Wot rot ye're talkin'!" cried Chook.  "Mother taught her to cook a
fair treat these two years.  She niver got anythin' to practise on in
your 'ouse."

"That's true," said Mrs Partridge, placidly.  "I was never one to
poison meself with me own cooking.  When I was a girl I used ter buy a
penn'orth of everythin', peas-pudden, saveloys, pies, brawn, trotters,
Fritz, an' German sausage.  Give me the 'am shop, an' then I know who
ter blame, if anythin' goes wrong with me stomach."

Chook gave his opinion of cookshops.

"Ah well," said Mrs Partridge, "what the eye doesn't see the 'eart
doesn't grieve over, as the sayin' is!  An' that reminds me.  Elizabeth
suffers from 'er 'eart, an' that means a doctor's bill which I could
never understand the prices they charge, knowin' plenty as got better
before the doctor could cure 'em an' so takin' the bread out of 'is
mouth, as the sayin' is.  Though I make it my business to be very
smooth  with them as might put somethin' nasty in the medsin an' so
carry you off, an' none the wiser, as the sayin' is."

"'Ere, this ain't a funeral," cried Chook, in disgust.

"An' thankful you ought ter be that it ain't," cried Mrs Partridge,
"after what I read in the paper only last week about people bein'
buried alive oftener than dead, an' fair gave me the creeps thinkin' I
could see the people scratchin' their way out of the coffin, an'
sittin' on a tombstone with nuthin' but a sheet round 'em.  It would
cure anybody of wantin' ter die.  I've told William to stick pins in me
when my time comes."

"Anybody could tell w'en you're dead," said Chook.

"Why, 'ow?" cried Mrs Partridge, eagerly.

"Yer'll stop gassin' about yerself," cried Chook, roughly.

Mrs Partridge started to smile, and then stopped.  It dawned slowly on
her mind that she was insulted, and she rose to her feet.

"Thank's fer yer nasty remark," she cried.  "That's all the thanks I
get fer comin' to give a 'elpin' 'and.  But I know when I'm not wanted."

"Yer don't," said Pinkey, "or yer'd 'ave gone 'ours ago."

Mrs Partridge turned to go, the picture of offended dignity, when her
eyes fell on an apparition in the doorway, and she quailed.  It was
William, left safely by the fireside for the night, and now glowering,
not at her as she swiftly divined, but at the hat with the drooping
feathers, twenty years too young for her face.  For the first time in
her life she lost her nerve, but with wonderful presence of mind, she
smiled in her agony.

"Why, there you are, William," she cried.  "Yer gave me quite a start.
I was just tryin' on Elizabeth's new 'at, to see if it suited me."

As she spoke, she tore out the hatpins with feverish dexterity, and
thrust the hat into Pinkey's astonished hand.

"Take it, yer little fool," she whispered, savagely.

Her face looked suddenly old and withered under the scanty grey hair.

"Good evenin', Mr Partridge--glad ter see yer," cried Chook, advancing
with outstretched hand; but the old man ignored him.  His eyes
travelled slowly round the room, taking in every detail of the humble
furniture. The others stood silent with a little fear in their hearts
at the sight of this old man with the face of a sleep-walker; but
suddenly Pinkey walked up to him, and, reaching on tiptoe, kissed him,
her face pink with emotion. It was the first time since her unforgiven
marriage.  And she hung on him like a child, her wonderful hair, the
colour of a new penny, heightening the bloodless pallor of the old
man's face.  The stolid grey eyes turned misty, and, in silence, he
slowly patted his daughter's cheek.

Chook kept his distance, feeling that he was not wanted.  Mrs
Partridge, who had recovered her nerve, came as near cursing as her
placid, selfish nature would permit.  She could have bitten her tongue
for spite.  She thought of a thousand ways of explaining away the hat.
She should have said that a friend had lent it to her; that she had
bought it for half price at a sale.  She had meant to show it to
William some night after his beer with a plausible story, but his
sudden appearance had upset her apple-cart, and the lie had slipped out
unawares.  She wasn't afraid of William, she scorned him in her heart.
And now that little devil must keep it, for if she went back on her
word it would put William on the track of other little luxuries that
she squeezed out of his wages unknown to him--luxuries whose chief
charm lay in their secrecy.  She felt ready to weep with vexation.
Instead she cried gaily:

"I've been tellin' them what a nice little 'ome they've got together.
I've seen plenty would be glad to start on less."

Partridge seemed not to hear his wife's remark.  His mind dulled by
shock and misfortune, was slowly revolving forgotten scenes.  He saw
with incredible sharpness of view his first home, with its few sticks
of second-hand furniture like Pinkey's, and Pinkey's mother, the dead
image of her daughter.  That was where he belonged--to the old time,
when he was young and proud of himself, able to drink his glass and
sing a song with the best of them.  Someone pulled him gently.  He
looked round, wondering what he was doing there.  But Pinkey pulled him
across the room to Chook, who was standing like a fool.  He looked
Chook up and down as if he were a piece of furniture, and then, without
a word, held out his hand.  The reconciliation was complete.

"Well, we must be goin', William," said Mrs Partridge, wondering how
she was to get home without a hat; but Partridge followed Chook into
the kitchen, where a candle was burning.  Chook held the candle in his
hand to show the little dresser with the cups and saucers and plates
arranged in mathematical precision.  The pots and pans were already
hung on hooks. They had all seen service, and in Chook's eyes seemed
more at home than the brand-new things that hung in the shops.  As
Chook looked round with pride, he became aware that Partridge was
pushing something into his hand. It seemed like a wad of dirty paper,
and Chook held it to the candle in surprise.  He unrolled it with his
fingers, and recognized banknotes.

"'Ere, I don't want yer money," cried Chook, offering the wad of paper
to the old man; but he pushed it back into Chook's hand with an
imploring look.

"D'ye mean it fer Liz?" asked Chook.

Partridge nodded; his eyes were full of tears.

"Yous are a white man, an' I always knew it.  Yer niver 'ad no cause
ter go crook on me, but I ain't complainin'," cried Chook hoarsely.

The tears were running a zigzag course over the grey stubble of
Partridge's cheeks.

"Yer'll be satisfied if I think as much of 'er as yous did of her
mother?" asked Chook, feeling a lump in his throat.

Partridge nodded, swallowing as if he were choking.

"She's my wife, an' the best pal I ever 'ad, an' a man can't say more
than that," cried Chook proudly, but his eyes were full of tears.

Without a word the grey-haired old man shook his head and hurried to
the front door, where Mrs Partridge was waiting impatiently.  She had
forced the hat on Pinkey in a speech full of bitterness, and had
refused the loan of a hat to see her home.  To explain her bare head,
she had prepared a little speech about running down without a hat
because of the fine night, but Partridge was too agitated to notice
what she wore.

When they stepped inside, the first thing that met Chook's eyes was the
hat with the wonderful feathers lying on a chair where Pinkey had
disdainfully thrown it.  He stood and laughed till his ribs ached as he
thought of the figure cut by Mrs Partridge.  He looked round for Pinkey
to join in, and was amazed to find her in tears.

"W'y, wot's the matter, Liz?" he cried, serious in a moment.

"Nuthin'," said Pinkey, drying her eyes "I was cryin' because I'm glad
father made it up with you.  'E's bin a good father to me.  W'en Lil
an' me was kids, 'e used ter take us out every Saturday afternoon, and
buy us lollies," and the tears flowed again.

Chook wisely decided to say nothing about the banknotes till her nerves
were steadier.

"'Ere, cum an' try on yer new 'at," he cried, to divert her thoughts.

"Me?" cried Pinkey, blazing.  "Do yer think I'd put anythin' on my 'ead
belongin' to 'er?"

"All right," said Chook, with regret, "I'll give it to mother fer one
of the kids."

"Yer can burn it, if yer like," cried Pinkey.

Chook held up the hat, and examined it with  interest.  It was quite
unlike any he had seen before.

"See 'ow it look on yer," he coaxed.

"Not me," said Pinkey, glaring at the hat as if it were Mrs Partridge.

But Chook had made up his mind, and after a short scuffle, he dragged
Pinkey before the glass with the hat on her head.

"That's back ter front, yer silly," she said, suddenly quiet.

A minute later she was staring into the glass, silent and absorbed,
forgetful of Mrs Partridge, Chook, and her father.  The hat was a
dream. The black trimmings and drooping feathers set off the ivory
pallor of her face and made the wonderful hair gleam like threads of
precious metal. She turned her head to judge it at very angle,
surprised at her own beauty. Presently she lifted it off her head as
tenderly as if it were a crown, with the reverence of women for the
things that increase their beauty. She put it down as if it were made
of glass.

"I'll git Miss Jones to alter the bow, an' put the feathers farther
back," she said, like one in a dream.

"I thought yer wouldn't wear it at any price," said Chook, delighted,
but puzzled.

"Sometimes you talk like a man that's bin drinkin'," said Pinkey, with
the faintest possible smile.




CHAPTER 16

A DEATH IN THE FAMILY


It was past ten o'clock, and one by one, with a sudden, swift collapse,
each shop in Botany Road extinguished its lights, leaving a blank gap
in the shining row of glass windows.  Mrs Yabsley turned into Cardigan
Street and, taking a firmer grip of her parcels, mounted the hill
slowly on account of her breath.  She still continued to shop at the
last minute, in a panic, as her mother had done before her, proud of
her habit of being the last customer at the butcher's and the grocer's.
She looked up at the sky and, being anxious for the morrow, tried to
forecast the weather. A sharp wind was blowing, and the stars winked
cheerfully in a windswept sky.  There was every promise of a fine day,
but to make sure, she tried the corn on her left foot.  The corn gave
no sign, and she thought with satisfaction of her new companion, Miss
Perkins.

For years she had searched high and low for some penniless woman to
share her cottage and Jonah's allowance, and her pensioners had gone
out of their way to invent new methods of robbing her.  But Miss
Perkins (whom she had found shivering and hungry on the doorstep as she
was going to bed one night and had taken in without asking questions,
as was her habit) guarded Mrs Yabsley's property like a watchdog.  For
Cardigan Street, when it learned that Mrs Yabsley only worked for the
fun of the thing, had leaped to the conclusion that she was rolling in
money.  They knew that she had given Jonah his start in life, and felt
certain that she owned half of the Silver Shoe.

So the older residents had come to look on Mrs Yabsley as their
property, and they formed a sort of club to sponge on her methodically.
They ran out of tea, sugar and flour, and kept the landlord waiting
while they ran up to borrow a shilling.  They each had their own day,
and kept to it, respecting the rights of their friends to a share of
the plunder.  None went away empty-handed, and they looked with
unfriendly eyes on any new arrivals who might interfere with their
rights.  They thought they deceived the old woman, and the tea and
groceries had a finer flavour in consequence; but they would have been
surprised to know that Mrs Yabsley had herself fixed her allowance from
Jonah at two pounds a week and her rent.

"That's enough money fer me to play the fool with, an' if it don't do
much good, it can't do much 'arm," she had remarked, with a mysterious
smile, when he had offered her anything she needed to live in comfort.

The terrible Miss Perkins had altered all that.  She had discovered
that Mrs Harris was paying for a new hat with the shilling a week she
got for Johnny's medicine; that Mrs Thorpe smelt of drink half an hour
after she had got two shillings towards the rent; that Mr Hawkins had
given his wife a black eye for saying that he was strong enough to go
to work again. Mrs Yabsley had listened with a perplexing smile to her
companion's cries of indignation.

"I could 'ave told yer all that meself," she said, "but wot's it
matter? Who am I to sit in judgment on 'em?  They know I've got more
money than I want, but they're too proud to ask fer it openly.  People
with better shirts on their backs are built the same way, if all I 'ear
is true.  I've bin poor meself an' yer may think there's somethin'
wrong in me 'ead, but if I've got a shillin', an' some poor devil's got
nuthin', I reckon I owe 'im sixpence.  It isn't likely fer you to
understand such things, bein' brought up in the lap of luxury, but
don't yer run away with the idea that poor people are the only ones who
are ashamed to beg an' willin' to steal."

Mrs Yabsley had asked no questions when she had found Miss Perkins on
the step, but little by little her companion had dropped hints of
former glory, and then launched into a surprising tale.  She was the
daughter of a rich man, who had died suddenly, and left her at the
mercy of a stepmother and she had grown desperate and fled, choosing to
earn her own bread till her cousin arrived, who was on his way from
England to marry her.  On several occasions she had forgotten that her
name was Perkins, and when Mrs Yabsley dryly commented on this, she
confessed that she had borrowed the name from her maid when she fled.
And she whispered her real name in the ear of Mrs Yabsley, who
marvelled, and promised to keep the secret.

Mrs Yabsley, who was no fool, looked for some proof of the story, and
was satisfied.  The girl was young and pretty, and gave herself the
airs of a duchess.  Mrs Swadling, indeed, had spent so much of her time
at the cottage trying to worm her secret from the genteel stranger that
she unconsciously imitated her aristocratic manner and way of talking,
until Mr Swadling had brought her to her senses by getting drunk and
giving her a pair of black eyes, which destroyed all resemblance to the
fascinating stranger.  Mrs Swadling had learned nothing, but she
assured half the street that Miss Perkins's father had turned her out
of doors for refusing to marry a man old enough to be her father, and
the other half that a forged will had robbed her of thousands and a
carriage and pair.

Cardigan Street had watched the aristocracy from the gallery of the
theatre with sharp, envious eyes, and reported their doings to Mrs
Yabsley, but Miss Perkins was the first specimen she had ever seen in
the flesh. In a week she learned more about the habits of the idle rich
than she had ever imagined in a lifetime.  Her lodger lay in bed till
ten in the morning, and expected to be waited on hand and foot.  And
when Mrs Yabsley could spare a minute, she described in detail the
splendours of her father's home.  She talked incessantly of helping Mrs
Yabsley with the washing, but she seemed as helpless as a child, and
Mrs Yabsley, noticing the softness and whiteness of her hands, knew
that she had never done a stroke of work in her life.  Then, with the
curious reverence of the worker for the idler, she explained to her
lodger that she only worked for exercise.

When Miss Perkins came, she had nothing but what she stood up in; but
one night she slipped out under cover of darkness, and returned with a
dress-basket full of finery, with which she dazzled Mrs Yabsley's eyes
in the seclusion of the cottage.  The basket also contained a number of
pots and bottles with which she spent hours before the mirror, touching
up her eyebrows and cheeks and lips.  When Mrs Yabsley remarked bluntly
that she was young and pretty enough without these aids, she learned
with amazement that all ladies in society used them.  Mrs Yabsley never
tired of hearing Miss Perkins describe the splendours of her lost home.
She recognized that she had lived in another world, where you lounged
gracefully on velvet couches and life was one long holiday.

"It's funny," she remarked, "'ow yer run up agin things in this world.
I never 'ad no partic'lar fancy fer dirty clothes an' soapsuds, but in
my time, which ever way I went, I never ran agin the drorin'-room
carpet an' the easy-chairs.  It was the boilin' copper, the scrubbin'
brush, an' the kitchen floor every time."

She was intensely interested in Miss Perkins's cousin, who was on his
way from England to marry her.  She described him so minutely that Mrs
Yabsley would have recognized him if she had met him in the street.
His income, his tastes and habits, his beautiful letters to Miss
Perkins, filled Mrs Yabsley with respectful admiration.  As a special
favour Miss Perkins promised to read aloud one of his letters
announcing his departure from England, but found that she had mislaid
it.  She made up for it by consulting Mrs Yabsley on the choice of a
husband.  Mrs Yabsley, who had often been consulted on this subject,
gave her opinion.

"Some are ruled by 'is 'andsome face, an' some by 'ow much money 'e's
got, but they nearly all fergit they've got ter live in the same 'ouse
with 'im.  Women 'ave only one way of lookin' at a man in the long run,
an' if yer ask my opinion of any man, I want ter know wot 'e thinks
about women. That's more important, yer'll find in the long run, than
the shape of his nose or the size of 'is bankin' account."

Mrs Yabsley still hid her money, but out of the reach of rats and mice,
and Miss Perkins had surprised her one day by naming the exact amount
she had in her possession.  And she had insisted on Mrs Yabsley going
with her to the Ladies' Paradise and buying a toque, trimmed with jet,
for thirty shillings, a fur tippet for twenty-five shillings, and a
black cashmere dress, ready-made, for three pounds.  Mrs Yabsley had
never spent so much money on dress in her life, but Miss Perkins
pointed out that the cadgers in Cardigan Street went out better dressed
than she on Sunday, and Mrs Yabsley gave in.  Miss Perkins refused to
accept a fur necklet, slightly damaged by moth, reduced to
twelve-and-six, but took a plain leather belt for eighteen pence.  They
were going out to-morrow for the first time to show the new clothes,
and she had left Miss Perkins at home altering the waistband of the
skirt and the hooks on the bodice, as there had been some difficulty in
fitting Mrs Yabsley's enormous girth.

Mrs Yabsley's thoughts came to a sudden stop as  she reached the steep
part of the hill.  On a steep grade her brain ceased to work, and her
body became a huge, stertorous machine, demanding every ounce of
vitality to force it an inch farther up the hill.  Always she had to
fight for wind on climbing a hill, but lately a pain like a knife in
her heart had accompanied the suffocation, robbing her of all power of
locomotion. The doctor had said that her heart was weak, but, judging
by the rest of her body, that was nonsense, and a sniff at the medicine
before she threw it away had convinced her that he was merely guessing.

When she reached the cottage she was surprised to find it in darkness,
but, thinking no harm, took the key from under the doormat and went in.
She lit the candle and looked round, as Jonah had done one night ten
years ago.  The room was unchanged.  The walls were stained with grease
and patches of dirt, added, slowly through the years as a face gathers
wrinkles.  The mottoes and almanacs alone differed.  She looked round,
wondering what errand had taken Miss Perkins out at that time of night.
She was perplexed to see a sheet of paper with writing on it pinned to
the table.  Miss Perkins knew she was no scholar.  Why had she gone out
and left a note on the table?  The pain eased in her heart, and
strength came back slowly to her limbs as the suffocation in her throat
lessened.  At last she was able to think.  She had left Miss Perkins
busy with her needle and cotton, and she noticed with surprise that the
clothes were gone.

With a sudden suspicion she went into the bedroom with the candle, and
looked in the wardrobe made out of six yards of cretonne.  The black
cashmere dress, the fur tippet, and the box containing the toque with
jet trimmings were gone!  She shrank from the truth, and, candle in
hand, examined every room, searching the most unlikely corners for the
missing articles.  She came back and, taking the note pinned to the
table, stared at it with intense curiosity.  What did these black
scratches mean?  For the first time in her life she wished she were
scholar enough to read. She had had no schooling and when she grew up
it seemed a poor way to spend the time reading, when you might be
talking.  Somebody always told you what was in the newspapers, and if
you wanted to know anything else, why, where was your tongue?  She
examined the paper again, but it conveyed no meaning to her anxious
eyes.

And then in a flash she saw Miss Perkins in a new light, The woman's
anxiety about her was a blind to save her money from dribbling out in
petty loans.  Mrs Yabsley, knowing that banks were only traps, still
hid her money so carefully that no one could lay hands on it.  So that
was the root of her care for Mrs Yabsley's appearance.  She held up the
note, and regarded it with a grimly humorous smile.  She knew the truth
now, and felt no desire to read what was written there--some lie, she
supposed--and dropped it on the floor.

Suddenly she felt old and lonely, and wrapping a shawl round her
shoulders, went out to her seat on the veranda.  It was near eleven,
and the street was humming with life.  The sober and thrifty were
trudging home with their loads of provisions; gossips were gathered at
intervals; sudden jests were bandied, conversations were shouted across
the width of the street, for it was Saturday night, and innumerable
pints of beer had put Cardigan Street in a good humour.  The doors were
opened, and the eye travelled straight into the front rooms lit with a
kerosene lamp or a candle.  Under the veranda at the corner the Push
was gathered, the successors of Chook and Jonah, young and vicious, for
the larrikin never grows old.

She looked on the familiar scenes that had been a part of her life
since she could remember.  The street was changed, she thought, for a
new generation had arrived, scorning the old traditions.  The terrace
opposite, sinking in decay, had become a den of thieves, the scum of a
city rookery. She felt a stranger in her own street, and saw that her
money had spoilt her relations with her neighbours.  Once she could
read them like a book, but these people came to her with lies and many
inventions for the sake of a few miserable shillings.  She wondered
what the world was coming to. She threw her thoughts into the past with
an immense regret.  A group on the kerbstone broke into song:

  Now, honey, yo' stay in yo' own back yard,
  Doan min' what dem white chiles do;
  What show yo' suppose dey's a-gwine to gib
  A little black coon like yo'?
  So stay on this side of the high boahd fence,
  An', honey, doan cry so hard;
  Go out an' a-play, jes' as much as yo' please,
  But stay in yo' own back yard.

The tune, with a taking lilt in it, made no impression on the old
woman. And she thought with regret that the old tunes had died out with
the people who sang them.  These people had lost the trick of enjoying
themselves in a simple manner.  Ah for the good old times, when the
street was as good as a play, and the people drank and quarrelled and
fought and sang without malice!  A meaner race had come in their stead,
with meaner habits and meaner vices.  Her thoughts were interrupted by
a tinkling bell, and a voice that cried:

"Peas an' pies, all 'ot!--all 'ot!"

It was the pieman, pushing a handcart.  He went the length of the
street, unnoticed.  She thought of Joey, dead and gone these long
years, with his shop on wheels and his air of prosperity.  His widow
lived on the rent of a terrace of houses, but his successor was as lean
as a starved cat, for the people's tastes had changed, and the
chipped-potato shop round the corner took all their money.  She thought
with pride of Joey and the famous wedding feast--the peas, the pies,
the saveloys, the beer, the songs and laughter.  Ah well, you could say
what you liked, the good old times were gone for ever.  Once the street
was like a play, and now...Her thoughts were disturbed again by a
terrific noise in the terrace opposite. The door of a cottage flew
open, and a woman ran screaming into the road, followed by her husband
with a tomahawk.  But as the door slammed behind him, he suddenly
changed his mind and, turning back, hammered on the closed door with
frantic rage, calling on someone within to come out and be killed.
Then, as he grew tired of trying to get in, he remembered his wife, but
she had disappeared.

The crowd gathered about, glad of a diversion, and  the news travelled
across the street to Mrs Yabsley on her veranda.  Doughy the baker,
stepping down unexpectedly from the Woolpack to borrow a shilling from
his wife, had found her drinking beer in the kitchen with Happy Jack.
And while Doughy was hammering on the front door, Happy Jack had
slipped out at the back, and was watching Doughy's antics over the
shoulders of his pals.  Presently Doughy grew tired and, crossing the
street, sat on the kerbstone in front of Mrs Yabsley's, with his eye on
the door.  And as he sat, he caressed the tomahawk, and carried on a
loud conversation with himself, telling all the secrets of his married
life to the street. Cardigan Street was enjoying itself.  The crowd
dwindled as the excitement died out, and Doughy was left muttering to
himself.  From the group at the corner came the roar of a chorus:

  You are my honey, honeysuckle, I am the bee,
  I'd like to sip the honey sweet from those red lips, you see;
  I love you dearly, dearly, and I want you to love me;
  You are my honey, honeysuckle, I am the bee.

Doughy still muttered, but the beer had deadened his senses and his
jealous anger had evaporated.  Half an hour later his wife crossed the
street cautiously and went inside.  Doughy saw her and, having reached
the maudlin stage, got up and lurched across the street, anxious to
make it up and be friends.  Quite like the old times, thought Mrs
Yabsley, when the street was as good as a play.  And suddenly
remembering her dismal thoughts of an hour ago, she saw in a flash that
she had grown old and that the street had remained young.  The past, on
which her  mind dwelt so fondly, was not wonderful.  It was her youth
that was wonderful, and now she was grown old.  She recognized that the
street was the same, and that she had changed--that the world is for
ever beginning for some and ending for others.

It was nearly midnight, and, with a shiver, she pulled the shawl over
her shoulders and took a last look at the street before she went to
bed. Thirty years ago since she came to live in it, when half the
street was an open paddock!  If Jim could see it now he wouldn't know
it!  The thought brought the vision of him before her eyes.  She was an
old woman now, but in her mind's eye he remained for ever young and for
ever joyous, the smart workman in a grey cap, with the brown moustache
and laughing eyes, who was nobody's enemy but his own.  Something
within her had snapped when he died, and she had remained on the
defensive against life, expecting nothing, surprised at nothing,
content to sit out the performance like a spectator at the play.

She thought of to-morrow, and decided to pay a surprise visit to the
Silver Shoe before the people set out for church.  There was something
wrong with Ada, she felt sure.  Jonah had failed to look her in the eye
when she had asked news of Ada the last time.  Well, she would go and
see for herself, and talk Ada into her senses again.  She locked the
door and went to bed.

She gave Jonah and Ada a surprise, but not in the way she intended. On
Sunday morning it happened that Mrs Swadling sent over for a pinch of
tea, and, growing impatient, ran across to see what was keeping Tommy.
She found that he could make no one hear, and growing suspicious,
called the neighbours.  An hour later the police forced the door, and
found Mrs Yabsley dead in bed.  The doctor said that she had died in
her sleep from heart failure.  Mrs Swadling, wondering what had become
of Miss Perkins, found a note lying on the floor, and wondered no more
when she read:


DEAR MRS YABSLEY,

I am sorry that I can't stay for the outing to-morrow, but my cousin
came out of Darlinghurst jail this morning, and we are going to the
West to make a fresh start.  All I told you about my beautiful home was
quite true, only I was the upper housemaid.  I am taking a few odds and
ends that you bought for the winter, as I could never find out where
you hid your money.  I have searched till my back ached, and quite
agree with you that it is safer than a bank.  I left your clothes at
Aaron's pawnshop, and will post you the ticket.  When you get this I
shall be safe on the steamer, which is timed to leave at ten o'clock.
I hope someone will read this to you, and tell you that I admire you
immensely, although I take a strange way of showing it.

In haste,
  MAY




CHAPTER 17

THE TWO-UP SCHOOL


The silence of sleeping things hung over the Haymarket, and the three
long, dingy arcades lay huddled and lifeless in the night, black and
threatening against a cloudy sky.  Presently, among the odd nocturnal
sounds of a great city, the vague yelping of a dog, the scream of a
locomotive, the furtive step of a prowler, the shrill cry of a
feathered watchman from the roost, the ear caught a continuous rumble
in the distance that changed as it grew nearer into the bumping and
jolting of a heavy cart.

It was the first of a lumbering procession that had been travelling all
night from the outlying suburbs--Botany, Fairfield, Willoughby,
Smithfield, St Peters, Woollahra and Double Bay--carrying the patient
harvest of Chinese gardens laid out with the rigid lines of a
chessboard.  A sleepy Chinaman, perched on a heap of cabbages, pulled
the horse to a standstill, and one by one the carts backed against the
kerbstone forming a line the length of the arcades, waiting patiently
for the markets to open.  And still, muffled in the distance, or
growing sharp and clear, the continuous rumble broke the silence, the
one persistent sound in the brooding night.

Presently the iron gates creaked on rusty hinges, the long, silent
arcades were flooded with the glow from clusters of electric bulbs,
and, with the shuffle of feet on the stone flags, the huge market woke
slowly to life, like a man who stretches himself and yawns.  Outside,
the carters encouraged the horses with short, guttural cries, the heavy
vehicles bumped on the uneven flags, the horses' feet clattered loudly
on the stones as the drivers backed the carts against the stalls, and
the unloading began.

In half an hour the grimy stalls had disappeared under piles of green
vegetables, built up in orderly masses by the Chinese dealers.  The
rank smell of cabbages filled the air, the attendants gossiped in a
strange tongue, and the arcades formed three green lanes, piled with
the fruits of the earth.  Here and there the long green avenues were
broken with splashes of colour where piles of carrots, radishes and
rhubarb, the purple bulbs of beetroot, the creamy white of
cauliflowers, and the soft green of eschalots and lettuce broke the
dominant green of the cabbage.

The markets were transformed; it was an invasion from the East.
Instead of the sharp, broken cries of the dealers on Saturday night,
the shuffle of innumerable feet, the murmur of innumerable voices in a
familiar tongue, there was a silence broken only by strange guttural
sounds dropping into a sing-song cadence, the language of the East.
Chinamen stood on guard at every stall, slant-eyed and yellow, clothed
in the cheap slops of Sydney, their impassive features carved in
fantastic ugliness, surveying the scene with inscrutable eyes that had
opened first on rice-fields, sampans, junks, pagodas, and the barbaric
trappings of the silken East.

At four o'clock the sales began, and the early buyers arrived with the
morose air of men who have been robbed of their sleep.  There were
small dealers, Dagoes from the fruit shops, greengrocers from the
suburbs, with a chaff-bag slung across their arm, who buy by the dozen.
They moved silently from stall to stall, pricing the vegetables,
feeling the market, calculating what they would gain by waiting till
the prices dropped, making the round of the markets before they filled
the chaff-bags and disappeared into the darkness doubled beneath their
loads.

Chook and Pinkey reached the markets by the first workman's tram in the
morning.  As the rain had set in, Chook had thrown the chaff-bags over
his shoulders, and Pinkey wore an old jacket that she was ashamed to
wear in the daytime.  By her colour you could tell that they had been
quarrelling as usual, because she had insisted on coming with Chook to
carry one of the chaff-bags.  And now, as she came into the light of
the arcades, she looked like a half-drowned sparrow.  The rain dripped
from her hat, and the shabby thin skirt clung to her legs like a wet
dishcloth.  Chook looked at her with rage in his heart.  These trips to
the market always rolled his pride in the mud, the pride of the male
who is willing to work his fingers to the bone to provide his mate with
fine plumage.

The cares of the shop had told on Pinkey's looks, for the last two
years spent with Chook's mother had been like a long honeymoon, and
Pinkey had led the life of a lady, with nothing to do but scrub and
wash  and help Chook's mother keep her house like a new pin.  So she
had grown plump and pert like a well-fed sparrow, but the care and
worry of the new shop had sharpened the angles of her body.  Not that
Pinkey cared.  She had the instinct for property, the passionate desire
to call something her own, an instinct that lay dormant and undeveloped
while she lived among other people's belongings.  Moreover, she had
discovered a born talent for shopkeeping.  With her natural desire to
please, she enchanted the customers, welcoming them with a special
smile, and never forgetting to remember that it was Mrs Brown's third
child that had the measles, and that Mrs Smith's case puzzled the
doctors.  They only wanted a horse and cart, so that she could mind the
shop while Chook went hawking about the streets, and their fortunes
were made.  But this morning the rain and Chook's temper had damped her
spirits, and she looked round with dismay on the cold, silent arcades,
recalling with a passionate longing the same spaces transformed by
night into the noisy, picturesque bazaar through which she had been
accustomed to saunter as an idler walks the block on a Saturday morning.

Pinkey waited, shivering in a corner, while Chook did the buying.  He
walked along the stalls, eyeing the sellers and their goods with the
air of a freebooter, for, as he always had more impudence than cash, he
was a redoubtable customer.  There was always a touch of comedy in
Chook's buying, and the Chinamen knew and dreaded him, instantly on the
defensive, guarding their precious cabbages against his predatory
fingers, while Chook parted with his shillings as  cheerfully as a
lioness parts with her cubs.  A pile of superb cauliflowers caught his
eye.

"'Ow muchee?" he inquired.

"Ten shilling," replied the Chinaman.

"Seven an' six," answered Chook, promptly.

"No fear," replied the seller, relapsing into Celestial gravity and
resuming his dream of fan-tan and opium.

Chook walked the length of the arcade and then came back.  These were
the pick of the market, and he must have them.  Suddenly he pushed a
handful of silver into the Chinaman's hand and began to fill his bag
with the cauliflowers.  With a look of suspicion the seller counted the
money in his hand; there were only eight shillings.

"'Ere, me no take you money," cried he, frantic with rage, trying to
push the silver into Chook's hand.  And then Chook overwhelmed him with
a torrent of words, swearing that he had taken the money and made a
sale. The Chinaman hesitated and was lost.

"All li, you no pickum," he said, sullenly.

"No fear!" said Chook, grabbing the largest he could see.

In the next arcade he bought a dozen of rhubarb, Chin Lung watching him
suspiciously as he counted them into the bag.

"You gottum more'n a dozen," he cried.

"What a lie!" cried Chook, with a stare of outraged virtue.

"I'll push yer face in if yer say I pinched yer rotten stuff," and he
emptied the rhubarb out of the bag, dexterously kicking the thirteenth
bunch under the stall.

"Now are yez satisfied?" he cried, and began counting the bunches into
the bag two by two.  As the Chinaman watched sharply, he stooped to
move a cabbage that he was standing on, and instantly Chook whipped in
two bunches without counting.

"Twelve," said Chook, with a look of indignation.  "I 'ope ye're
satisfied: I am."

When the bags were full, Pinkey was blue with the cold, and the dawn
had broken, dull and grey, beneath the pitiless fall of rain.  It was
no use waiting for such rain to stop, and they quarrelled again because
Chook insisted that she should wait in the markets till he went home
with one chaff-bag and came back for the other.  Each bag, bulging with
vegetables, was nearly the size of Pinkey, but the expert in moving
furniture was not to be dismayed by that.  She ended the dispute by
seizing a bag and trudging out into the rain, bent double beneath the
load, leaving Chook to curse and follow.

Halfway through breakfast Pinkey caught Chook's eye fixed on her in a
peculiar manner.

"Wot are yez thinkin' about?" she asked, with a smile.

"Well, if yer want ter know, I'm thinkin' wot a fool I was to marry
yer," said Chook, bitterly.

A cold wave swept over Pinkey.  It flashed through her mind that he was
tired of her; that he thought she wasn't strong enough to do her share
of the work.  Well, she could take poison or throw herself into the
harbour.

"Ah!" she said, cold as a stone.  "Anythin' else?"

"I mean," said Chook, stumbling for words, "I ought to 'ave 'ad more
sense than ter drag yez out of a good 'ome ter come 'ere an' work like
a bus 'orse."

"Is that all?" inquired Pinkey.

"Yes; wot did yer think?" said Chook, miserably.  "It fair gives me the
pip ter see yer 'umpin' a sack round the stalls, when I wanted ter make
yer 'appy an' comfortable."

Pinkey took a long breath of relief.  She needn't drown herself, then,
he wasn't tired of her.

"An' who told yer I wasn't 'appy an' comfortable?" she inquired,
"'cause yer can go an' tell 'em it's only a rumour.  An' while ye're
about it, yous can tell 'em I've got a good 'ome, a good 'usband, an'
everythin' I want."  Here she looked round the dingy room as if daring
it to contradict her.  "An' as fer the good 'ome I came from, I wasn't
wanted there, an' was 'arf starved; an' now the butcher picks the best
joint an' if I lift me finger, a big 'ulkin' feller falls over 'imself
ter run an' do wot I want."

Chook listened without a smile.  Then his lips twitched and his eyes
turned misty.  Pinkey ran at him, crying, "Yer silly juggins, if I've
got yous, I've got all I want." She hung round his neck, crying for
pleasure, and Mrs Higgs knocked on the counter till she was tired
before she got her potatoes.

The wet morning gave Pinkey a sore throat, and that finished Chook. The
shop gave them a bare living, but with a horse and cart he could easily
double their takings, and Pinkey could lie snug in bed while he drove
to Paddy's Market in the morning.  He looked round in desperation for
some way of making enough money to buy Jack Ryan's horse and cart,
which were still for sale.  He could think of nothing but the two-up
school, which had swallowed all his spare money before he was married.
Since his marriage he had sworn off the school, as he couldn't spare
the money with a wife to keep.

All his life Chook had lived from hand to mouth.  He belonged to the
class that despises its neighbours for pinching and scraping, and yet
is haunted by the idea of sudden riches falling into its lap from the
skies. Certainly Chook had given Fortune no excuse for neglecting him.
He was always in a shilling sweep, a sixpenny raffle, a hundred to one
double on the Cup.  He marked pak-a-pu tickets, took the kip at two-up,
and staked his last shilling more readily than the first.  It was
always the last shilling that was going to turn the scale and make his
fortune.  Well, he would try his luck again unknown to Pinkey, arguing
with the blind obstinacy of the gambler that after his abstinence fate
would class him as a beginner, the novice who wins a sweep with the
first ticket he buys, or backs the winner at a hundred to one because
he fancies its name.

Chook and Pinkey had been inseparable since their marriage, and he
spent a week trying to think of some excuse for going out alone at
night.  But Pinkey, noticing his gloomy looks, decided that he needed
livening up, and ordered him to spend a shilling on the theatre.
Instantly Chook declined to go alone, and Pinkey fell into the trap.
She had meant to go with him at the last moment, but now she declared
that the night air made her cough.  Chook could tell her all about the
play when he came home. This in itself was a good omen, and  when two
black cats crossed his path on the way to the tram, it confirmed his
belief that his luck was in.

When Chook reached Castlereagh Street, he hesitated.  It was market-day
on Thursday, and the two sovereigns in his pocket stood for his banking
account.  They would last for twenty minutes, if his luck were out, and
he would never forgive himself.  But at that moment a black cat crossed
the footpath rapidly in front of him, and his courage revived.  That
made the third tonight.  Men were slipping in at the door of the
school, which was guarded by a sentinel.  Chook, being unknown, waited
till he saw an acquaintance, and was then passed in.  The play had not
begun, and his long absence from the alley gave his surroundings an air
of novelty.

The large room, furnished like a barn, gave no sign of its character,
except for the ring, marked by a huge circular seat, the inner circle
padded and covered with canvas to deaden the noise of falling coins.
Above the ring the roof rose into a dome where the players pitched the
coins.  The gaffers, a motley crowd, were sitting or standing about,
playing cards or throwing deck quoits to kill time till the play began.
The money-changer, his pockets bulging with silver, came up, and Chook
turned his sovereigns into half-crowns.  Chook looked with curiosity at
the crowd; they were all strangers to him.

The cards and quoits were dropped as the boxer entered the ring.  It
was Paddy Flynn himself, a retired pugilist, with the face and neck of
a bull, wearing a sweater and sandshoes, his arms and legs bared to
show the enormous muscles of the ancient athlete.  He threw the kip and
the pennies into the centre, and took his place on a low seat at the
head of the ring.

The gaffers scrambled for places, wedged in a compact circle, the
spectators standing behind them to advise or take a hand as occasion
offered.  Chook looked at the kip, a flat piece of wood, the size of a
butter-pat, and the two pennies, blackened on the tail and polished on
the face.  A gaffer stepped into the ring and picked them up.

"A dollar 'eads!  A dollar tails!  'Arf a dollar 'eads!" roared the
gamblers, making their bets.

"Get set!--get set!" cried the boxer, lolling in his seat with a
nonchalant air; and in a twinkling a bright heap of silver lay in front
of each player, the wagers made with the gaffers opposite.  The spinner
handed his stake of five shillings to the boxer, who cried "Fair go!"

The spinner placed the two pennies face down on the kip, and then, with
a turn of the wrist, the coins flew twenty feet into the air.  For a
second there was a dead silence, every eye following the fall of the
coins.  One fell flat, the other rolled on its edge, every neck craned
to follow its movements.  One head and one tail lay in the ring.

"Two ones!" cried the boxer; and the stakes remained untouched.

The spinner tossed the coins again, and, as they fell, the gaffers
cried "Two heads!"

"Two heads," repeated the boxer, with the decision of a judge.

The next moment a shower of coins flew like spray across the ring; the
tails had paid their dollars to the winning heads.  Three times the
spinner threw heads, and the pile of silver in front of Chook grew
larger. Then Chook, who was watching the spinner, noticed that he
fumbled the pennies slightly as he placed them on the kip.  Success had
shaken his nerve, and instantly Chook changed his cry to "A dollar
tails--a dollar tails!"

The coins spun into the air with a nervous jerk, and fell with the two
black tails up.  The spinner threw down the kip, and took his winnings
from the boxer--five pounds for himself and ten shillings for the boxer.

As another man took the kip, the boxer glared at the winning players.
"How is it?" he cried with the voice of a footpad demanding charity,
and obeying the laws of the game, the winners threw a dollar or more
from their heap to the boss.

For an hour Chook won steadily, and then at every throw the heap of
coins in front of him lessened.  A trot or succession of seven tails
followed, and the kip changed hands rapidly, for the spinner drops the
kip when he throws tails.  Chook stopped betting during the trot,
obeying an instinct. Without counting, his practised eye told him that
there were about five pounds in the heap of coins in front of him.  The
seventh man threw down the kip, and Chook, as if obeying a signal, rose
from his seat and walked into the centre of the ring.  He handed five
shillings to the boxer, and placed the pennies tail up on the kip.  His
stake was covered with another dollar, the betting being even money.

"Fair go!" cried the boxer.

Chook jerked the coins upward with the skill of an old gaffer; they
flew into the dome, and then dropped spinning.  As they touched the
canvas floor, a hundred voices cried "Two heads!"

"Two heads!" cried the boxer, and a shower of coins flew across the
ring to the winners.

"A dollar or ten bob heads!" cried the boxer, staking Chook's win.
Chook spun the coins again, and as they dropped heads, the boxer raked
in one pound.

"Wot d'ye set?" he cried to Chook.

"The lot," cried Chook, and spun the coins.  Heads again, and Chook had
two pounds in the boxer's hands, who put ten shillings aside in case
Chook "threw out", and staked thirty.  Chook headed them again, and was
three pounds to the good.  The gaffers realized that a trot of heads
was coming, and the boxer had to offer twelve to ten to cover Chook's
stake. For the seventh time Chook threw heads, and was twelve pounds to
the good. This was his dream come true, and with the faith of the
gambler in omens, he knew that was the end of his luck.  He set two
pounds of his winnings, and tossed the coins.

"Two ones!" cried the gamblers, with a roar.

Chook threw again.  One penny fell flat on its face; the other rolled
on its edge across the ring.  In a sudden, deadly silence, a hundred
necks craned to follow its movements.  Twenty or thirty pounds in
dollars and half-dollars depended on the wavering coin.  Suddenly it
stopped, balanced as if in doubt, and fell on its face.

"Two tails!" cried the gaffers, and the trot of  heads was finished.
Chook's stake was swept away, and the boxer handed him ten pounds.
Chook tossed a pound to him for commission.  He acknowledged it with a
grunt, and looking round the ring at the winning players cried out "How
is it?--how is it?"  With his other winnings Chook had over fifteen
pounds in his pocket, and he decided to go, although the night was
young. As he went to the stairs, the boxer cried out, "No one to leave
for five minutes!" following the custom when a big winner left the
room, to prevent a swarm of cadgers, lug-biters, and spielers begging a
tram fare, a bed, a cup of coffee from the winner.  When Chook reached
the top of the staircase, the G.P.O. clock began to strike, and Chook
stopped to listen, for he had forgotten the lapse of time.  He counted
the last stroke, eleven, and then, as if it had been a signal, came the
sound of voices and a noise of hammering from the front door.  The next
moment the doorkeeper ran up the narrow staircase crying "The Johns are
here!"

For a moment the crowd of gamblers stared, aghast; then the look of
trapped animals came into their faces, and with the noise of
splintering wood below, they made a rush at the money on the floor.
The boxer ran swearing into the ring to hide the kip and the pennies,
butting with his bull shoulders against a mob of frenzied gaffers mad
with fear and greed, grabbing at any coins they could reach in despair
of finding their own. The news spread like fire.  The school was
surrounded by a hundred policemen in plain clothes and uniform; every
outlet from the alley was watched and guarded.  A cold scorn of the
police filled Chook's mind. For months the school ran unmolested, and
then a raid was planned in the spirit of sportsmen arranging a drive of
rabbits for a day's outing.  This raid meant capture by the police, an
ignominious procession two by two to the lock-up, a night in the cells
unless bail was found, and a fine and a lecture from the magistrate in
the morning.  To some it meant more.  To the bank clerk it meant the
sack; to the cashier who was twenty pounds short in his cash, an
examination of his books and discovery; to the spieler who was wanted
by the police, scrutiny by a hundred pair of official eyes.

The gaffers ran here and there bewildered, cursing and swearing in an
impotence of rage.  Like trapped rats the men ran to the windows and
doors, but the room, fortified with iron bars and barbed wire, held
them like a trap.  The boxer cried out that bail would be found for the
captured, but his bull roar was lost in the din.

There was a rush of heavy police boots on the stairs, the lights were
suddenly turned out, and in the dark a wild scramble for liberty.
Someone smashed a window that was not barred, and a swarm of men fought
round the opening, dropping one by one on to the roof of some stables.
The first man through shouted something and tried to push back, but a
frenzied stream of men pushed him and the others into the arms of the
police, who had marked this exit beforehand.  Chook found himself on
the roof, bleeding from a cut lip, and hatless.  Below him men were
crouching on the roofs like cats, to be picked off at the leisure of
the police.

He could never understand how he escaped.  He stood on the roof
awaiting capture quietly, as resistance was useless, picked up a hat
two sizes too large for him, and, walking slowly to the end of the
roof, ducked suddenly under an old signboard that was nailed to a
chimney.  Every moment he expected a John to walk up to him, but, to
his amazement, none came. As a man may walk unhurt amid a shower of
bullets, he had walked unseen under twenty policemen's eyes.  From
Castlereagh Street came a murmur of voices.  The theatres were out, and
a huge crowd, fresh from the painted scenes and stale odours of the
stalls and gallery, watched with hilarious interest the harlequinade on
the roofs.  In half an hour a procession was formed, two deep, guarded
by the police, and followed by a crowd stumbling over one another to
keep pace with it, shouting words of encouragement and sympathy to the
prisoners.  Five minutes later Chook slithered down a veranda post, a
free man, and walked quietly to the tram.




CHAPTER 18

THE "ANGEL" LOSES A CUSTOMER


Six months after the death of Mrs Yabsley, Ada and Mrs Herring sat in
the back parlour of the Angel sipping brandy.  They had drunk their
fill and it was time to be going, but Ada had no desire to move.  She
tapped her foot gently as she listened to the other woman's ceaseless
flow of talk, but her mind was elsewhere.  She had reached the stage
when the world seemed a delightful place to live in; when it was a
pleasure to watch the people moving and gesticulating like figures in a
play, without jar or fret, as machines move on well-oiled cogs.

There was nothing to show that she had been drinking, except an
uncertain smile that rippled over her heavy features as the wind breaks
the surface of smooth water.  Mrs Herring was as steady as a rock, but
she knew without looking that the end of her nose was red, for drink
affected that organ as heat affects a poker.  Ada looked round with
affection on the small room with the sporting prints, the whisky
calendar, and the gong. For months past she had felt more at home there
than at the "Silver Shoe."

She had never forgotten the scene that had followed her first visit to
this room, when Jonah, surprised by her good humour, had smelt brandy
on her breath.  The sight of a misshapen devil, with murder in his
eyes, spitting insults, had sobered her like cold water.  She had
stammered out a tale of a tea-room where she had been taken ill, and
brandy had been brought in from the adjoining hotel.  Mrs Herring, who
had spent a lifetime in deceiving men, had prepared this story for her
as one teaches a lesson to a child, but she had forgotten it until she
found herself mechanically repeating it, her brain sobered by the
shock.  For a month she had avoided the woman with the hairy lip, and
then the death of her mother had removed the only moral barrier that
stood between her and hereditary impulse.

Since then she had gone to pieces.  Mrs Herring had prescribed her
favourite remedy for grief, a drop of cordial, and Jonah for once found
himself helpless, for Mrs Herring taught Ada more tricks than a monkey.
Privately she considered Ada a dull fool, but she desired her company,
for she belonged to the order of sociable drunkards, for whom drink has
no flavour without company, and who can no more drink alone than men
can smoke in the dark.  Ada was an ideal companion, rarely breaking the
thread of her ceaseless babble, and never forgetting to pay for her
share.  It was little enough she could squeeze out of Aaron, and often
she drank for the afternoon at Ada's expense.

She looked anxiously at Ada, and then at the clock.  For she drank with
the precision of a patient taking medicine, calculating to a drop the
amount she could carry, and allowing for the slight increase of
giddiness when she stepped into the fresh air of the streets.  But
to-day she felt anxious, for Ada had already drunk a glass too much,
and turned from her coaxings with an obstinate smile.  The more she
drank, she thought, the less she would care for what Jonah said when
she got home.  Mrs Herring felt annoyed with her for threatening to
spoil a pleasant afternoon, but she talked on to divert her thoughts
from the brandy.

"And remember what I told you, dearie.  Every woman should learn to
manage men.  Some say you should study their weak points, but that was
never my way.  They all like to think their word is law, and you can do
anything you please if you pretend you are afraid to do anything
without asking their permission.  And always humour them in one thing.
Now, Aaron insists on punctuality.  His meals must be ready on the
stroke, and once he is fed, I can do as I please.  Now, do be ruled by
me, dearie, and come home."

But Ada had turned unmanageable, and called for more drink.  Mrs
Herring could have slapped her.  Her practised eye told her that Ada
would soon be too helpless to move, and she thought, with a cringing
fear, of Aaron the Jew, and her board and lodging that depended on his
stomach.

Outside it had begun to rain, and Joe Grant, a loafer by trade and a
lug-biter by circumstance, shifted from one foot to another, and stared
dismally at the narrow slit between the swinging doors of the "Angel",
where he knew there was warmth, and light, and comfort--everything that
he desired.  The rain, fine as needle-points, fell without noise,
imperceptibly covering his clothes and beard with  moisture.  The
pavements and street darkened as if a shadow had been thrown over them,
and then shone in irregular streaks and patches of light, reflected
from the jets of light that suddenly appeared in the shop windows.  Joe
looked at the clock through the windows of the bar.  It was twenty to
six.  The rain had brought the night before its time, and Joe wondered
what had become of Mrs Jones and her pal.  He had had the luck to see
her going in at the side door, and she was always good for a tray bit
when she came out. Failing her, he must depend on the stream of
workmen, homeward bound, who always stopped at the Angel for a pint on
their way home.

Suddenly the huge white globes in front of the hotel spluttered and
flashed, piercing the darkness and the rain with their powerful rays.
The bar, as suddenly illumined, brilliant with mirrors and glass,
invited the weary passenger in to share its comforts.  Joe fingered the
solitary coin in his pocket--threepence.  It was more than the price of
a beer to him; it was the price of admission to the warm, comfortable
bar every night, for the landlord was the friend of every man with the
price of a drink in his pocket, and once inside, he could manage to
drink at other people's expense till closing time.  He kept an eye on
the side door for Ada and Mrs Herring, at the same time watching each
pedestrian as he emerged from the darkness into the glare of the
electric lights.

The fine points of rain had gradually increased to a smart downfall,
that drummed on the veranda overhead and gurgled past his feet in the
gutter. Behind him, from a leak in the pipe, the water fell to the
ground with a noisy splash as if someone had turned on a tap.  Joe felt
that he hated water like a cat.  His watery blue eyes, fixed with a
careless scrutiny on every face, told him in an instant whether the
owner was a likely mark that he could touch for a drink, but his luck
was out.  He decided that the two women must have slipped out by
another door.

Jonah, who had been caught in the shower, stopped for a moment under
the veranda, anxious to get back to the Silver Shoe before closing
time.  Joe let him pass without stirring a muscle; he knew him.  If you
asked him for a drink, he offered you work.  But, as Jonah hesitated
before facing the rain again, a sudden anger flamed in his mind at the
sight of Jonah's gold watch-chain and silver-mounted umbrella.  Cripes,
he knew that fellow when he knocked about with the Push, and now he was
rolling in money!  And with the sudden impulse of a suicide who throws
himself under a train, he stepped up to Jonah.

"Could I 'ave a word with yer, Mr Jones?" he mumbled.

"'Ello, Smacker!  Just gittin' 'ome, like myself?" said Jonah.

"Not much use gittin' 'ome to an empty 'ouse," said Joe, with a doleful
whine, "an' I've earned nuthin' this week."

"'Ow do yer expect to find work, when the only place yer look fer it is
in the bottom of a beer-glass?" said Jonah.

"I 'ave me faults, none knows better than meself,"  said Joe humbly,
"but thinkin' of them won't fill me belly on a night like this."

"Now look 'ere," said Jonah, "I'm in a 'urry.  I won't give yer any
money, but if ye're 'ungry, come across the street, an' I'll buy yer a
meal."

Joe hesitated, but the thought of good money being wasted on food was
too much for him, and he played his last card.

"Look, I'll tell yer straight, Mr Jones; it's no use tryin' to pull yer
leg.  I can git all the tucker I want for the askin', but I'm dyin' for
a beer to cheer me up an' keep out the cold."

He smiled at Jonah with an air of frankness, hoping to play on Jonah's
vanity by this cynical confession, but his heart sank as Jonah replied
"No, not a penny for drink," and prepared to dive into the rain.

"'Orl right, boss," muttered Joe; and then, half to himself, he added
"'Ard luck, to grudge a man a pint, with 'is own missis inside there
gittin' as full as a tick."

"What's that yer say?" cried Jonah, turning pale.

"Nuthin'," muttered Joe, conscious that he had made a mistake.

But a sudden light flashed on Jonah.  Ada had lied to him from the
beginning.  She had told him that she got the drink at Paddy Boland's
in the Haymarket, a notorious drinking-den for women, where spirits
were served to customers, disguised as light refreshments.  The fear of
a public scandal in a room full of women had alone prevented him from
going there to find her.  It was Mrs Herring's craft to throw Jonah on
the wrong scent, and sip comfortably in the back parlour of the Angel,
safe from detection, a stone's throw from the Silver Shoe.  Jonah
turned and walked in at the side door, leaving Joe with the uneasy
feeling of the man who killed the goose to get the golden eggs.

Ada had just rung the gong, insisting on another drink with the fatuous
obstinacy of drunkards.  She lolled in her chair, her hat tilted over
one ear, watching the door for the return of Cassidy with the tray and
glasses, and wondering dimly why Mrs Herring's voice sounded far away,
as if she were speaking through a telephone.  Mrs Herring, the tip of
her nose growing a brighter red with drink and vexation, was scolding
and coaxing by turns in a rapid whisper.  Suddenly she stopped, her
eyes fixed in a petrified stare at an apparition in the doorway.  It
was the devil himself, Ada's husband, the hunchback.  As he stood in
the doorway, his eyes travelled from her to his wife.  His face turned
white, a nasty greyish white, his eyes snapped like an angry cat's, and
then his face hardened in a sneer.  But Ada, who was fast losing
consciousness of her identity, stared at her husband without fear or
surprise.  The deadly silence was broken by the arrival of Cassidy, who
nearly ran into Jonah with the tray.

"Beg pardon," said he, briskly, and looking down found himself staring
into the face of a grinning corpse.

"Don't mind me, Cassidy," said the corpse, speaking.  "She can stand
another glass, I think."

Cassidy put the tray down with a jerk that upset the glasses.

"I'm very sorry this should have happened, Mr Jones," he stammered.
"I'm very ..."

"Of course you are," cried Jonah.  "Ye're sorry fer anythin' that
interferes with yer business of turning men and women into swine."

"Come now," said Cassidy, making a last stand on his dignity, "this is
a public house, and I am bound to serve drink to anyone that asks for
it. As a matter of fact, I didn't know the lady was in this condition
till the barman sent me in to see what could be done."

"You're a liar, an' a fat liar.  I hate fat liars--I don't know
why--an' if yer tell another, I'll ram yer teeth down yer throat.
She's been comin' 'ere for months, an' you've been sending her home
drunk for the sake of a few shillings, to poison my life and make her
name a byword in the neighbourhood.  Now, listen to me!  You'll not
serve that woman again with drink under any pretext whatever."

"I should be glad to oblige you; but this is a public house, as I said
before..."

He stopped as Jonah took a step forward, his fists clenched,
transformed in a moment into Jonah the larrikin, king of the Cardigan
Street Push.

"D'ye remember me, Cassidy?" he cried.  "I've sent better men than you
to the 'orspital in a cab.  D'ye remember w'en yer were a cop with one
stripe, an' we smashed every window in Flanagan's pub for laggin'?
D'ye remember the time yer used ter turn fer safety down a side street
w'en yer saw us comin'?"

Cassidy's face stiffened for a moment, the old policeman coming to life
again at the sight of his natural enemy, the larrikin.  But years of
ease had buried the guardian of the law under layers of fat.  He
stepped hastily back from Jonah's fists.

"No, I won't hit yer; yer might splash," cried Jonah bitterly.

And Cassidy, forgetting that the dreaded Push was scattered to the
winds, and trembling for the safety of his windows, spoke in a changed
voice.

"I'll do anything to meet your wishes, Mr Jones.  There's no call to
rake up old times.  We've both got on since then, and it won't pay us
to be enemies.  I promise you faithfully that your wife shan't be
served with drink here."

"I'm glad to 'ear it," said Jonah; "an' now yer better 'elp me ter git
'er 'ome."

He looked round the room.  There were only himself, Cassidy, and Ada.
Mrs Herring, who had been paralysed by the sight of the devil in the
shape of a hunchback, had found herself on the footpath, sober as a
judge, without very well knowing how she got there.

Ada, stupefied with brandy, and tired over the long conversation, had
fallen asleep on the table.  Jonah went to the door and called Joe, who
was listening dismally to the hum of voices raised in argument and the
pleasant clink of glasses in the bar, now filled with workmen carrying
their bags of tools, their faces covered with the sweat and grime of
the day.

"Fetch me a cab, Smacker," he said.  "My wife's been taken ill.  She
fainted in the street, and they brought her here to recover."

"Right y'are, boss," cried Joe.  "She turned giddy as she was walkin'
past, an' yer tried to pull 'er round with a drop of brandy."

He repeated the words like a boy reciting a lesson, feeling anxiously
with his thumb as he spoke, wondering if the coin Jonah had pushed into
his hand was a florin or a half-dollar.

Cassidy and Joe, one on each side, helped Ada into the cab.  Her feet
scraped helplessly over the flagged pavement her head lolled on her
shoulder, and the baleful white gleam of the huge electric lamps fell
like limelight on her face contracted in an atrocious leer.

The "Silver Shoe" was closed and in darkness, and Jonah drew a breath
of relief.  The neighbours were at their tea, and he could get his
shameful burden in unseen.  Prendergast, the cabman, helped him to drag
Ada across the shop to the foot of the stairs, where with an oath he
threw her across his shoulder, and ran up the winding staircase as if
he were carrying a bag of chaff.

Suddenly the door on the landing opened, throwing a flood of light on
their faces, and Jonah was astonished to see Miss Grimes, trim and
neat, looking in alarm from him to the cabman and his burden.  As
Prendergast dropped Ada on the couch, she took a step forward.

"What has happened?  Is she hurt?" she asked, bending over Ada; but the
next moment she turned away.

This unconscious movement of disgust maddened Jonah.  What was she
doing there to see his humiliation?

"No, she's not hurt," said Jonah dryly.  "But wot are you doing 'ere?"
he added.

His tone nettled the young woman, and she coloured.

"I'm sorry I'm in the way," she said stiffly, "but Mr Johnson locked
up, and was anxious to get away, and as I was giving Ray his lesson, I
offered to stay with him till someone came."

"I beg yer pardon," said Jonah.  "I'm much obliged to yer fer mindin'
the kid, but I didn't want yer to see this."

"I've known it all the time," said Clara, quietly.

"Ah," said Jonah, understanding many things in a flash.

He caught sight of Ray, staring open-mouthed at his mother lying so
strangely huddled on the couch.

"Yer mother's tired, Ray," he said.  "Go an' boil the kettle; she'll
want some tea when she wakes up."

"That's 'ow I 'ave ter lie to everybody; an' I suppose they all know
the truth, an' nod an' wink behind my back," he cried bitterly.  "I've
tried all I know; but now 'er mother's gone, I'm fair beat.  People
envy me because I've got on, but they little know wot a millstone I've
got round my neck."

He lifted his head, and look steadily at Ada snoring in a drunken sleep
on the couch.  And to Clara's surprise, his face suddenly changed;
tears stood in his eyes.

"Poor devil!  I don't know that she's to blame altogether.  It's in her
blood.  Her father went the same way.  My money's done 'er no good.
She'd 'ave been better off in Cardigan Street on two pounds a week."

Clara was surprised at the pity in his voice.  She thought that he
loathed and despised his wife.  Suddenly Jonah looked up at her.

"Will yer meet me to-morrow afternoon?" he asked abruptly.

"Why?" said Clara, alarmed and surprised.

"I want yer to 'elp me.  Since 'er mother died, she's gone from bad to
worse.  I've got no one to 'elp me, an' I feel I'll burst if I don't
talk it over with somebody."

"I hardly know," replied Clara, taken by surprise.

"Say the Mosman boat at half past two, an' I'll be there," said Jonah
brusquely.

"Very well," said Clara.




CHAPTER 19

THE PIPES OF PAN


Circular Quay, shaped like a bite in a slice of bread, caught the eye
like a moving picture.  The narrow strip of roadway, hemmed in between
the Customs House and the huge wool stores, was alive with the
multitudinous activity of an ant-hill.  A string of electric cars slid
past the jetties in parallel lines or climbed the sharp curve to
Phillip Street; and every minute cars, loaded with passengers from the
dusty suburbs, swung round the corners of the main streets and stopped
in front of the ferries.  And as the cars stopped, the human cargo
emptied itself into the roadway and hurried to the turnstiles, harassed
by the thought of missing the next boat.

From the waterside, where the great mail steamers lay moored along the
Quay, came the sudden rattle of winches, the cries of men unloading
cargo, and the shrill hoot of small steamers crossing the bay.  Where
the green waters licked the piles and gurgled under the jetties,
waterside loafers sat on the edge of the wharves intently watching a
fishing-line thrown out. Men in greasy clothes and flannel shirts, with
the look of the sea in their eyes, smoked and spat as they watched the
ships in brooding  silence.  For of all structures contrived by the
hands of man, a ship is the most fascinating.  It is so complete, so
perfect in its devices and ingenuity, a house and a habitation for men
set adrift on the waste of waters, plunging headlong into danger and
romance with its long spars and coiled ropes, its tarry sailors roaring
a sea-chanty, and the common habits of eating and sleeping accomplished
in a spirit of adventure.

Two streams, mainly women, met at the turnstiles--mothers and children
from the crowded, dusty suburbs, drawn by the sudden heat of an autumn
sun in a cloudless sky to the harbour for a day in the open air, and
the leisured ladies of the North Shore, calm and collected, dressed in
expensive materials, crossing from the fashionable waterside suburbs to
the Quay to saunter idly round the Block, look in the shops, and drink
a cup of tea.

Jonah, who had been standing outside the Mosman ferry for the last
half-hour, looked at the clock in the Customs House opposite, and swore
to himself.  It was on the stroke of three, and she would miss the
boat, as usual.  It was always the same--she was always late; and when
he had worked himself into a fury, deciding to wait another minute, and
then to go home, she would suddenly appear breathless, with a smile and
an apology that took the words out of his mouth.

He watched each tram as it stopped, looking for one face and figure
among the moving crowd, for he had learned to know her walk in the
distance while her features were a blur.  For months past he had
endured that supreme tyranny--the domination of the woman--till his
whole life seemed to be spent between thinking about her and waiting
for her at appointed corners. The hours they spent together fled with
incredible speed, and she always shortened the flying minutes by coming
late, with one of half a dozen excuses that he knew by heart.

Their first meeting had been at the Quay the day after he had brought
Ada home drunk from the "Angel", and since then a silent understanding
had grown between them that they should always meet there and cross the
water, as Jonah's conspicuous figure made recognition very likely in
the streets and parks of the city.

The first passion of his life--love of his child--had for ever stamped
on his brain the scenes and atmosphere of Cardigan Street, the struggle
for life on the Road, and the march of triumph to the "Silver Shoe".
And this, the second passion of his life--love of a woman--was set like
a stage-play among the wide spaces of sea and sky, the flight of gulls,
the encircling hills, and the rough, salt breath of the harbour.

Suddenly he saw her crossing the road, threading her way between the
electric cars, and noted with intense satisfaction the distinction of
her figure, clothed in light tweed, with an air of scrupulous neatness
in which she could hold her own with the rich idlers from the Shore.
She smiled at him with her peculiar, intense look, and then frowned
slightly.  Jonah knew that something was wrong, and remembered that he
had forgotten to raise his hat, an accomplishment that she had taught
him with much difficulty.

"So sorry to be late, but I couldn't really help it.  I'll tell you
presently," she said, as they passed the turnstiles.

Jonah knew by her voice that she was in a bad temper, and his heart
sank. The afternoon that he had waited for and counted on for nearly a
week would be spoiled.  Never before in his life had his pleasures
depended on the humour or caprice of anyone, but he had learned with
dismal surprise that a word or a look from this woman could make or mar
the day for him.  He gave her a sidelong look, and saw she was angry by
a certain hardness in her profile, and, as he stared moodily at the
water, he wondered if all women were as mutable and capricious.  In his
dealings with women--shop-hands who moved at his bidding like
machines--he had never suspected these gusts of emotion that ended as
suddenly as they began.  Ada had the nerves of a cow.

Over the way the Manly boat was filling slowly with mothers and
children and stray couples.  A lamentable band on the upper deck mixed
popular airs with the rattle of winches.  The Quay was alive with
ferry-boats, blunt-nosed and squat like a flat-iron, churning the water
with invisible screws.  A string of lascars from the P. & O. boat caught
his eye with a patch of colour, the white calico trousers, the gay
embroidered vests, and the red or white turbans bringing a touch of the
East to Sydney. Suddenly the piles of the jetty slipped to the rear,
and the boat moved out past the huge mail-steamers from London,
Marseilles, Bremen, Hongkong, and Yokohama lying at the wharves.

As they rounded the point the warships swung into view, grim and
forbidding, with the ugly strength of bulldogs.  A light breeze flicked
the waters of the harbour into white flakes like the lash of a whip,
and Jonah felt the salt breath of the sea on his cheeks.  His eye
travelled over the broad sheet of water from the South Head, where the
long rollers of the Pacific entered and broke with a muscular curve, to
the shores broken by innumerable curves into bays where the moving
waters, already tamed, lost their beauty like a caged animal, and spent
themselves in fretful ripples on the sand.  Overhead the sky, arched in
a cloudless dome of blue, was reflected in the turquoise depths of the
water.

Then Mosman came in sight with its shaggy slopes and terra-cotta roofs,
the houses, on the pattern of a Swiss chalet, standing with spaces
between, fashionable and reserved.  Jonah thought of Cardigan Street,
and smiled. They walked in silence along the path to Cremorne Point,
the noise of birds and the rustling of leaves bringing a touch of the
country to Jonah.

"Had you been waiting long?" asked Clara, suddenly.

"Since twenty past two," replied Jonah.

"The impudence of some people is incredible," she said.  "I've just
lost a pupil and a guinea a quarter--it's the same thing.  The mother
thought I should buy the music for the child out of the guinea.  That
means a hat and a pair of gloves or a pair of boots less through no
fault of my own. You don't seem very sympathetic," she cried, looking
sharply at Jonah.

"I ain't," said Jonah, calmly.

"Well, I must say you don't pick your words.  A guinea may be nothing
to you, but it means a great deal to me."

"It ain't that," said Jonah, "but I hate the thought of yer bein' at
the beck an' call of people who ain't fit to clean yer boots.  Ye're
like a kid 'oldin' its finger in the fire an' yellin' with pain.
There's no need fer yer to do it.  I've offered ter make yer cashier in
the shop at two pounds a week, if yer'd put yer pride in yer pocket."

"And throw a poor girl out of work to step into her shoes."

"Nuthin' of the sort, as I told yer.  She's been threatenin' fer months
to git married, but it 'urts 'er to give up a good billet an' live on
three pounds a week.  Yer'd do the bloke a kindness, if yer made me
give 'er the sack."

"It's no use.  My mother wouldn't listen to it.  For years she's half
starved herself to keep me out of a shop.  She can never forget that
her people in England are gentry."

"I don't know much about gentry, but I could teach them an' yer mother
some common sense," said Jonah.

"We won't discuss my mother, if you please," said Clara, and they both
fell silent.

They had reached the end of Cremorne Point, a spur of rock running into
the harbour.  Clara ran forward with a cry of pleasure, her troubles
forgotten as she saw the harbour lying like a map at her feet.  The
opposite shore curved into miniature bays, with the spires and towers
of the city etched on a filmy  blue sky.  The mass of bricks and mortar
in front was Paddington and Woollahra, leafless and dusty where they
had trampled the trees and green grass beneath their feet; the streets
cut like furrows in a field of brick.  As the eye travelled eastward
from Double Bay to South Head the red roofs became scarcer, alternating
with clumps of sombre foliage.  Clara looked at the scene with parted
lips as she listened to music.  This frank delight in scenery had
amused Jonah at first.  It was part of a woman's delight in the pretty
and useless.  But, as his eyes had become accustomed to the view, he
had begun to understand. There was no scenery in Cardigan Street, and
he had been too busy in later years to give more than a hasty glance at
the harbour.  There was no money in it.

From where they sat they could see a fleet of tramps and cargo-boats
lying at anchor on their right.  Jonah examined them attentively, and
then his eyes turned to the city, piled massively in the sunlight,
studded with spires and towers and tall chimneys belching smoke into
the upper air. It was this city that had given him life on bitter
terms, a misshapen and neglected street-arab, scouring the streets for
food, of less account than a stray dog.

His eye softened as he looked again at the water.  As the safest place
for their excursions they had picked by chance on the harbour with its
fleet of steamers that threaded every bay and cove, and little by
little, in the exaltation of the senses following his love for this
woman, the swish of the water slipping past the bows, the panorama of
rock and sandy beach, and the salt smell of the sea were for ever part
of  this strange, emotional condition where reality and dream blended
without visible jar or shock.

He turned and looked at the woman beside him.  She was silent, looking
seaward.  He stared at her profile, cut like a cameo, with intense
satisfaction.  The low, straight forehead, the straight nose, the full
curving chin, satisfied his eye like a carved statue.  About her ear,
exquisitely small and delicate, the wind had blown a fluff of loose
hair, and on this insignificant detail his eye dwelt with rapture.
This woman's face pleased him like music.  And as he looked, all his
desires were melted and confounded in a wave of tenderness, caressing
and devotional, the complete surrender of strength to weakness.  He
wanted to take her in his arms, and dared not even touch her hand.
There had been no talk of love between them, and she had kept him at a
distance with her air of distinction and superficial refinements.  She
seemed to spread a silken barrier between them that exasperated and
entranced him.  Some identity in his sensations puzzled him, and as he
looked, with a flash he was in Cardigan Street again, stooping over his
child with a strange sensation in his heart, learning his first lesson
in pity and infinite tenderness. Another moment and he would have taken
her in his arms.  Instead of that, he said "I'm putting that line of
patent leather pumps in the catalogue at seven and elevenpence, post
free."

Instantly Clara became attentive.

"You mean those with the buckles and straps?  They'll go like hot
cakes!"

"They ought to," said Jonah, dryly.  "Post free brings them a shade
below cost price."

"A shade below cost?" said Clara in surprise.  "I thought you bought
them at seven and six?"

"So I do," replied Jonah, "but add twelve per cent for working
expenses, an' where's the profit?  Packard's manager puts them in the
window at eight an' six, an' wonders why they don't sell.  His girls
come straight from the factory and buy them off me.  They're the sort I
want--waitresses, dressmakers, shop-hands, bits of girls that go
without their meals to doll themselves up.  They want the cheapest they
can get, an' they're always buying."

And at once they plunged into a discussion on the business of the
Silver Shoe.  Clara always listened with fascination to the details of
buying and selling.  Novelettes left her cold, but the devices to
attract customers, the lines that were sold at a loss for
advertisement, the history of the famous Silver Shoe that Jonah sold in
thousands at a halfpenny a pair profit, astonished her like a
fairy-tale that happened to be real.

One day, while shopping at Jordan's mammoth cash store, her ear had
caught the repeated clink of metal, and turning her head, she stood on
the stairs, thunderstruck.  She saw a square room lit with electric
bulbs in broad daylight.  It was the terminus of a multitude of shining
brass tubes leading from counters the length of a street away, and,
with an incessant popping, the tubes dropped a cascade of gold and
silver before the cashiers, silent and absorbed in this river of coin.
She felt that she was looking at the heart of this huge machine for
drawing money from the pockets of the multitude.  The "Silver Shoe",
that  poured a stream of golden coins into the pockets of the
hunchback, fascinated her in a like manner.

They had talked for half an hour, intent on figures which Jonah dotted
on the back of an envelope, when they were surprised by a sudden change
in the light.  The sun was low in the sky, dipping to the horizon,
where its motion seemed more rapid, as if it had gathered speed in the
descent.  The sudden heat had thrown a haze over the sky, and the city
with its spires and towers was transformed.  The buildings floated in a
liquid veil with the unreality of things seen in a dream.  The rays of
the sun, filtered through bars of crystal cloud, fell not crimson nor
amber nor gold, but with the mystic radiance of liquid pearls, touching
the familiar scene with Eastern magic.  In the silvery light a dome
reared its head that might have belonged to an Eastern mosque with a
muezzin calling the faithful to prayers.  Minarets glistered, remote
and ethereal, and tall spires lifted themselves like arrows in flight.
On the left lay low hills softly outlined against the pearly sky; hills
of fairyland that might dissolve and disappear with the falling night;
hills on the borderland of fantasy and old romance.

And as they watched, surprised out of themselves by this magic play of
light, the sun's rim dipped below the skyline, a level lake of blood,
and the fantastic city melted like a dream.  The pearly haze was
withdrawn like a net of gossamer, and the magic city had vanished at a
touch. The familiar towers and spires of Sydney reappeared, silhouetted
against the amber rim of night; the hills, robbed of their pearly
glamour, huddled beneath a belt of leaden cloud; the harbour waters lay
fiat and grey like a sheet of polished metal; light clouds were pacing
in from the sea.

They stared across the water, silent and thoughtful, touched for a
moment with the glamour of a dream.  The sound of a cornet, prolonged
into a wail, reached them from the deck of a Manly steamer.  At
intervals the full strength of the band, cheerful and vulgar, was
carried by a gust of wind to their ears.

"Oh, I would like to hear some music!" cried Clara.  "Something slow
and solemn, a dirge for the dying day."

Jonah turned and looked at her curiously, surprised by the gush of
emotion in her voice.  He started to speak, and hesitated.  Then the
words came with a rush.

"I could give yer a tune meself, but I suppose yer'd poke borak."

"Give me a tune?  I never knew you could sing," said Clara, in surprise.

"Sing!" said Jonah, in scorn.  "I can beat any singin' w'en I'm in good
nick."

"Whatever do you mean?" said Clara.  She was surprised to see that the
habitual shrewd look had gone out of his eyes.  He looked half ashamed
and defiant.

"Yer remember w'en I first met yer in the shop I mentioned that I could
do a bit with the mouth-organ?"

"The mouth-organ?" said Clara, smiling.  "I thought only boys amused
themselves with that."

"No fear!" cried Jonah.  "I 'eard a bloke at the 'Tiv.' play a fair
treat. That's 'ow I come to git this instrument," and he tapped
something in his breast pocket.  "Kramer's 'ad to send 'ome for it, an'
I only got it this afternoon.  I've bin dyin' to 'ave a go at it, but I
always wait till I git the place to meself.  It wouldn't do for the
'ands to see the boss playin' the mouth-organ."

He took the instrument out of his pocket, and handed it to Clara with
the pride of a fiddler showing his Strad.  Clara looked carelessly at
the flat row of tubes cased in nickel-silver.

"Exhibition concert organ with forty reeds," said Jonah.  Again Clara
looked at the instrument with a slightly disdainful air, as an organist
would look at a penny whistle.

"Well, play something," she said with a smile.

Jonah breathed slowly into the reeds, up and down the scale, testing
the compass of the instrument.  It was full and rich, unlike any that
she had heard in the streets.  Presently he struck into a popular
ballad from the music-hall, holding the organ to his mouth with the
left hand.  With his right he covered the pipes to control the volume
of sound as a pianist uses the pedals.  When he had finished, Clara
smiled in encouragement, with a secret feeling that he was making
himself ridiculous.  She looked across the water, wishing he would put
the thing away and stop this absurd exhibition.  But Jonah had warmed
up to his work.  He was back in Cardigan Street again, when the Push
marched through the streets with him in the lead, playing tunes that he
had learned at the music-halls.

In five minutes Clara's uneasiness had vanished, and she was listening
to the music with a dreamy languor quite foreign to her usual
composure.  Her mind was filled with the fantastic splendour of the
sunset; the fresh salt air had acted like a drug; and the sounds
breathed into the reeds made her nerves vibrate like strings.  Strange,
lawless thoughts floated in her mind.  The world was meant for love,
and passionate sadness, and breaking hearts that healed at the glance
of an eye.  And as her ear followed the tune, her eyes were drawn with
an irresistible movement to the musician. She found him staring at her
with a magnetic look in his eyes.

He was no longer ridiculous.  The large head, wedged beneath the
shoulders, the projecting hump, monstrous and inhuman, and the music
breathed into the reeds set him apart as a sinister, uncanny being.
She frowned in an effort to think what the strange figure reminded her
of, and suddenly she remembered.  It was the god Pan, the goat-footed
lord of rivers and woods, sitting beside her, who blew into his pipes
and stirred the blood of men and women to frenzies of joy and fear.
There was fear and exultation in her heart.  A pagan voluptuousness
spread through her limbs.  Jonah paused for a moment, and then broke
into the pick of his repertory.  And Clara listened, hypnotized by the
sounds, her brain mechanically fitting the words to the tune:

  Come to me, sweet Marie, sweet Marie, come to me!
  Not because your face is fair, love, to see;
  But your soul, so pure and sweet,
  Makes my happiness complete,
  Makes me falter at your feet, sweet Marie.

The vulgar, insipid words rang as plainly in her ears as if a voice
were singing them.  Jonah stopped playing, and stared at her with a
curious glitter in his eyes.  She felt, in a dazed, dreamy fashion,
that this was the hunchback's declaration of love.  The hurdy-gurdy
tune and the unsung words had acted like a spell.  For a space of
seconds she gazed with a fixed look at Jonah, waiting for him to move
or speak.  She seemed to be slipping down a precipice without the power
or desire to resist.  Then, like a fit of giddiness, the sensation
passed.  She stumbled to her feet and ran wildly down the rocky path to
the wharf where the ferry-boat, glittering with electric lights, like a
gigantic firefly, was waiting at the jetty.




CHAPTER 20

MRS PARTRIDGE MINDS THE SHOP


Chook caught the last tram home, and found Pinkey asleep in bed with a
novelette in her hand.  She had fallen asleep reading it.  The noise of
Chook's entry roused her, and she stared at him, uncertain of the hour.
Then, seeing him fully dressed, she decided that it was four o'clock in
the morning, and that he was trying to sneak off to Paddy's Market
without her.  She was awake in an instant, and her face flushed pink
with anger as she jumped out of bed, indignant at being deprived of her
share of the unpleasant trip to the markets.  Three times a week she
nerved herself for that heartbreaking journey in the raw morning air,
resolved never to let Chook see her flinch from her duty.  As she
started to dress herself with feverish haste, Chook recovered enough
from his astonishment to ask her where she was going.

"To Paddy's, of course," she replied fiercely.  "Yer sneaked off last
week on yer own, an' cum 'ome so knocked out that yer couldn't eat yer
breakfast."

A cold shiver ran through Chook.  Her mind was affected, and in a flash
he saw his wife taken to the asylum and himself left desolate.  Then he
understood, and burst into a roar.

"Git into bed again, Liz," he cried.  "Ye're walkin' in yer sleep."

"Wot's the time?" she asked, with a suspicious look.

"Five past twelve," said Chook, reluctantly.

"An' ye're only just come 'ome!  Wot d'ye mean by stoppin' out till
this time of night?" she cried, turning on him furiously, but secretly
relieved, like a patient who finds the dentist is out.

"The play was out late, an' we..." stammered Chook.

As he stammered, Pinkey caught sight of a rip in his sleeve, and
looking at him intently, was horrified to see his lip cut and bleeding.
She gave a cry of terror and burst into tears.

"Yer never went to no play; yer've bin fightin'," she sobbed.

"No, I ain't, fair dinkum," cried Chook.  "I'll tell yer 'ow I come by
this, if yer wait a minute."

"Yer never cut yer lip lookin' at the play; yer've gone back ter the
Push, as Sarah always said yer would."

"I'll screw Sarah's neck when I can spare the time," said Chook,
savagely.

Chook, the old-time larrikin, had turned out a model husband, but, for
years after his marriage, Mrs Partridge had taken a delight in
prophesying that he would soon tire of Pinkey's apron-strings and
return to the Push and the streets.  And now, although Waxy Collins and
Joe Crutch were in jail for sneak-thieving, their places taken by
younger  and more vicious scum, Pinkey thought instantly of the dread
Push when Chook grew restive.

"No," said Chook, deciding to cut it short, "I tore me coat an' cut me
lip gittin' away from the Johns at Paddy Flynn's alley."

Pinkey turned sick with fear.  The two-up school was worse than the
Push, and they were ruined.

"I knew it the moment I set eyes on yer.  Yer've been bettin' again,
an' lost all yer money.  Yer've got nothing left for the markets, an'
the landlord'll turn us out," she cried, seeing herself already in the
gutter.

"Yes, I lost a bit, but I pulled up, an' I'm a couple of dollars to the
good," said Chook, feeling in his pocket for some half-crowns.

"Well, give it to me," said Pinkey, "an' I'll go straight termorrer and
pay ten shillings on a machine."

"Wot would yer 'ave said if I'd won ten or fifteen quid?" asked Chook.

"I should 'ave said 'Buy Jack Ryan's 'orse an' cart, an' never go near
a two-up school again'," said Pinkey, thinking of the impossible.

"Well, I won the dollars, an' I'll do as yer say," cried Chook emptying
his pockets on the counterpane.

As Chook poured the heap of gold and silver on to the bed, Pinkey
gasped, and turned deadly white.  Chook thought she was going to faint.

"It's all right, Liz," he cried.  "I've 'ad a good win, an' we're set
up fer life."

He was busy sorting the gold and silver into heaps, first putting aside
his stake, two pounds ten.  There  were fifteen pounds twelve shillings
and sixpence left.  Pinkey stared in amazement.  It seemed incredible
that so much money could belong to them.  And suddenly she thought,
with a pang of joy, that no longer would she need to nerve herself for
the cruel journey to the markets in the morning.  Chook would drive
down in his own cart, and she would be waiting on his return with a
good breakfast.  They had gone up in the world like a rocket.

The marriage of Pinkey, three years ago, had affected Mrs Partridge
like the loss of a limb.  For over two years she had been chained to
the same house, in the same street, with the desire but not the power
to move. Only once had she managed to change her quarters with the aid
of William, and the result had been disastrous.  For the first time in
his life William had lost a day at Grimshaw's to move the furniture,
and for six months he had brooded over the lost time.  This last move
had planted them in Botany Street, five minutes' walk from Chook's
shop.  At first Mrs Partridge had fretted, finding little consolation
in the new ham-and-beef shop on Botany Road; and then, little by
little, she had become attached to the neighbourhood.  She had been
surprised to find that entertainment came to her door unsought, in the
form of constant arrivals and departures among the neighbours.  And
each of them was the beginning or the end of a mystery, which she
probed to the bottom with the aid of the postman, the baker, the
butcher, and the tradesmen who were left lamenting with their bills
unpaid.  Never before in her wanderings had she got so completely in
touch with her surroundings.

But from habit she always talked of moving.  She could never pass an
empty house without going through it, sniffing the drains, and
requesting the landlord to make certain improvements, with the mania of
women who haunt the shops with empty purses, pricing expensive
materials.  Every week she announced to Chook and Pinkey that she had
found the very house, if William would take a day off to move.  But in
her heart she had no desire to leave the neighbourhood.  It was an
agreeable and daily diversion for her to run up to the shop, and
prophesy ruin and disaster to Chook and Pinkey for taking a shop that
had beggared the last tenant, ignoring the fact that Jack Ryan had
converted his profits into beer. Chook's rough tongue made her wince at
times, but she refused to take offence for more than a day.  She had
taken a fancy to Chook the moment she had set eyes on him, and was sure
Pinkey was responsible for his sudden bursts of temper.  She thought to
do him a service by dwelling on Pinkey's weak points, and Chook showed
his gratitude by scowling.  Pinkey, who had been a machinist in the
factory, was no hand with a needle, and Mrs Partridge commented on this
in Chook's hearing.

"An' fancy 'er 'ardly able to sew on a button, which is very dangerous
lyin' about on the floor, as children will eat anythin', not knowin'
the consequences," she cried.

Chook pointed out that there were no children in the house to eat stray
buttons.

"An' thankful you ought to be for that," she cried.  "There's Mrs
Brown's baby expectin' to be waited  on 'and an' foot, an' thinks
nothin' of wakin' 'er up in the night, cryin' its heart out one minute,
an' cooin' like a dove the next, though I don't 'old with keepin' birds
in the 'ouse as makes an awful mess, an' always the fear of a nasty nip
through the bars of the cage, which means a piece of rag tied round
your finger."

Here she stopped for breath, and Chook turned aside the torrent of
words by offering her some vegetables, riddled with grubs, for the
trouble of carrying them home.  She considered herself one of Chook's
best customers, having dealt off him since their first meeting.  Every
market-day she came to the shop, picked out everything that was damaged
or bruised, and bought it at her own price.  She often wished that
Pinkey had married a grocer.

Chook had said nothing to her of his win at the two-up school, and she
only heard of it at the last moment through a neighbour.  She put on
her hat, and just reached the shop in time to see Chook drive up to the
door in his own horse and cart.  Pinkey was standing there, radiant,
her dreams come true, already feeling that their fortunes were made.
Mrs Partridge looked on with a choking sensation in her throat,
desiring nothing for herself, but angry with Fortune for showering her
gifts on others.  Then she stepped up briskly, and cried out:

"I 'eard all about yer luck, an' I sez to myself, 'it couldn't 'ave
'appened to a more deservin' young feller.' You'll ride in yer carriage
yet, mark my words."

She came nearer and stared at the mare, anxious to  find fault, but
knowing nothing of the points of a horse.  She decided to make friends
with it, and rubbed its nose.  The animal, giving her an affectionate
look, furtively tried to bite her arm, and then threw back its head,
expecting the rap on the nose that always followed this attempt. Mrs
Partridge trembled with fear and rage.

"Well, I never!" she cried.  "The sly brute!  Looked at me like a 'uman
being, an' then tried to eat me, which I could never understand people
preachin' about kindness to dumb animals, an' 'orses takin' a delight
in runnin' over people in the street every day."

"It's because they've got relations that makes 'em thankful animals are
dumb," said Chook.

"Meaning me?" cried Mrs Partridge, smelling an insult.

"You?" said Chook, affecting surprise.  "I niver mind yous talkin'.  It
goes in one ear an' out of the other."

Mrs Partridge bounced out of the shop in a rage, but next day she came
back to tell Pinkey that she had found the very house in Surry Hills
for a shilling a week less rent.  She stayed long enough to frighten
the life out of Pinkey by telling her that she had heard that Jack Ryan
was well rid of the horse, because it had a habit of bolting and
breaking the driver's neck.  Chook found Pinkey trembling for his
safety, and determined to put a stop to these annoyances.  He
disappeared for a whole day, and when Pinkey wanted to know where he
had been, he told her to wait and see.  They nearly quarrelled.  But
the next morning he gave her a surprise.  After breakfast he announced
that he was going to take her to the Druids' picnic in his own cart,
and that Mrs Partridge had consented to mind the shop in their absence.

When Chook asked Mrs Partridge to mind the shop for the day, she jumped
at the idea.  She felt that she had a gift for business which she had
wasted by not marrying the greengrocer; and now, with the shop to
herself, she would show them how to deal with the customers, and find
time in between to run her eye through Pinkey's boxes.  She, too, would
have a holiday after her own heart.  She decided to wear her best skirt
and blouse, to keep the customers in their place and remind them that
she was independent of their favours.  She found everything ready on
her arrival.  The price of every vegetable was freshly painted on the
window by Chook in white letters, and there were five shillings in
small change in the till.  Lunch was set for her on the kitchen table,
a sight to make the mouth water, for Chook, remembering the days of his
courting, had ransacked the ham-and-beef shop for dainties--sheep's
trotters, brawn, pig's cheek, ham-and-chicken sausage, and a bottle of
mixed pickles.  Nothing was wanting.  As Chook drove off with Pinkey,
she waved her hand to them, and then, surveying the street with the air
of a proprietor, entered the shop and took possession.

They were going to Sir Joseph Banks's for the picnic; but, to Pinkey's
surprise, the cart turned into Botany Street and pulled up in front of
Sarah's cottage.

"Wotcher stoppin' 'ere for?" she inquired.

"'Cause we're goin' ter git out," said Chook, with a grin.

"Git out?  Wot for?  There's nobody at 'ome, Dad's at work."

"I know; that's w'y I came," said Chook, tying the reins to the seat.
"Git down, Liz; yer've got a 'ard day in front of yer."

"'Ard day?  Wotcher mean?" cried Pinkey, suspiciously.

"We're goin' ter move Sarah's furniture to the new 'ouse she found in
Surry Hills," replied Chook.

"She never took no 'ouse," said Pinkey.

"No, I took it yesterday in 'er name," said Chook, grinning at Pinkey's
perplexed frown.  "I wanted ter give 'er a pleasant surprise fer 'er
birthday."

"Wot about the picnic?" exclaimed Pinkey, suddenly.

"There ain't no picnic," said Chook.  "It's next Monday; the date must
'ave slipped me mind."

"An' yer mean ter move 'er furniture in without 'er knowin'?"

"That's the dart," said Chook, with a vicious smile.  "If Sarah's
tongue don't git a change of air, I'll git three months fer murder.  So
'urry up, Liz, an' put this apron over yer skirt."

The impudence of Chook's plan took her breath away, but when he
insisted that there was no other way of getting rid of Mrs Partridge,
she consented, with the feeling that she was taking part in a burglary.
Chook took the key from under the flower-pot and went in.  They found
the place like a pigsty, for in the excitement of dressing for her day
behind the counter, Sarah had wasted no time in  making the bed or
washing up, and Pinkey, trained under the watchful eye of Chook's
mother, stood aghast.  She declared that nothing could be done till
that mess was cleared away, and tucked up her sleeves.

The appearance of the cart had roused the neighbours' curiosity, and
Chook engaged them in conversation over the back fence.  He explained
that Mrs Partridge had begged him to come down and move her furniture
while she minded the shop.  There was a general sigh of relief.
Nothing had escaped her eye or tongue.  Mrs King, who was supposed to
be temperance, did wonders with the bottle under her apron, but was
caught.  Then she found out that Mrs Robinson's brother, who was
supposed to be doing well in the country, was really doin' seven years.
Chook refused half a dozen offers of help before Pinkey had finished
washing up.

As Chook lacked the professional skill of Jimmy the van-man, Pinkey was
obliged to make two loads of the furniture; but by twelve o'clock the
last stick was on the cart, and Pinkey, sitting beside her husband on a
plank, carried the kerosene lamp in her lap to prevent breakage.  By
sunset everything was in its place, and Chook and Pinkey, aching in
every joint, locked the door and drove home.

Meanwhile, Mrs Partridge had spent a pleasant day conducting Chook's
business on new lines.  She had always suspected that she had a gift
for business, and here was an opportunity to prove it.  The first
customer was a child, sent for three penn'orth of potatoes.  As
children are naturally careless, Mrs Partridge saw here an excellent
opportunity for weeding out the stock, and went to a lot of trouble in
picking out the small and damaged tubers, reserving the best for
customers who came to choose for themselves.  Five minutes later she
was exchanging them for the largest in the sack under the direction of
an infuriated mother.  This flustered her slightly, and when Mrs Green
arrived, complaining of rheumatic twinges in her leg, she decided to
try Pinkey's sympathetic manner.

"Ah, if anybody knows what rheumatism is, I do," she cried.  "For years
I suffered cruelly, an' then I was persuaded to carry a new pertater in
me pocket, an' I've never 'ad ache or pain since; though gettin' cured,
to my mind, depends on the sort of life you've led."

Mrs Green, a woman with a past, flushed heavily.

"'Oo are yer slingin' off at?" she cried.  "You and yer new pertater.
I'd smack yer face for two pins," and she walked out of the shop.

This made Mrs Partridge careful, and she served the next customers in
an amazing silence.  Then she dined royally on the pick of the
ham-and-beef shop, and settled down for the afternoon.  But she
recovered her tongue when Mrs Paterson wanted some lettuce for a salad.

"Which I could never understand people eatin' salads, as I shall always
consider bad for the stomach, an' descendin' to the lower animals," she
cried.  "Nothing could make me believe I was meant to eat vegetables
raw when I can 'ave them boiled an' strained for 'alf an 'our."

In her eagerness to convert Mrs Paterson to her views, she forgot to
charge for the lettuce.  When  Chook and Pinkey arrived, she had
partially destroyed the business, and was regretting that she had been
too delicate to marry the greengrocer.  She showed Chook the till
bulging with copper and silver.

"Yer've done us proud," cried Chook, staring.

Mrs Partridge sorted out ten shillings from the heap.

"That's Mrs Robins's account," she remarked.

"Wot made 'er pay?" inquired Pinkey, suspiciously.  "Yer didn't go an'
ask 'er for it, did yer?"

"Not likely," said Mrs Partridge; "but when she complained of the peas
bein' eighteenpence a peck, I pointed out that if she considered
nothing too dear for 'er back, she should consider nothing too dear for
'er stomach, an' she ran 'ome to fetch this money an' nearly threw it
in my face."

"Me best customer," cried Pinkey in dismay.  "She pays at the end of
the month like clockwork."

Mrs Partridge stared at the heap of silver, and changed the subject.

"It 'ud give me the creeps to sleep in the 'ouse with all that money,"
she remarked, "after readin' in the paper as 'ow burglars are
passionate fond of silver, an' 'avin' no reg'lar 'ours for callin',
like to drop in when least expected." She noted with satisfaction that
Pinkey changed colour, and shook the creases out of her skirt.  "Well,
I must be goin'," she added.  "I never like to keep William waitin' for
'is tea."

A cold wave swept over Chook.  He had clean forgotten William, who
would go home to Botany Street and find an empty house.  Pinkey dived
into the bedroom, and left Chook to face it out.

"'Ere's yer key," he said helplessly, to make a beginning.

"This is my key," said Mrs Partridge, feeling in her pocket, "an' the
other one is under the flower-pot for William, if I'm out.  I dunno
what you mean."

"I mean this is the key of yer new 'ouse in Surry Hills," said Chook,
fumbling hopelessly with the piece of iron.

"You've bin drinkin', an' the beer's gone to yer 'ead," said Mrs
Partridge, unwilling to take offence.

"I tell yer I'm as dry as a bone," cried Chook, losing patience.

"Yer think yer live in Botany Street, but yer don't.  Yer live in
Foveaux Street, an' this is the key of the 'ouse."

"I think I live in Botany Street, but I've moved to Foveaux Street,"
repeated Mrs Partridge, but the words conveyed no meaning to her mind.

She came closer to Chook.  He looked and smelt sober, and suddenly a
horrid suspicion ran through her mind that her brain was softening.
She was older than they thought, for she had taken five years off her
age when she had married William.  In an agony of fear she searched her
memory for the events of the past month, trying to recall any symptom
of illness that should have warned her.  She could remember nothing,
and turned to Chook with a wild fear in her eyes.  Something must be
wrong with him.

"Can you understand what you're sayin'?" she asked.

"Yes," said Chook, anxious to get it over.  "Yer lived in Botany Street
this morning, but yer moved to-day, an' now yer live in Foveaux Street
in the 'ouse yer picked on Monday."

"Do you expect me to believe that?" cried Mrs Partridge.

"No," said Chook; "but yer will w'en yer go 'ome an' find your 'ouse
empty."

"An' who moved me?"

"Me an' Liz," said Chook.  "The picnic wasn't till next week, an' Liz
an' me thought we'd give yer a surprise."

For the first time in her life Mrs Partridge was speechless.  She saw
that she had been tricked shamefully.  They had ransacked her house,
and laid bare all the secrets of her little luxuries.  She quailed as
she remembered what they had found in the cupboard and the bottom
drawer of the wardrobe. Never again could she face Chook and Pinkey,
knowing what they did, and take her pickings of the shop.  Suddenly she
recovered her tongue, and turned on Chook, transformed with rage.

"William will break every bone in yer body when 'e 'ears what you've
done," she cried, "mark my words.  An' in case I never see yer again,
let me tell yer somethin' that's been on my mind ever since I first met
you.  If that ginger-headed cat 'idin' behind the bedroom door 'adn't
married yer, nobody else would, for you're that ugly it 'ud pay yer to
grow whiskers an' 'ide yer face."

And with this parting shot she marched out of the shop and disappeared
in the darkness.




CHAPTER 21

DAD WEEPS ON A TOMBSTONE


The scene at Cremorne Point had suddenly reminded Clara that she was
playing with fire.  In the beginning she had consented to these
meetings to humour the parent of her best pupil, and gradually she had
drifted into an intimacy with Jonah without the courage to end it.  To
her fastidious taste his physical deformity and the flavour of Cardigan
Street that still clung about his speech and manners put him out of
court as a possible lover; but it had gratified her pride to discover
that he was in love with her, and as he never expressed himself more
plainly than by furtive glances and sudden inflections in his voice,
she felt sure of her power to keep him at a distance.

These outings, indeed, had nearly fallen through, when Jonah, fumbling
for words and afraid to say what was on his mind, had touched on a
detail of his business.  To his surprise Clara caught fire like straw,
fascinated at being shown the inner workings of the "Silver Shoe".  And
from that time a curious attitude had grown between them.  Jonah talked
of his business, and stared at Clara as she listened, forgetful of him,
her mind absorbed in details of profit and loss.  She found the
position easy to maintain, for Jonah, catching at straws, demanded no
positive encouragement. A chance word or look from her was rich matter
for a week's thought, twisted and turned in his mind till it meant all
he desired.

She saw clearly and coldly that Jonah had placed her on a pedestal, and
she determined never to step down of her own accord, recognizing with
the instinct for business that had surprised Jonah that she would lose
more than she would gain.  And yet the sudden glimpse of passion in
Jonah had whetted her appetite for more.  It had recalled the days of
her engagement with a singular bitterness and pleasure.  She thought
with a hateful persistence of her first love, the man who had
accustomed her to admiration and then shuffled out of the engagement,
forced by the attitude of his relatives to her father.  But for weeks
after the scene at Cremorne Jonah had retired within himself terrified
lest he should alarm her and put an end to their outings.  So far she
had timed their meetings for the daylight out of prudence, but, pricked
on by curiosity, she had begun to dally on the return journey, desiring
and fearing some token of his adoration.

Meanwhile Jonah swung like a pendulum between hope and despair.  He
dimly suspected that a bolder man would have had his declaration out
and done with long ago, and he waited for a favourable opportunity; but
it came and went, and left him speechless.  He had accepted Ada as the
typical woman, and now found himself as much at sea as if he had
discovered a new species, for he never suspected that any other woman
had it in her power, given a favourable opportunity, to lead him to
this new world of sensation.  Women had always been shy of him, and
with his abnormal shape and his absorption in business it had been easy
for him to miss what lay beneath the surface. But for the accident of
his meeting with Clara, his temperament would have carried him through
life, unconscious of love from his own experience and regarding it as a
fable of women and poets.

Jonah never spent money willingly, except where Ray was concerned, and
Clara in their first meetings had been surprised and chilled by his
anxiety to get the value of his money.  He had informed her, bluntly,
that money was not made by spending it; but for some months he had been
surprised by a desire to spend his money to adorn and beautify this
woman.  Clara, however, maintaining her independence with a wary eye,
had refused to take presents from him.  He had become more civilized
and more human under the weight of his generous emotions, but they
could find no outlet.

It was the affair of Hans Paasch that opened his eye to the power for
good that she exercised over him.  When his shop had closed for want of
customers, Paasch found that his failing eyesight and methodical
slowness barred him from competing with younger and quicker men, and,
his mind weakened and bewildered by disaster, he had turned for help to
his first and only love, the violin.  For some years he had taught a
few pupils who were too poor to pay the fees of the professional
teachers, and, persuaded that pupils would flock to him if he gave his
whole time to it he took a room and set up as a teacher.  In six months
he had to choose between starvation by inches or playing dance music in
Bob Fenner's hall for fifteen shillings a week.  For a while he endured
this, playing popular airs that he hated and despised for the larrikins
whom he hated and feared, a nightly butt and target for their coarse
jests.  Then he preferred starvation, and found himself in the gutter
with the clothes he stood up in and his fiddle.  He had joined the army
of mendicant musicians, who scrape a tune in front of hotels and shops,
living on charity thinly veiled.

They had passed him one night on their return from Mosman, playing in
front of a public-house to an audience of three loafers.  The streets
had soon dragged him to their level.  Unkempt and half starved, he wore
the look of the vagrant who sleeps in his clothes for want of bedding.
Grown childish in his distress, he had forgotten his lifelong habits of
neatness and precision, going to pieces like a man who takes to drink.

Clara, who knew his history, was horrified at the sight.  She thought
he lived comfortably on a crust of bread by giving lessons.  Jonah
turned sulky when she reproached him.

"I don't see 'ow I'm ter blame for this any more'n if 'e'd come to the
gutter through drink.  It was a fair go on the Road, an' if I beat 'im
an' the others, it was because I was a better man at the game.  I spent
nearly all my money in that little shanty where I started, an' 'im an'
the others looked on an' 'oped I'd starve.  Yer talk about me bein'
cruel an' callous. It's the game that's cruel, not me.  I  knocked 'im
out all right, but wot 'ud be the use of knockin' 'im down with one
'and an' pickin' 'im up with the other?"

"You say yourself that he took you off the streets, and gave you a
living."

"So 'e did, but 'e got 'is money's worth out of me.  I did the work of
a man, an' saved 'im pounds for years.  Yer wouldn't 'ave such a
sentimental way of lookin' at things if yer'd been a steet-arab,
sellin' newspapers, an' no one ter make it 'is business whether yer
lived or starved."

"But surely you can't see him in that condition without feeling sorry
for him?"

"Oh yes, I can; 'e's no friend of mine.  'E told everybody on the Road
that I went shares with the Devil," said Jonah, with an uneasy grin.
"'Ere, I'll show yer wot 'e thinks of me."

He felt in his pocket for a coin, and crossed the street.  Paasch had
finished his piece, and putting his fiddle under his arm, turned to the
loafers with a beseeching air.  They looked the other way and discussed
the weather.  Then Jonah stepped up to him and thrust the coin into his
hand.  Paasch, feeling something unaccustomed in his fingers, held it
up to the light.  It was a sovereign, and he blinked in wonder at the
coin then at the giver, convinced that it was a trick.  Then he
recognized Jonah, and a look of passionate fear and anger convulsed his
features. He threw down the coin as if it had burnt him, crying:

"No, I vill not take your cursed moneys.  Give me back mine shop and
mine business that you stole from me.  You are a rich man and ride in
your carriage, and I am the beggar, but I would not change with you.
The great gods shall mock at you.  Money you shall have in plenty while
I starve, but never your heart's desire, for like a dog did you bite
the hand that fed you."

Suddenly his utterance was choked by a violent fit of coughing, and he
stared at Jonah, crazed with hate and prophetic fury.  A crowd began to
gather, and Jonah, afraid of being recognized, walked rapidly away.

"Now yer can see fer yerself," he cried, sullenly.

"Yes, I see," said Clara, strangely excited; "and I think you would be
as cruel with a woman as you are with a man."

"I've given yer no cause ter say that," protested Jonah.

"Perhaps not," said Clara; "but that man won't last through the winter
unless he's cared for.  And if he dies, his blood will be on your head,
and your luck will turn.  His crazy talk made me shiver.  Promise me to
do something for him."

"Ye're talkin' like a novelette," said Jonah, roughly.

But Paasch's words had struck a superstitious chord in Jonah, and he
went out of his way to find a plan for relieving the old man without
showing his hand.  He consulted his solicitors, and then an
advertisement in the morning papers offered a reward to anyone giving
the whereabouts of Hans Paasch, who left Hassloch in Bavaria in 1860,
and who would hear of something to his advantage by calling on Harris &
Harris, solicitors. A month later Jonah held a receipt for twelve
pounds ten, signed by Hans Paasch, the first instalment of an annuity
of fifty pounds a year miraculously left him by a distant cousin in
Germany.

He showed this to Clara while they were crossing in the boat to Mosman.
She listened to him in silence.  Then a flush coloured her cheeks.

"You'll never regret that," she said; "it's the best day's work you
ever did."

"I 'ope I'll never regret anythin' that gives you pleasure," said
Jonah, feeling very noble and generous, and surprised at the ease with
which he turned a compliment.

They had the Point to themselves, as usual, and Clara went to the edge
of the rocks to see what ships had come and gone during the week,
trying to identify one that she had read about in the papers.  Jonah
watched her in silence, marking every detail of her tall figure with a
curious sense of possession that years of intimacy had never given him
with Ada.  And yet she kept him at a distance with a skill that
exasperated him and provoked his admiration.  One day when he had held
her hand a moment too long, she had withdrawn it with an explanation
that sounded like an apology. She explained that from a child she had
been unable to endure the touch of another person; that she always
preferred to walk rather than ride in a crowded bus or tram because
bodily contact with others set her nerves on edge.  It was a nervous
affection, she explained, inherited from her mother.  Jonah had his own
opinion of this malady, but he admitted to himself that she would never
enter a crowd or a crush.

The result of her pleading for Paasch had put her  in a high good
humour. It was the first certain proof of her power over Jonah, and she
chattered gaily.  She had risen in her own esteem.  But presently, to
her surprise, Jonah took some papers from his pocket and frowned over
them.

"It's very impolite to read in other people's company," she remarked,
with a sudden coolness.

"I beg yer pardon," said Jonah, starting suddenly, as if a whip had
touched him.  She never failed to reprove him for any lapse in manners,
and Jonah winced without resentment.

"I thought this might interest yer," he continued.  "I'm puttin' Steel
in as manager at last, an' this is the agreement."

"Who advised you to do that?" said Clara, with an angry flush.

"Well, Johnson's been complainin' of overwork fer some time, but Miss
Giltinan decided me.  She's very keen on me openin' up branches in the
suburbs."

"You place great weight on Miss Giltinan's opinion," said Clara,
jealously.

"Ter tell the truth, I do," said Jonah.  "Next ter yerself, she's got
the best 'ead fer business of any woman I know."

"I don't agree with it at all," said Clara.  "You're the brains of the
"Silver Shoe", and another man's ideas will clash with yours."

"No fear!" said Jonah.  "I've got 'im tied down in black and white by
my solicitors."

Clara ran her eye over the typewritten document, reading some of the
items aloud.

"'Turn over the stock three times a year'!  What  does that mean?" And
she listened while Jonah explained, the position of pupil and tutor
suddenly reversed.

"'Ten and a half per cent bonus, in addition to his salary, if he shows
an increase on last year's sales.'"

"'Net profits on the departments not to exceed twenty-five per cent.,'"
read Clara in amazement.  "Why, I should have thought the more profit
he made, the better for you."

"No fear," said Jonah, with a grin; "I can't 'ave a man puttin' up the
price of the Silver Shoe with his eye on his bonus."

Then a long discussion followed that lasted till nightfall.  As the
night promised to be fine, Jonah persuaded her to take tea at a
dilapidated refreshment-room, halfway to the jetty, and they continued
the discussion over cups of discoloured water and stale cakes.  When
they reached the Point again the moon was rising clear in the sky, and
they sat and watched in silence the gradual illumination of the
harbour.  The wind had dropped, and tiny ripples alone broke the
surface of the water.  On the opposite shore the beaches lay obscured
in the faint light of the moon, growing momently stronger, the land and
water melted and confounded together in the grey light.  The lesser
stars fled at the slow approach of the moon, and in an hour she floated
alone in the sky, save for the larger planets, Hooding the deep abysses
of the night with a gleam of silver, tender and caressing that softened
the angles and blotted details in brooding shadows.

Overhead curved the arch of night, a deep, flawless  blue with velvety
depths, pale and diluted with light as it touched the skyline.  On the
right, in the farther distance, Circular Quay flashed with the gleam of
electric arcs, each contracted into a star of four points.  And they
glittered on the waterline like clustered gems without visible setting.
A fainter glow marked the packed suburbs of the east; and then the
lamps, flung like jewels in the night, picked out the line of shore to
Rose Bay and the Heads.

Ferry-boats were crossing the harbour, jewelled and glittering with
electric bulbs, moving in the distance without visible effort with the
motion of swans, the throb of engines and the swirl of water lost in
the distance.  It was a symphony in light, each detached gleam on the
sombre shore hanging

  Like a rich jewel in an Ethiop's ear.

Between the moon and the eye the water lay like a sheet of frosted
glass; elsewhere the water rippled without life or colour, treacherous
and menacing in the night.

Jonah turned and looked at the woman beside him.  They were alone on
the rocky headland, the city and the world of men seemed remote and
unreal, cut off by the silvery light and the brooding shadows.  It
dawned slowly on him that his relations with this woman were
independent of time and space.  Of all things visible, it was she alone
that mattered.  Often enough he had missed his cue, but now, as if
answering a question, he began speaking softly, as if he were talking
to himself:

"Clara!--Clara Grimes!--Clara!  I've wanted ter say that out aloud fer
months, but I've never found the place ter say it in.  It sounds quite
natural 'ere.  Yer know that I love yer--I've seen it in yer face, but
yer don't know that you're the first woman I ever wanted.  No, yer
needn't run away.  I'm afraid ter touch yer, an' yer know it.  Yer
thought because I was married that I knew all about women.  Why, I
didn't know what women were made for till I met you.  I thought w'en I
'ad the shop an' my boy that I had everythin' I wanted, but the old
woman was right.  There's a lot more in this world than I ever dreamt
of.  Seein' you opened my eyes. An' now I want yer altogether.  I want
ter see yer face every 'our of the day, an' tell yer whatever comes
into my mind.  I spend 'ours talkin' to yer w'en I'm by myself."

"It's only my right," he went on, with increased energy.  "I'm a man in
spite of my shape, an' I only ask fer what I'm entitled to.  I can see
that other men 'ave been gittin' these things without me knowin' it.  I
used ter grin at Chook, but I was the fool.  I had everythin' that I
could see that was worth 'avin', an' somehow I wasn't satisfied.  I
never could see much in this life.  I often wondered what it was all
about.  But now I understand.  What's this for," and he indicated the
dreamy peaceful scene with a sweep of his hand, "if it only leaves yer
starin' and wonderin'? I know now.  It's ter make me think about yer
an' want yer.  Well, yer've made a man of me, an' it's up ter yous ter
make the best of me." He broke off with a short laugh.  "P'raps this
sound funny ter you.  I've 'eard old women at the Salvos' meetings talk
like this, tellin' of the wonderful things they found out w'en they got
converted."

Clara had listened in silence, with an intent, curious expression on
her face.  Jonah's words were like balm to her pride, lacerated three
years ago by her broken engagement.  And she listened, immensely
pleased and a little afraid, like a mischievous child that has set fire
to the curtains. Jonah's face was turned to her, and as she looked at
him her curiosity was changed to awe at the sight of passion on fire.
She thought of the crazy fiddler's words, and felt in herself an
infinite sadness, for she knew that Jonah would never gain his heart's
desire.

"I've 'ad my say," he continued, "an' now I'll talk sense.  You're a
grown woman, an' yer know what all this means.  I can give yer anythin'
yer like: a house an' servants; everythin' yer want.  What do yer say?"

Clara had gone white to the lips.  It had come at last, and the "Silver
Shoe" was within her reach, but the gift was incomplete.  She must
decline it, and take her chances for the future.

"Not quite everything, Joe," she replied gently, afraid of wounding
him. "Ever since I was a girl I've had something to be ashamed of
through no fault of my own--my drunken father, the street we live in,
our genteel poverty; and now, when I seem to have missed all my
chances, you come along, and offer me everything I want with the main
thing left out.  Oh, I know those cottages where the husband is a
stranger, and the neighbours watch them behind the curtains, and pump
the servant over the back fence! I'm too proud for that sort of thing.
Oh, what a rotten world this is!" she cried passionately, and burst
into a storm of weeping.  It was the most natural action of her life.

Jonah sat and stared at the lights of the Quay, dismayed by her tears
but relieved in his mind.  He had spoken at last; already he was
framing fresh arguments to persuade her.  Presently she dried her eyes
and looked at him with the ghost of a smile.  Then began a discussion
which threatened to last all night, neither of them giving way from the
position they had taken up, neither yielding an inch to the other's
entreaties.  Suddenly Jonah looked at his watch with an exclamation.
It was nearly ten.  In the heat of argument they had forgotten the
lapse of time.  They scrambled over boulders and through the lantana
bushes down to the path, and just caught the boat.

When they reached the Quay they were surprised again by the splendour
of the night.  The moon, just past the full, flooded the streets with
white light that left deep shadows between the buildings like a
charcoal drawing. They took a tram to the Haymarket, as they were
afraid of being recognized in the Waterloo cars, and reached Regent
Street after eleven.  The hotels had disgorged their customers, who
were talking loudly in groups on the footpath or lurching homeward with
uneven steps.  Jonah was explaining that he must see Clara all the way
home on account of the lateness of the hour, when he was astonished to
hear someone sobbing in the monumental mason's yard as if his heart
would break.  He turned and looked.  The headstones and white marble
crosses stood in rows with a faint resemblance to a graveyard; the
moonlight fell clear and cold on these monuments awaiting a purchaser.
Some, already sold, were lettered in black with the name of the
departed.  Jonah and Clara stared, puzzled by the noise, when they saw
an old man in the rear of the yard in a top hat and a frock coat,
clinging to a marble cross.  He lurched round, and instantly Clara,
with a gasp of amazement and shame, recognized her father.

She moved into the shadows of a house, humiliated to her soul by this
exhibition; but Jonah laughed, in spite of himself, at the figure cut
by Dad among the ready-made monuments.  As he laughed, Dad caught sight
of him, and clinging to a marble angel with one arm for support,
beckoned wildly with the other.

"Come here--come here," he cried between his sobs.  "I'm all alone with
the dead, and nobody to shed a tear 'cep' meself.  Shame on you, shame
on you," he cried, raising his voice in bitter grief, "to pass the poor
fellows in their graves without sheddin' tear!"

He stopped and stared with drunken gravity at the name on the nearest
tombstone, trying to read the words which danced before his eyes in the
clear light.  Jonah saw them plainly.

  SACRED TO THE MEMORY OF
  SARAH JAMES,
  Aged Eighty-five.

A fresh burst of grief announced that Dad had deciphered the lettering.

"Sam!" he cried bitterly.  "Me old fren' Sam!  To think of bringing him
here without letting me know!  The besh fren' I ever had."

Here sobs choked his utterance.  He stooped and examined the shining
marble slab again, lurching from one side to the other with incessant
motion.

"An' not a flowersh onsh grave!" he cried.  "Sam was awf'ly fond
flowersh."

"Get away 'ome, or the Johns'll pinch yer," said Jonah.

Dad stopped and stared at him with a glimmering of reason in his
fuddled brain.

"I know yoush," he cried, with a cunning leer.  "An' I know your fren'
there.  She isn't yer missis.  She never is, y' know.  Naughty boy!" he
cried, wagging his finger at Jonah; "but I wont split on pal."

That reminded him of the deceased Sam, and he turned again to the
monument.

"Goo'bye, Sam," he cried suddenly, under the impression that he had
been to a funeral.  "I've paid me respecks to an ol' fren', an' now
we'll both sleep in peace."

"Come away and leave him," whispered Clara, trembling with disgust and
mortification.

"No fear!" said Jonah.  "The Johns down 'ere don't know 'im, an'
they'll lumber 'im.  You walk on ahead, an' I'll steer 'im 'ome."

He looked round; there was not a cab to be seen.

He led Dad out of the stonemason's yard with difficulty, as he wanted
to wait for the mourning coaches.  Then, opposite the mortuary, he
remembered his little present for the Duchess, and insisted on going
back.

"Wheresh my lil' present for Duchess?" he wailed.  "Can't go 'ome
without lil' present."

Jonah was in despair.  At last he rolled his handkerchief into a ball
and thrust it into Dad's hand.

Then Dad, relieved and happy, cast Jonah off, and stood for a moment
like the Leaning Tower of Pisa.  Jonah watched anxiously, expecting him
to fall, but all at once, with a forward lurch Dad broke into a run,
safe on his feet as a spinning top.  Jonah had forgotten Dad's run,
famous throughout all Waterloo, Redfern, and Alexandria.




CHAPTER 22

A FATAL ACCIDENT


As Clara crossed the tunnel at Cleveland Street, she found that she had
a few minutes to spare, and stopped to admire the Silver Shoe from the
opposite footpath.  Triumphant and colossal, treading the air securely
above the shop, the glittering shoe dominated the street with the
insolence of success.  More than once it had figured in her dreams,
endowed with the fantastic powers of Aaron's rod, swallowing its rivals
at a gulp or slowly crushing the life out of the bruised limbs.

Her eye travelled to the shop below, with its huge plate-glass windows
framed in brass, packed with boots set at every angle to catch the eye.
The array of shining brass rods and glass stands, the gaudy ticket on
each pair of boots with the shillings marked in enormous red figures
and the pence faintly outlined beside them, pleased her eye like a
picture. To-day the silver lettering was covered with narrow posters
announcing that Jonah's red-letter sale was to begin to-morrow.  And as
she stared at this huge machine for coining money, she remembered, with
a sudden disdain, her home with its atmosphere of decay and genteel
poverty.  She was conscious of some change in herself.  The slight
sense of physical repugnance to the hunchback had vanished since his
declaration.  He and his shop stood for power and success.  What else
mattered?

Her spirits drooped suddenly as she remembered the obstacle that lay
between her and the pride of openly sharing the triumphs of the Silver
Shoe as she already shared its secrets.  She thought with dismay of the
furtive meetings drawn out for years without hope of relief unless the
impossible happened.  A watched pot never boils, and Ada was a young
woman.

She crossed the street and entered the shop, her eye scouting for Jonah
as she walked to the foot of the stairs, for since the appointment of a
manager, Jonah had found time to slip up to the room after the lesson
to ask her to play for him, on the plea that the piano was spoiling for
want of use.  And he waited impatiently for these stolen moments, with
a secret desire to see her beneath his roof in a domestic setting that
gave him a keener sense of intimacy than the swish of waters and wide
spaces of sea and sky.  But to-day she looked in vain, and Miss
Giltinan, seeing the swift look of inquiry, stepped up to her.

"Mr Jones was called away suddenly over some arrangements for our sale
that opens to-morrow.  He left word with me that he'd be back as soon
as possible," she said.

Clara thanked her, and flushed slightly.  It seemed as if Jonah were
excusing himself in public for missing an appointment.  As she went up
the stairs one shopman winked at the other and came across with a pair
of hobnailed boots in his hand.

"This'll never do," he whispered, "the boss missin' his lesson.  He'll
get behind in his practice."

"Wotcher givin' us?" replied the other.  "The boss don't take lessons;
it's the kid."

"Of course he don't," said the other with a leer.  "He learns a lot
here by lookin' on, an' she tells him the rest at Mosman in the pale
moonlight. If I won a sweep, I'd take a few lessons meself an' cut him
out."

He became aware that Miss Giltinan was standing behind him, and raised
his voice.

"I was tellin' Harris that the price of these bluchers ought to be
marked down; they're beginning to sweat," he explained, turning to Miss
Giltinan and showing her some small spots like treacle on the uppers.

"Mr Jones doesn't pay you good money to talk behind his back; and if
you take the trouble to look at the tag, you'll see those boots have
already been marked down," she replied indignantly.

The shopman slinked away without a word.  Miss Giltinan was annoyed. It
was not the first time that she had heard these scandalous rumours, for
the shop was alive with whispers, some professing to know every detail
of the meetings between Jonah and the music-teacher, naming to a minute
the boat they caught on their return from Mosman.  Jonah had contrived
to avoid the faces that were familiar to him, but he had forgotten that
he must be seen and recognized by people unknown to him.  Miss
Giltinan's clear and candid mind rejected these rumours for lying
inventions, incapable of belief that her idol, Jonah, would carry on
with any woman. They talked about him going upstairs to hear the piano.
What was more natural when he couldn't play it himself?  And she
dismissed the matter from her mind and went about her business.

Clara gave Ray his lesson, listening between whiles for a rapid step
from below, but none came.  She decided to go, and picked up her
gloves.  But as she passed the bedroom door on the landing, a voice
that she recognized for Ada's called out "Is that you, Miss Grimes?"

"Yes," said Clara, and paused.

The voice sounded faint and thin, like that of a sick woman.

"'Ow is it y'ain't playin' anythin' to-day?" she continued.

"Mr Jones is out," replied Clara, annoyed by this conversation through
the crack of a door, and anxious to get away.

"Oh, is 'e?" said Ada, with an increase of energy in her voice.  "I
wish yer'd come in fer a minit, if ye're not in a 'urry."

Clara pushed the door open, and went in.  It was her first sight of the
bedroom, and she recoiled in dismay.  The place was like a pigsty.  Ada
was lying on the bed, still tossed and disordered from last night, in a
dirty dressing-gown.  A basin of soapy water stood on the washstand,
and the carpeted floor was littered with clothes, a pile of penny
novelettes, and a collection of odds and ends on their way to the
rag-bag.  In spite of the huge bedroom suite with its streaked and
speckled mirrors, the room seemed half furnished.

For a moment Clara was puzzled, and then her quick, feminine eye noted
a complete absence of the common knick-knacks and trifles that indicate
the refinement or vulgarity of the owner.  She remembered that Jonah
had told her that Ada pawned everything she could lay hands on since he
stopped her allowance.  But she was more surprised at the change in Ada
herself. Months ago Ada had begun to avoid her, ashamed of her slovenly
looks, and now Clara scarcely recognized her.  Her eyes were sunken,
her cheeks had fallen in, and a bluish pallor gave her the look of one
recovering from a long illness.  The room had not been aired, and the
accumulated odours of the night turned Clara sick.  She was thinking of
some excuse to get away when Ada began to speak with a curious whine,
quite unlike her old manner.

"I'm ashamed ter ask yer in, Miss Grimes, the room's in such a state;
but I've been very ill, with no one ter talk to fer days past.  Not
that I'm ter blame.  I 'ope it's niver your lot to 'ave a 'usband with
thousan's in the bank, an' too mean ter keep a servant.  'Ere am I from
mornin' ter night, slavin' an' drudgin', an' me with a leg that bad I
can 'ardly stand on it.  I'll just show yer wot state I'm in.  It's
breakin' out all over. Me blood's that bad fer want of proper food an'
nourishment." She began to unfasten a dirty bandage below her knee.
Clara turned her head in disgust. The flesh was covered with ulcerated
sores.

"I don't know 'ow you find 'im, Miss Grimes," she continued, her voice
rising in anger, "but if yer believe me, a meaner man niver walked the
earth.  I've 'ad ter pawn the things in this very room ter pay the
baker an' the grocer.  That's 'ow 'e makes 'is money.  Starvin' 'is own
wife ter squeeze a few shillin's for 'is bankin' account.  'E knows I
can't go outside the door, 'cause I've got nuthin' ter put on; but 'e
takes jolly good care ter go down town an' live on the fat of the land."

From the next room came the fitful, awkward sounds of a five-finger
exercise from Ray.  Clara listened with silent contempt to this torrent
of abuse.  She knew that it was false that the more Jonah gave her, the
more she spent on drink.  And as she looked at Ada's face, ravaged by
alcohol, a stealthy thought crept into her mind that set her heart
beating. Suddenly Ada's anger dropped like a spent fire.

"Did yer say Mr Jones was busy in the shop?" she inquired, feebly.

"No," said Clara, "I understand that he went down town on important
business, and won't be back till late."

"Thank yer," said Ada, with a curious glitter in her eyes.  "Would yer
mind callin' Ray in?  I want ter send 'im on a message to the grocer's."

Clara went into the next room and sent Ray to his mother, stopping for
a minute to shut the keyboard and put the music straight.  After every
lesson she was accustomed to examine the piano as if it were her own
property.  When she entered the bedroom again, Ada was whispering
rapidly to Ray.  She looked up as Clara entered, and gave him some
money in a piece of paper.

"An' tell 'im I'll send the rest to-morrer," she added aloud.  Ray went
down the back stairs, swinging an empty  millet-bag in his hand.  For
another five minutes Clara remained standing, to show that she was
anxious to get away, while Ada abused her husband, giving detailed
accounts of his meanness and neglect.  Suddenly her mood changed.

"I'm afraid I mustn't keep yer any longer, Miss Grimes," she said
abruptly; "an' thank yer fer lookin' in ter see 'ow I was."

Clara, surprised and relieved at the note of dismissal in her voice,
took her leave.

She went down the winding staircase at the rear of the shop, opposite
the cashier's desk.  The pungent odour of leather was delightful in her
nostrils after the stale smell of the room above, and she halted at the
turn of the landing to admire the huge shop, glittering with varnish,
mirrors, and brass rods.  Then she looked round for Jonah, but he was
nowhere to be seen.

The sight of Ada, ravaged by alcohol, had filled her with strange
thoughts, and she walked up Regent Street, comparing Ada with her own
father, who seemed to thrive on beer.  There must be some difference in
their constitutions, for Ada was clearly going to pieces, and...the
thought entered her mind again that quickened her pulse.  She had never
thought of that!  She was passing the "Angel" with its huge white
globes and glittering mirrors that reflected the sun's rays, when she
caught sight of Ray coming out of the side door, swinging an empty
millet-bag in his hand. A sudden light flashed on her mind.  Ada's
invitation into the bedroom, the inquiry about Jonah, and her sudden
dismissal all meant this.

"Did you get what your mother wanted?" she asked the child, with a
thumping sensation in her heart.

"No," said Ray carelessly; "the man wouldn't give me the medicine.  He
told me to go home and fetch the rest of the money."

"How much more do you want?" asked Clara, in a curious tone.

"Eighteen pence," said Ray, showing two half-crowns in his hand.

Clara hesitated, with parched lips.  She remembered Ada's face, ravaged
by brandy.  She was a physical wreck, and six months ago...perhaps
another bottle...

The thought grazed her mind with a stealthy, horrible suggestion.  She
felt in her purse with trembling fingers, and found a shilling and a
sixpence.

"Go and get your mother's medicine," she whispered, putting the money
into Ray's hand; "but don't tell her that you met me, or she may scold
you."

Ray turned in at the side door, and Clara, white to the lips, hurried
round the corner.

It took Ray half an hour to cover the short distance between the Angel
and the Silver Shoe, with a bottle of brandy swinging carelessly in the
millet-bag.  Cassidy himself, all smiles, had carefully wrapped it in
paper.  Ray had promised to hurry home with the medicine for his
mother, but, as usual, the shop windows were irresistible.  Some of his
early trips to the "Angel" had taken half a day.

Meanwhile Ada lay on the bed in an agony of attention, atrociously
alert to every sound, hearing with every nerve in her body.  Her nerves
had collapsed under the repeated debauches, and the scream of an engine
shunting in the railway yards went through her like a knife.  The
confused rumble of carts in Regent Street, the familiar sounds from the
shop below, the slamming of a door, a voice raised in inquiry, the
monotonous, kindly echoes of life, struck on the raw edges of her
nerves, exasperating her to madness.

And through it all her ears sought for two sounds with agonizing
acuteness--the firm, rapid step of Jonah mounting the stairs winding
from the shop, or the nonchalant, laggard footfall of Ray ascending
from the stairs at the rear.  Would Cassidy send the bottle and trust
her for the other eighteen pence?  Would Jonah hurry back to meet Miss
Grimes? Presently her ear distinguished the light, uncertain step of
Ray.  Every nerve in her body leapt for joy when she saw the bottle.
She looked at the clock, it was nearly four.  She had at least an hour
clear, for Jonah would be in no hurry now that he had missed the
music-lesson.  She snatched the bag from the astonished child.

"Go an' see if yer father's in the shop.  If 'e ain't there, yer can go
an' play in the lane till 'e comes back," she cried.

Her hands shook as she held the bottle, but with a supreme effort she
controlled her muscles and drew the cork without a sound, an
accomplishment that she had learned in the back parlour of the Angel.
She poured out half a glass, and swallowed it neat.  The fiery liquid
burnt her throat and brought the tears to her eyes, but she endured it
willingly for the sake of the blessed relief that always followed.   A
minute later she repeated the dose and lay down on the bed.  In ten
minutes the seductive liquid had calmed her nerves like oil on troubled
waters.  She listened to the familiar sounds of the shop and the street
with a delicious languor and sense of comfort in her body.  In an hour
she had reached the maudlin stage, and the bottle was half empty.

She felt at peace with the world, and began to think kindly of Jonah.
Hazily she remembered her bitter speech to Miss Grimes, and wondered at
her violence.  There was nothing the matter with him.  He had been a
good husband to her, working day and night to get on in the world.  She
felt a sudden desire to be friendly with him.  Maudlin tears of
self-reproach filled her eyes as she thought how she had stood in his
way instead of helping him.  She would mend her ways, give up the drink
which was killing her, and take her proper position, with a fine house
and servants.  With a fatuous obstinacy in her sodden brain, she
decided not to lose a minute, but to go and surprise Jonah with her
noble resolutions.

She got to her feet, and saw the brandy bottle.  Ah!  Jonah must not
know that she had been drinking, and with the last conscious act of her
clouded brain she staggered into the sitting-room and hid the bottle
under the cushions of the sofa.  Then, conscious of nothing but her
resolve, she lurched to the top of the stairs.  It was nearly dark, and
she felt for the railing, but the weight of her body sent an atrocious
pain through her leg, and to ease it she took a step forward to put her
weight on the other.  And then, without fear, and without the desire or
the power to save herself, she stepped into space and fell headlong
down the winding staircase that she had always dreaded, rolling and
bumping with a horrible noise on the wooden steps down to the shop,
where the electric lights had just been switched on.  She rolled
sideways, and lay, with a curious slackness in her limbs, in front of
the cashier's desk.  One of the shopmen, startled by the noise, turned,
and then, with a look of horror on his face, ran to the door.  He
bumped into Jonah, who was coming from the ladies' department.

"Wot the devil's this?" cried Jonah.

The man turned and pointed to the huddled heap at the foot of the
stairs.

"It's yer missis.  She fell from the top.  'Er face is looking the
wrong way."

Jonah ran forward and shouted for a doctor.  Then he knelt down and
tried to lift Ada into a sitting posture, but her head sagged on one
side.  And Jonah realized suddenly, with a curious feeling of
detachment, that he was free.  When the doctor arrived, he told them
that death had been instantaneous, as she had broken her neck in the
fall.

The next day the "Silver Shoe" was closed on account of the funeral.
The Grimes family sent a wreath, but Jonah looked in vain for Clara
among the mourners.  He was disappointed but relieved, fearing that the
exultation in his heart would betray him in the presence of strangers.
He dwelt with rapture on the moment in which he would meet her face to
face, free to love and be loved, willing to lose some precious hours
for the sake of rehearsing schemes for the future in his mind.  He
listened without emotion to the conventional regrets of the mourners,
agreeing mechanically with their empty remarks on his great loss, a
mocking devil in his brain.

The day after the funeral the Silver Shoe returned to business, and
Jonah spent the morning in the shop, too nervous to sit idle.  He had
spent a sleepless night debating whether he should go to Clara or wait
till she came to him of her own accord.  The shop was alive with
customers, drawn by the red-letter sale, but there was no sign of the
one woman above all he desired to see.  Suddenly he decided, with a
certainty that astonished him, that she would come in the afternoon.
After dinner he stayed in the sitting-room, fidgeting with impatience.
He looked for something to do, and remembered that he had still to
clear up the mystery of Ada's drunken bout.  All the shop-hands had
denied lending her money, and the mystery was increased by his finding
no bottle in the usual hiding places.  Ray, when questioned about
brandy, had stared at him with bewildered eyes.  And to calm his nerves
he made another search of the rooms.

He turned out the drawers and cupboards, meeting everywhere evidence of
Ada's slovenly habits.  And at the sight and touch of the tawdry laces
and flaring ribbons he was surprised by an emotion of tenderness and
pity for his dead wife.  He realized that the last link had snapped
that bound him to Cardigan Street and the Push.  Something vibrated in
him as he thought of the woman who had shared his youth, and he
understood suddenly that no other woman could disturb her possession of
the years that were dead. Clara could share the future with him, but
half his life belonged irrevocably to Ada.

He had searched every likely nook and corner of the rooms, and found
nothing.  The absence of the bottle set him thinking.  He became
certain that the hand of another was in this.  Ada had never left her
room; therefore the bottle had been brought to her.  And the one who
brought it had taken it away again.  Clara had been the last one to see
her alive, and of course...He stopped with an unshaped thought in his
mind, and then smiled at it for an absurdity.  Tired with his
exertions, he sat on the sofa, digging his elbow into the cushion, and
instantly felt something hard underneath.  The next moment he was on
his feet, holding in his hands the bottle of brandy, half empty.  He
stared stupidly at the bottle that had sent Ada to her death and set
him free, wondering who had paid for it and brought it into the house.
As he turned the bottle in his hands, examining it with the morbid
interest with which one examines a bloodstained knife, he heard a light
tap on the door.

"Come in," he cried, absorbed in his discovery.

He turned with the bottle in his hands, to find Clara standing in the
doorway with a tremulous smile on her lips.  But, as Jonah turned, her
eye fell on the bottle.

"I've been a day findin' this," said Jonah; "but now..."

An extraordinary change in Clara's face stopped the words on his lips.
The tremulous smile on her parted lips changed to a nervous grin, and
her colour turned to a greyish white as she stared at the bottle, her
eyes dilated with horror.  For some moments there was a dreadful
silence, in which Jonah distinctly heard Miss Giltinan giving an order
downstairs. Slowly he looked from Clara to the bottle.  Again he stared
at the frightened woman, and his mind leapt to a dreadful certainty.

"Come in, an' shut the door," he said.  His voice was little more than
a whisper.

Clara obeyed him mechanically.

"Sit down," he added, putting the bottle on the table.

For a while each stared at the other, too stunned to move or speak.
Jonah's world had fallen about his ears, and Clara's dreams of wealth
mocked at her and fled.

Suddenly, in the deadly silence, Jonah began to speak.

"So it was you, was it?  I never thought of that.  I wonder what
brought yer 'ere just as I found this?  They say murder will out, an' I
believe it now.  If this 'appened to anybody else, 'e'd go mad.  But I
can stand it.  I'm tough.  I fought my way up from the gutter.  An'
ye're the woman that I worshipped....For God's sake, woman, speak!
Make up something that I can believe.  Say yer never 'ad a 'and in
this, an' I'll kiss the ground yer walk on.  No, it wouldn't be any
use.  I couldn't believe the angel Gabriel, if he looked at me with
that face.  Yer paid for that bottle an' brought it 'ere.  I saw that
the moment yer set eyes on it. Yer thought Ada wasn't goin' ter hell
fast enough, an' yer'd give 'er a shove.  An' I see now why yer did it.
Yer wanted ter step into 'er shoes, an' 'andle my money.  It wasn't me
yer wanted.  I might 'ave known that. It was the shop that yer were
always talkin' about.  An' if yer 'adn't walked in at that door just
now, I should never 'ave suspected.  Screamin' funny, ain't it?  She
wasn't much loss, but she was a thousand times better than the ladylike
devil that killed her.  I don't know 'ow the law stands in a case like
this.  Yer may be safe from that, but yer've got me ter deal with
first.  Yer led me on with yer damned airs to believe in things I've
never dreamt of before.  An' now yer've killed the best in me as sure
as yer murdered my wife.  Well, yer must pay for that, too."

Clara sat on the chair like one in a trance.  She understood in a
numbed kind of way that something dreadful was going to happen.  O God,
she had never meant to do wrong!  And if this was the punishment, let
it come quickly.  Jonah had been walking backwards and forwards with
nervous steps, and she noted every detail of his person with a fixed
stare.  The early repugnance to his deformity returned with horror as
she studied the large head, wedged between the shoulders as if a
giant's hand had pressed it down, the projecting hump, and the
unnaturally long arms ending in the hard, hairy fist of the shoemaker.

She felt that he was going to kill her.  She wanted to speak, to cry
out that she was not so guilty as he thought, but her tongue was like a
rasp. Suddenly Jonah stopped in front of her.  Her stony silence had
maddened him, and in a moment he was transformed into the old-time
larrikin, accustomed to demand an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth.
He  rushed at her with a cry like an animal, and caught her by the
throat with his powerful hands.  But the contact of his fingers with
that delicate flesh that he had never dared to touch before brought him
to his senses.  A violent shudder shook him like ague, his fingers
relaxed, and with a sobbing cry, dreadful to hear, he dragged the
fainting woman to her feet and pushed her towards the door, crying "Go,
go, for God's sake!"

She walked unsteadily through the shop with a face the colour of chalk,
hearing and seeing nothing.  The red-letter sale was in full swing.  A
crowd of customers jostled one another as they passed in and out; the
coins clinked merrily in the till.  Miss Giltinan caught sight of her
face, and wondered.  Half an hour later, growing suspicious, she ran
upstairs, and knocked at the door on a pretext of business.  Hearing
nothing, she opened the door, with her heart in her mouth, and looked
in. Jonah was crouching motionless on the end of the sofa, his head
buried among the cushions, like a stricken animal.  Puzzled, but
reassured, she closed the door gently and went downstairs.

      *      *      *      *      *

Jonah never saw Clara again.  He spent a week in the depths, groping
blindly, hating life for its deceptions.  Then, one day, his passion of
hatred and loathing for Clara left him suddenly, as a garrison
surrenders without a blow.  He took a cab to her house, and knocked at
the door.  A curtain moved, but the door remained unopened.  A month
later he learned that she had married her old love, the clerk in the
Lands Department, transferred by request to Wagga, beyond the reach of
Dad and his reputation.  The following year Jonah married Miss
Giltinan, chiefly on account of Ray, who was growing unmanageable; and
on Monday morning it was one of the sights of Regent Street to see the
second Mrs Jones step into her sulky to drive round and inspect the
suburban branches of the "Silver Shoe" which Jonah had opened under her
direction.

Chook and Pinkey did not need to stare at sixpence before spending it,
but their fortune was long in the making.  Meanwhile Chook consoled
himself with the presence of a sturdy son, the image of Pinkey, with a
mop of curls the colour of a new penny.










End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Jonah, by Louis Stone

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JONAH ***

***** This file should be named 3678.txt or 3678.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/6/7/3678/

Produced by Col Choat.  HTML version by Al Haines.

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
