The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Interdependence of Literature, by 
Georgina Pell Curtis

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Interdependence of Literature

Author: Georgina Pell Curtis

Posting Date: May 15, 2009 [EBook #3778]
Release Date: February, 2003
First Posted: September 4, 2001

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE INTERDEPENDENCE OF LITERATURE ***




Produced by Dianne Bean.  HTML version by Al Haines.









THE INTERDEPENDENCE of LITERATURE


By

GEORGINA PELL CURTIS




"There is first, the literature of knowledge, and secondly the
literature of power. The function of the first is to teach, the
function or the second is to move; the first is a rudder, the second an
oar or a sail. The first speaks to the mere discursive understanding,
the second speaks ultimately, it may happen, to the higher
understanding or reason, but always through affections of pleasure and
sympathy."

      Thomas De Quincey "Essays on the Poets." (Alexander Pope.)



  B. Herder,
  17 South Broadway, St. Louis, Mo.
  and 68 Great Russell St., London, W.C.

1917




PREFACE.

The author has endeavored in these pages to sketch, in outline, a
subject that has not, as far as she knows, been treated as an exclusive
work by the schoolmen.

Written more in the narrative style than as a textbook, it is intended
to awaken interest in the subject of the interdependence of the
literatures of all ages and peoples; and with the hope that a larger
and more exhaustive account of a very fascinating subject may some day
be published.

Chicago, Ill., June, 1916.




CONTENTS.

  Ancient Babylonian and Early Hebrew
  Sanskrit
  Persian
  Egyptian
  Greek
  Roman
  Heroic Poetry
  Scandinavian
  Slavonic
  Gothic
  Chivalrous and Romantic
  The Drama
  Arabian
  Spanish
  Portuguese
  French
  Italian
  Dutch
  German
  Latin Literature and the Reformation
  Seventeenth and Eighteenth Century Philosophy
  English



ANCIENT BABYLONIAN AND EARLY HEBREW.

From the misty ages of bygone centuries to the present day there has
been a gradual interlinking of the literatures of different countries.
From the Orient to the Occident, from Europe to America, this slow
weaving of the thoughts, tastes and beliefs of people of widely
different races has been going on, and forms, indeed, a history by
itself.

The forerunner and prophet of subsequent Christian literature is the
Hebrew. It is not, however, the first complete written literature, as
it was supposed to be until a few years ago.

The oldest Semitic texts reach back to the time of Anemurabi, who was
contemporaneous with Abraham, five hundred years before Moses. These
Semites possessed a literature and script which they largely borrowed
from the older non-Semitic races in the localities where the posterity
of Thare and Abraham settled.

Recent researches in Assyria, Egypt and Babylonia has brought this
older literature and civilization to light; a literature from which the
Hebrews themselves largely drew. Three thousand years before Abraham
emigrated from Chaldea there were sacred poems in the East not unlike
the psalms of David, as well as heroic poetry describing the creation,
and written in nearly the same order as the Pentateuch of Moses.

The story of the Deluge, and other incidents recorded in the Old
Testament, together with numerous legends, were known and treasured by
the Ancients as sacred traditions from the earliest ages of the world.

We learn from St. Paul that "Moses was skilled in all the knowledge of
the Egyptians." He must therefore have been familiar not only with the
ancient poems and sacred writings, but also with the scientific,
historical, legal and didactic literature of the times, from which, no
doubt, he borrowed all that was best in the Mosaic Code that he drew up
for the Chosen People of God. This old literature Moses confirmed and
purified, even as Christ at a later period, confirmed and elevated all
that was best in the Hebrew belief. Hence from these Oriental scholars
we learn that the Hebrew was only one of several languages which
enjoyed at different times a development of the highest culture and
polish, although the teaching of the old Rabbis was that the Bible was
the first set of historical and religious books to be written. Such was
the current belief for many ages; and while this view of the Scriptures
is now known to be untrue, they are, in fact, the most ancient and
complete writings now in existence, although the discovery in
Jerusalem, thirty-five or forty years ago, of the inscriptions of
Siloe, take us back about eight hundred years before Christ; but these
Siloeian inscriptions are not complete examples of literature.

"The Ancient culture of the East," says Professor A. H. Sayce, "was
pre-eminently a literary one. We have learned that long before the day
of Moses, or even Abraham, there were books and libraries, readers and
writers; that schools existed in which all the arts and sciences of the
day were taught, and that even a postal service had been organized from
one end of Western Asia to the other. The world into which the Hebrew
patriarchs were born, and of which the book of Genesis tells us, was
permeated with a literary culture whose roots went back to an antiquity
of which, but a short time ago, we could not have dreamed. There were
books in Egypt and Babylonia long before the Pentateuch was written;
the Mosaic age was in fact an age of a widely extended literary
activity, and the Pentateuch was one of the latest fruits of long
centuries of literary growth."

There is no doubt that these discoveries of modern times have been a
distinct gain to Christianity, as well as to the older Hebrew
literature, for it confirms (if confirmation is needed), the history of
the creation, to find it was believed by the ancient peoples, whom we
have seen were a learned and cultivated race.

In the present day the great College of St. Etienne in Jerusalem,
founded by the Dominicans expressly for the study of the Scriptures,
carries on a never ending and widely extended perusal of the subject.
Parties of students are taken over the Holy Places to study the
inscriptions and evidences of Christianity, and the most learned and
brilliant members of the Order are engaged in research and study that
fits them to combat the errors of the Higher Criticism. Their work,
which is of a very superior order, has attracted attention among
scholars of every country in Europe.

In the ancient development of the world there came a time when there
was danger of truth being corrupted and mingled with fable among those
who did not follow the guidance of God, as did Abraham and the
patriarchs; then the great lawgiver, Moses, was given the divine
commission to make a written record of the creation of the world and of
man and to transmit it to later ages; and because he was thus commanded
and inspired by God, his literature represents the most perfect and
trustworthy expression of the primitive revelations. From the very
beginning, therefore, we trace this interdependence of literature.
Moses, authorized by God, turns to all that is best in the older
Babylonian, Egyptian and Indic literature, and uses it to regenerate
and uplift the Hebrew race, so that we see the things contained in the
Bible remained the same truths that God had been teaching from the
beginning of time. The older Egyptian and Babylonian literature became
lost to the world for thousands of years until in the nineteenth
century modern research in the Pyramids and elsewhere, brought it to
light; but the Hebrew literature was passed down to the Christian era,
and thence to our own times, intact. It excels in beauty,
comprehensiveness, and a true religious spirit, any other writing prior
to the advent of Christ. Its poetry, which ranges from the most extreme
simplicity and clearness, to the loftiest majesty of expression,
depicts the pastoral life of the Patriarchs, the marvellous history of
the Hebrew nation, the beautiful scenery in which they lived and moved,
the stately ceremonial of their liturgy, and the promise of a Messiah.
Its chief strength and charm is that it personifies inanimate objects,
as in the sixty-fourth Psalm, where David says:

"The beautiful places of the wilderness shall grow fat; and the hills
shall be girded about with joy. The rams of the flock are clothed, and
the vales shall abound with corn they shall shout, yea they shall sing
a hymn."

And again in the seventeenth Psalm, he says:

"He bowed the Heavens and came down ... and He flew upon the wings of
the winds ... He made darkness His covert, His pavilion round about
Him: dark waters in the clouds of the air."

In time the Hebrew language began to be influenced by others, although,
as a people, they rank with the Greeks and Spaniards as being very
little moulded by any outside influence on their literature. From the
time of Abraham to the age of Moses the old stock was changed by the
intermarriage of some of their race with the Egyptians and Arabians.
During this period their literature was influenced by Zoroaster, and by
the Platonist and Pythagorean schools. This is especially noticeable in
the work of Philo of Alexandria, who was born a few years B.C.

Josephus, who first saw the light in A.D. 37; and Numenius, who lived
in the second century, were Jews, who as such remained, while adopting
Greek philosophy. The learned writings of the Rabbis became known as
Rabbinical literature. It is written in a language that has its roots
in the Hebrew and Chaldaic; though it has also borrowed largely from
the Arabian, Greek and Latin. In the sixteenth century Christian
scholars began to make an extensive study of Hebrew and Rabbinical
literature, and they were not slow to discover the value of these
Oriental works. These writings, however, are subject to change, and it
is in the Bible alone that we find the fundamental teaching of Hebrew
literature. Differing entirely from the Mythological and Oriental
Nations, it taught, as its cardinal principle, the unity of God. Its
historical worth has been recognized by the greatest scholars in all
ages, and it has influenced not only the ancient world, but also the
literature and poetry of the Middle Ages and of modern times. It forms
a contrast to the philosophy of the Greeks, and to that of Europeans of
a later age. When the latter have tried to explain the great mystery of
God and man, they have invariably failed. In the beautiful writings of
the Greeks, wherein we find the height of artistic expression and
polish, there is a subsequent gradual decline; but such is not the case
in the Old Testament. In every age fresh beauty and hidden treasure is
found in its pages. Another phase of the Bible which has had a far
reaching and lasting effect upon all language and literature, is its
prevailing spirit of types and symbols. This is conspicuous both in the
poetical books and in those that are didactic or historical. It has had
the same influence on the thoughts and imagination of all Christian
people and upon the poetry and imitative arts of the Middle Ages (and
nearly the same upon later and more cultivated times) that Homer had
upon the Ancients. For in it we find the standard of all our Christian
images and figures, and it gives us a model of imitation that is far
more beautiful in itself, and far more world-wide in its application
than anything we can borrow from the Greeks. We see this in Dante and
Tasso, and in other Christian poets. To the Hebrew, as the original
custodians of the Old Testament, we are indebted for keeping the faith
pure when all other nations either forgot or abandoned it, or else
mixed it up with errors and idolatry. What Moses records of the
creation of the world and the first ten Fathers, is embodied by the
Persians, Indians and Chinese in whole volumes of mythology, and
surrounded by a host of fanciful traditions. Thus we see in the Hebrew
as the chosen people of God, a nation able to preserve its literature
intact through captivity, dispersion and persecution, for a period of
four thousand years.



SANSKRIT.

Sanskrit has only recently become known to Europe through the
researches of English and German Oriental scholars. It is now
acknowledged to be the auxiliary and foundation of all civilized
speech, and is important as being the language of an extensive
literature which records the life of a wonderful people from a remote
age nearly to the present time.

The ancient home of the Aryan, or Indo-European race, was in Central
Asia, whence many of its people migrated to the West, and became the
founders of the Persian, Greek and Roman Nations, besides settling in
Spain and England. Other offshoots of the original Aryans took their
lives in their hands and penetrated the passes of the Himalayas,
spreading all over India. Wherever they went, they seem to have held
themselves superior to the aboriginal people whom they found in
possession of the soil.

"The history of civilization," says a well-known authority on
literature, "is everywhere the history of the Aryan race. The
forefathers of the Greek and Roman, of the Englishman and the Hindu,
dwelt together in India, spoke the same language, and worshipped the
same gods. The languages of Europe and India are merely different forms
of the original Aryan speech. This is especially true of the words of
common family life. Father, Mother, brother, sister and widow, are
substantially the same in most of the Aryan languages whether spoken on
the banks of the Ganges, the Tiber or the Thames. The word daughter,
which occurs in nearly all of them, is derived from the Sanskrit word
signifying to draw milk, and preserves the memory of the time when the
daughter was the little milkmaid in the primitive Aryan household."

The Hindu language is founded on the Sanskrit, of which we may name the
books of the Vedas, 1500 B.C.

All the poetical works of Asia, China and Japan are taken almost
entirely from the Hindu, while in Southern Russia the meagre literature
of the Kalmucks is borrowed entirely from the same source. The
Ramayana, or great Hindu poem, must have had its origin in the
history-to-be of Christ. It has been translated into Italian and
published in Paris. The Hitopadesa, a collection of fables and
apologues, has been translated into more languages than any book except
the Bible. It has found its way all over the civilized world, and is
the model of the fables of all countries.

The dramas of Kalidasa, the Hindu Shakespeare, contain many episodes
borrowed from the great Epic poems. The Messenger Cloud of this poet is
not surpassed by any European writer of verse. The Ramayon and the
Mahabharata are the two great Epic poems of India, and they exceed in
conception and magnitude any of the Epic poems in the world, surpassing
the Iliad, the Odyssey and the Jerusalem Delivered. The Ramayon, of
seven Cantos, has twenty-five thousand verses, and the hero, Rama, in
his wanderings and misfortunes, is not unlike Ulysses. The Mahabharata
records the doings of gods, giants, and heroes, who are all fighting
against each other. It contains two hundred thousand verses, embodied
in eighteen Cantos, and is thought to be not the work of one man; but
different songs sung from the earliest ages by the people, and
gradually blended into one poem. In it we find the ancient traditions
which nearly all people possess, of a more free, active and primitive
state of nature, whose world of greatness and heroism has been
suppressed in later ages. Among the Hindustans there exists a religion
resembling in part that of Greece, with traces of the Egyptian; and yet
containing in itself many ideas, both moral and philosophical, which in
spite of dissimilarity in detail, is evidently akin to our doctrines of
the Christian religion. In fact, the resemblance between the Hindu and
Christian religion is so remarkable that some scholars think the Hindu
was taken from the Christian. It is more probable that it was of
greater antiquity, and that the similarity between them springs from
the seed of all truth and all Nature implanted in man by God. Indian
and Christian both teach regeneration. In the Indian creed, as soon as
the soul is touched with the love of divine things it is supposed to
drop its life of sin and become "new born."

In a higher region all these truths in the lower world which have to do
with divine things, are mysteriously akin to each other. It needs only
the first spark of light from above to make them instinct with life.

The Recluses or Gymnosophists of India are not unlike the first
Recluses of Egypt, and the first hermits of the desert in the Christian
era.

The doctrines of India first obtained a foothold in Europe through the
dogma of Metempsychosis. It was introduced into the Hellenes by
Pythagoras; but never became popular among the Greeks. This
Metempsychosis (or the transmigration of souls) was believed by the
Indians from the earliest period, and their whole history is built upon
it. A very ancient connection can be traced between India and Egypt,
manifested by Castes, which are found equally in both countries, and by
similiar Mythologies. When Alexander the Great invaded Northern India
from Persia, the Greeks found an Indian Mythology far more like their
own than the Persian or Hebrew. They thought they had met with the same
gods they had been accustomed to worship, though clothed in a different
form and color. They showed their faith in this discovery by the names
of the Indian Hercules and the Indian Bacchus, later so common among
them.

The worship of Vishnoo and Krishnoo in Hindostan differs very little
from the religion of Buddha and Fo which was established in China and
Thibet during the first century of Christianity. The former retained
caste, while the latter, following the teaching of Buddha, have
repudiated any class distinctions.

Decimal cyphers originated in Hindostan.



PERSIAN.

In everything appertaining to their religious belief the Persians bear
a close resemblance to the Hebrew, but the poetical part of their
mythology is more similiar to the Northern theology, while their
manners bear a strong resemblance to the Germans. The spiritual worship
of nature, light, fire, and of other pure elements, is embodied in both
the Zend Avesta (Persian) and the Edda (Scandinavian). The two nations
have the same opinion concerning spirits which rule and fill nature,
and this has given rise to poetical fancies about giants, dwarfs and
other beings, found equally in Persian and Northern Sagas.

The work of Lokman, existing now only in Arabic, has caused some people
to think that it is of Arabian origin; but it is really Persian, and of
the tenth century B.C. His Apologues are considered the foundation on
which Greek fable was reared. The Code of Zoroaster, in which the two
great principles of the world are represented by Ormuzd (goodness and
light), and Ahriman (darkness and sin) are as old as the creation.

Ormuzd is worshiped in the sun, the stars, and in fire. Zoroaster
explained the history of man as being one long contest between these
two powers until a time to come when Ormuzd would be victorious over
Ahriman. Ormuzd, as the ruler of the universe, seeks to draw men to the
light, to dispel the darkness of ignorance, and to extend the triumph
of virtue over the material and spiritual world. It may be said of the
Persians, as Tertullian said of the Roman Pagans, "that in their
highest moods and beliefs they were naturally Christian." Among a
Persian sect called the Sufis' there is a belief that nothing exists
absolutely but God; that the human soul is an emanation from His
essence, and will ultimately be restored to Him, and that the supreme
object of life should be a daily approach to the eternal spirit, so as
to form as perfect a union with the divine nature as possible. How
nearly this belief approaches the Christian doctrine, will be easily
seen.

Persian poetry is nearly all in the form of love stories, of which the
"Misfortunes of Mejnoun and Leila" represent the Eastern Romeo and
Juliet, and may have been known to Shakespeare in the writing of his
own drama.



EGYPTIAN.

Egypt shared with ancient Babylon and Assyria in the civilization of
its primitive literature. It is from five of its Pyramids, opened in
1881, that valuable writings have been brought to light that carry us
back one thousand years before the time of Moses.

Their famous "Book of the Dead," of which many copies are found in our
museums of antiquities, is one instance of their older civilization.
These copies of the original, in the form of scrolls, are some of them
over a hundred feet long, and are decorated with elaborate pictures and
ornamentation. The book gives conclusive proof of the teaching of the
Egyptians of a life beyond this. Their belief in the journey of the
soul after death to the Underworld, before it is admitted to the Hall
of Osiris, or the abode of light, is akin to the Catholic doctrine of
Purgatory and Heaven. The Egyptian literature is painted or engraved on
monuments, written on papyrus, and buried in tombs, or under the ruins
of temples, hence, as has been said elsewhere, much of it remained
hidden until nineteenth century research brought it to light. Even at
the present time many inscriptions are still undeciphered.

Geometry originated with the Egyptians, and their knowledge of
hydrostatics and mechanics (shown in the building of the Pyramids), and
of astronomy and medicine, is of remotest antiquity. The Greeks
borrowed largely from them, and then became in turn their teacher. The
Egyptian priests, from the earliest age, must have preserved the annals
of their country; but they were destroyed by Cambyses (500 B.C.), who
burned the temples where they were stored.

In the fourth century B.C., Egypt was conquered by Alexander the Great,
who left it under the rule of the Ptolemies. The next century after the
Alexandrian age the philosophy and literature of Athens was transferred
to Alexandria. The Alexandrian library, completed by Ptolemy
Philadelphus, in the third century before Christ, was formed for the
most part of Greek books and it also had Greek librarians; so that in
the learning and philosophy of Alexandria at this time, the Eastern and
Western systems were combined. During the first century of the
Christian era Egypt passed from the control of the Greek Kings to that
of the Roman Emperors, under whom it continued to flourish. In the
seventh century the country was conquered by the Saracens, who burned
the great Alexandrian library. Following them came the Arabian Princes,
who protected literature, and revived the Alexandrian schools,
establishing also other seats of learning. But in the thirteenth
century the Turks conquered Egypt, and all its literary glory
henceforth departed. It has had no further development, and no
influence in shaping the literature of foreign nations. What it might
have been if the literary treasures of Egypt had not been destroyed by
Cambyses and the Saracens, we can only guess. Great literary monuments
must have been lost, which would shed more light on the civilization of
the ancient world.



GREEK.

A modern writer says of the Greeks:

"All that could beautify the meagre, harmonize the incongruous, enliven
the dull, or convert the crude material of metaphysics into an elegant
department of literature, belongs to the Greeks themselves, for they
are preeminently the 'nation of beauty.' Endowed with profound
sensibility and a lively imagination, surrounded by all the
circumstances that could aid in perfecting the physical and
intellectual powers, the Greeks early acquired that essential literary
and artistic character which produced their art and literature."

Whatever the Greeks learned or borrowed from others, by the skill with
which they improved, and the purposes to which they applied it, became
henceforth altogether their own. If they were under any obligation to
those who had lived before them for some few ideas and hints, the great
whole of their intellectual refinement was undoubtedly the work of
their own genius; for the Greeks are the only people who may be said in
almost every instance to have given birth to their own literature.
Their creations stand almost entirely detached from the previous
culture of other nations. At the same time it is possible to trace a
thread running back to remote antiquity, to show that their first hints
of a literature came from Asia. Their oldest traditions and poems have
many points of resemblance to the most ancient remains of the Asiatic
nations. Some writers say that "this amounts to nothing more than a few
scattered hints or mutilated recollections, and may all be referred to
the common origin of mankind, and the necessary influence of that
district of the world in which mental improvement of our species was
first considered as an object of general concern." But this proves at
least that there was an older civilization and literature than the
Greeks, and that that civilization had its root in the East. According
to their own testimony the Greeks derived their alphabet from the
Phoenicians, and the first principles of architecture, mathematical
science, detached ideas of philosophy, as well as many of the useful
arts of life, they learned from the Egyptians, or from the earliest
inhabitants of Asia.

The essential characteristic of the Greeks as a nation was the
development of their own idea, their departure from whatever original
tradition they may have had, and their far-reaching influence on all
subsequent literature throughout the world. They differed in this from
all other nations; for to quote again:

"the literature of India, with its great antiquity, its language, which
is full of expression, sweetness of tone, and regularity of structure,
and which rivals the most perfect of those western tongues to which it
bears such a resemblance, with all its richness of imagery and its
treasures of thought, has hitherto been void of any influence on the
development of general literature. China contributed still less, Persia
and Arabia were alike isolated until they were brought in contact with
the European mind through the Crusaders, and the Moorish Empire in
Spain."

This independence and originality of Greek literature is due in some
measure to the freedom of their institutions from caste; but another
and more powerful cause was that, unlike the Oriental nations, the
Greeks for a long time kept no correct record of their transactions in
war or peace. This absence of authentic history made their literature
become what it is. By the purely imaginary character of its poetry, and
the freedom it enjoyed from the trammels of particular truths, it
acquired a quality which led Aristotle to consider poetry as more
philosophical than history.

The Homeric poems are in a great measure the fountainhead from which
the refinement of the Ancients was derived. The history of the Iliad
and the Odyssey represent a state of society warlike it is true, but
governed by intellectual, literary and artistic power. Philosophy was
early cultivated by the Greeks, who first among all nations
distinguished it from religion and mythology.

Socrates is the founder of the philosophy that is still recognized in
the civilized world. He left no writings behind him; but by means of
lectures, that included question and answer, his system, known as the
dialectics, has come down to us.

Aesop, who lived 572 B.C., was the author of some fables which have
been translated into nearly every language in the world, and have
served as a model for all subsequent writings of the same kind. In 322
B.C., the centre of learning owing to the conquests of Alexander the
Great, was moved to Egypt in the city that bears his name. Here the
first three Ptolemies founded a magnificent library where the literary
men of the age were supported by endowments. The second Ptolemy had the
native annals of Egypt and Judea translated into Greek, and he procured
from the Sanhedrim of Jerusalem the first part of the Sacred
Scriptures, which was later completed and published in Greek for the
use of the Jews at Alexandria. This translation was known as the
Septuagint, or version of the Seventy; and is said to have exercised a
more lasting influence on the civilized world than any book that has
ever appeared in a new language. We are indebted to the Ptolemies for
preserving to our times all the best specimens of Greek literature that
have come down to us.



THE NEW TESTAMENT AND THE GREEK FATHERS.

The interdependence of Greek literature includes some reference to the
Greek fathers and their writings.

Many of the books of the Old Testament, regarded as canonical by the
Catholic Church; but known as the Apochrypha among non-Catholics, were
written in Greek. A number of them are historical, and of great value
as illustrating the spirit and thought of the age to which they refer.
The other class of writers includes the work of Christian authors.
Greek and Latin writings wholly different from Pagan literature, began
to appear soon after the first century, and their purifying and
ennobling influence was more and more felt as time passed. The
primitive Christians held these writings of the Greek and Latin fathers
in great esteem, and in the second and third centuries Christianity
counted among its champions many distinguished scholars and
philosophers, particularly among the Greeks. Their writings, biblical,
controversial, doctrinal, historical and homiletical, covered the whole
arena of literature.

Justin Martyr, Clement of Alexandria, Eusebius, Athanasius, Gregory
Nazianzen, Basil, and John Chrysostom are only a few of the brilliant
names among Greek and Latin writers, who added a lasting glory to
literature and the Church.



ROMAN.

To the Roman belongs the second place in the classic literature of
antiquity. The original tribes that inhabited Italy, the Etruscans, the
Sabines, the Umbrians and the Vituli had no literature, and it was not
until the conquest of Tarentum in 272 B.C. that the Greeks began to
exercise a strong influence on the Roman mind and taste; but Rome had,
properly speaking, no literature until the conclusion of the first
Punic war in 241 B.C.

This tendency to imitate the Greek was somewhat modified by Roman
national pride. We catch sight of this spirit in Virgil and Horace, in
Cicero and Caesar. The graceful softening of language and art among the
imaginative Greeks, becomes in the Romans austere power and majesty,
with a tendency to express greatness by size. These early indications
of race characteristics never died out, as we may see by the contrast
between the Apollo Belvidere of the Greeks, and the Moses of
Michelangelo. The oldest existing example of Latin or Roman literature
is the sacred chant of the Frates Arvales. These latter composed a
college of Priests whose prescribed duty was to offer prayers for
abundant harvests. This took place in the spring, in solemn dances and
processions, not unlike the Bacchic festivals of the Greeks, although
the Roman dances took place in the temple with closed doors. The dance
was called the tripudium from its having three rhythmical beats. The
inscription of this litany of the Frates was discovered in Rome in
1778, and experts have agreed that the monument belongs to the reign of
Heliogabalus, 218 A.D. It is said to contain the very words used by the
priests in the earliest times.

"Most of the old literary monuments in Rome," says a modern writer,
"were written in Saturnian verse, the oldest measure used by the Latin
poets. It was probably derived from the Etruscans, and until Ennius
introduced the heroic hexameter the strains of the Italian bards flowed
in this metre. The structure of the Saturnian is very simple, and its
rhythmical arrangement is found in the poetry of every age and country.
Macaulay adduces as an example of this measure, the following line from
the well-known nursery song:

   'The queen was in her parlor,
    Eating bread and honey.'

From this species of verse, which probably prevailed among the natives
of Provence (the Roman Provencia) and into which at a later period,
rhyme was introduced as an embellishment, the Troubadours derived the
metre of their ballad poetry, and thence introduced it into the rest of
Europe."

Literature with the Romans was not of spontaneous growth; it was
chiefly due to the influence of the Etruscans, who were their early
teachers, they lacked that delicate fancy and imagination that made the
Greeks, even before they emerged from a state of barbarism, a poetical
people. The first written literature of the Romans was in the form of
history, in which they excelled. Like other nations, they had oral
compositions in verse long before they possessed any written
literature. The exploits of heroes were recited and celebrated by the
bards of Rome as they were among the Northern nations. Yet these lays
were so despised by the Romans that we can scarcely see any trace of
their existence except in certain relics which have been borrowed from
true poetry and converted into the half fabulous history of the infant
ages of Rome. That the Romans, as a people, had no great national
drama, and that their poems never became the groundwork of a later
polished literature was due to the incorporation of foreigners into
their nation who took little interest in the traditions of their
earlier achievements. Father Ennius (239-169 B.C.), as Horace calls
him, was the true founder of Latin poetry. He enriched the Latin
language, gave it new scope and power; and paid particular attention to
its grammatical form. What he has done was so well done, that it has
never been undone, although later ages added new improvements to the
language. In fable Rome was an imitator of Greece; but nevertheless
Phaedrus (16 A.D.) struck out a new line for himself, and became both a
moral instructor and a political satirist. Celsus, who lived in the
reign of Tiberius, was the author of a work on medicine which is used
as a textbook even in the present advanced state of medical science.

The Greek belief in destiny becomes in the Romans stoicism. This
doctrine, found in the writings of Seneca, and in the tragedies
attributed to him, led to the probability that he was their author.
Seneca has had many admirers and imitators in modern times. The French
school of tragic poets took him for their model.

Corneille and Racine seem to consider his works real tragedy.

Cicero's philosophical writings are invaluable in order to understand
the minds of those who came after him. Not only all Roman philosophy of
the time; but a great part of that of the Middle Ages was Greek
philosophy filtered through Latin, and mostly founded on that of
Cicero. But of all the Roman creations, the most original was
jurisprudence. The framework they took from Athens; but the complete
fabric was the work of their own hands. It was first developed between
the consulate of Cicero and the death of Trajan (180 years), and
finally carried to completion under Hadrian. This system was of such a
high order that the Romans have handed it down to the whole of modern
Europe, and traces of Roman law can be found in the legal formulas of
the entire civilized world.

After the fall of the Western Empire these laws had little force until
the twelfth century, when Irnerius, a German lawyer, who had lived in
Constantinople, opened a school at Bologna, and thus brought about a
revival in the West of Roman civil law. Students came to this school
from all parts of Europe, and through them Roman jurisprudence was
carried into, and took root in foreign countries. By common consent the
invention of satire is attributed to the Romans. The originator of the
name was Ennius; but the true exponent of Roman satire was Lucilius,
who lived 148-102 B.C. His writings mark a distinct era in Roman
literature and filled no less than thirty volumes, some fragments of
which remain. After his death there was a decline in satire until fifty
years later, when Horace and Juvenal gave it a new impetus, although
their style was different from that of Lucilius. Doctor Johnson was
such an admirer of the two finest of Juvenal's satires that he took
pains to imitate them.

Boethius, the last of the Roman philosophers, left a work "on the
Consolations of Philosophy," which is known in all modern languages. A
translation was made into Anglo-Saxon by King Alfred in 900 A.D. Virgil
(70-19 B.C.) has taken Homer as his model in his great national poem of
the Aeneid. In many passages it is an imitation of the Iliad and the
Odyssey. In his didactic poems, known as the Bucolics, Virgil has made
use of Theocritus, while in the Georgics he has chosen Hesiod as his
model. The later didactic poets of all ages have imitated Virgil,
particularly in England, where Thomson's Seasons is a thoroughly
Virgilian poem. It is easy to see in Virgil where borrowed methods end
and native strength begins; for, in spite of being close imitators of
the Greek, there is a character peculiar to the writers of Rome by
means of which they have acquired an appearance of dignity and
worthiness all their own.



HEROIC POETRY.

The traditions of all nations go back to an age of heroes. Nature,
also, has had her time of stupendous greatness, a period of great
revolutions in nature, of which we can see traces to this day; and of
huge animals, whose bones are still being dug up. The history of
civilization also has its period of great achievements, and poetry has
had its time of the wonderful and gigantic. In numerous heroic poems of
different nations we can trace the unity of all heroic personages, as
in the Iliad and the Odyssey of Greece, the Sagas of the North in the
Nibelungen-lied, and the Ramayon of the Orient. Freedom, greatness and
heroism are embodied in these poems, and many of them breathe a martial
spirit.

We find the same character, however touched by local color, in all
these beautiful traditions of whatever nation or clime; at the zenith
of success, in the spring-time of youth and hope, on the very eve of
joy unutterable, there often seizes on the soul of man an overwhelming
sense of the hollowness and fleetingness of life. It is this touch of
the spiritual which raises these old heroic poems to such sublime
beauty and power. Poetry of this kind implies a nation, one which is
still, or has been, great; one which has a past, a legendary history,
vivid recollections, and an original and poetical manner of thought, as
well as a clearly defined mythology.

Poetry of this order--lyric as well as epic--is much more the child of
nature than of art. These great mythological poems for hundreds of
years were never written; but were committed to memory, sung by the
bards, and handed down from one generation to another until in time
they were merged, after the Christian era, into the historical heroic
poems. These in turn were the origin of the chivalrous poetry which is
peculiar to Christian Europe, and has produced such remarkable effect
on the national spirit of the noblest inhabitants of the world. Nor has
this oral poetry entirely died out. In the present day Mr. Stephen
Gwynne has astonished the world by telling of how he heard aged
peasants in Kerry reciting the classics of Irish-Gaelic literature,
legendary poems and histories that had descended from father to son by
oral tradition; and the same phenomena was found by Mr. Alexander
Carmichael among the Gaelic peasants in the Scottish Highlands and
surrounding islands. It has been said that heroic poetry is of the
people, and that dramatic poetry is the production of city and society;
and cannot exist unless it has a great metropolis to be the central
point of its development, and it is only by the study of the literature
of all nations that we see how essentially these heroic poems were the
foundation of all that followed them in later ages.



SCANDINAVIAN.

The Scandinavian Nation held, during the Middle Ages, the first and
strongest influence over the poetry and thought of Western Europe. The
oldest and purest remains of the poets of German Nations are contained
in the Scandinavian Edda. Its mythology is founded on Polytheism; but
through it, as through the religion of all nations of the world, there
is a faint gleam of the one Supreme God, of infinite power, knowledge
and wisdom, whose greatness and justice could not be represented in the
form of ordinary man. Such was the God of the Pagan Germans, and such
was the earliest belief of mankind.

Perhaps the poet priests of primitive times, who shaped the imaginative
mythology of the North, were conscious of the one true God; but
considered Him above the comprehension of the rude men of the times, so
they invented the deities who were more nearly akin to the material
forces that these people alone understood. The second part of the first
Edda contains the great Icelandic poems, the first of which is the song
of Voland, the famous northern smith.

Voland, or Wayland, the Vulcan of the North, is of unknown antiquity;
and his fame, which spread all over Europe, still lives in the
traditions of all the nations of the North. These poems, although
fragmentary, still far surpass the Nibelungen-lied, and in their
powerful pathos and tragic passion they surpass any ancient poetry
except that of Greece.

The Scandinavians in general, and Icelanders in particular, traveled
over every part of the West, and penetrated into hitherto unexplored
seas, collecting in every quarter the facts and fancies of the age. In
the character of wandering Normans they exerted a strong influence in
shaping poetry, and in developing the Crusades. They brought back with
them to their Northern homes the Christian and chivalrous poems of the
South. In many of these the likeness to the Icelanders own Northern
Sagas was remarkable, suggesting some still more remote age when one
heroic conception must have dominated all peoples.

After bringing home these poems of Southern Europe, the Scandinavians
proceeded to adapt them to their own use, giving them a new force and
beauty. The marvellous in Southern poetry became with them something
fraught with deeper meaning; and the Northern version of the
Nibelungen-lied acquired an ascendency in its strength and poetical
beauty, over the German heroic. Hence, during the Middle Ages, the
Scandinavians in general, and Icelanders in particular, came to possess
a peculiar chivalrous poetry of their own. It was, however, destined to
share the same fate as the great poems of the rest of Europe; first to
be reduced to prose romance, and then broken up into ballads. The chief
cause of this breaking up of the old order of poetry was due to the
Reformation. The national poetry was left to be carried on by the
common people alone, and of course in their hands was corrupted and
mutilated. Scott speaks of this in his Lay of the Last Minstrel, where
he describes the old bard, who

  "'Tuned to please a peasant's ear
  The harp a King had loved to hear."

These Bards, or Scalds, meaning Smoothers of Language, were welcome
guests in the early ages, at the Courts of Kings and Princes. Up to the
twelfth century, when the Monks and the art of writing, put an end to
their profession, these poets continued to come from Iceland and travel
all over the world. In return for their songs they received rings and
jewels of more or less value; but never money. We have a list of 230
Scalds who made a name for themselves from the time of Dagnar Lodbrok
to that of Vladimir II, or from the end of the eighth to the beginning
of the thirteenth century. When Christianity entered Scandinavia the
spirit of the old tradition still remained with the people, and became
their literature under the name of "Folk Sagas," or as we would call
them, fairy tales. These legends are found not only in modern
Scandinavia, but they have made their way into all the literature of
Europe. Jack the Giant Killer, Cinderella, Blue Beard, the Little Old
Woman Cut Shorter, and the Giant who smelled the blood of an Englishman
(the Fee, Fi, Fo, Fum of our nursery days), were all heroes and
heroines of Scandinavian songs, later adapted in various ways to the
use of different countries. After awhile this lost art revived in the
Romances of chivalry, and in popular ballads. They describe all the
changes in life and society, and are akin to the ballads of the British
Isles. In them we find the common expression of the life and feelings
of a common race. The same stories often influenced the bards of all
countries at different periods. These ballads are all written in the
same form and express a certain poetic feeling which is not found in
the Epic Age. In all countries they had a refrain, or chorus, which
marks the migration of poetry from the Epic to the Lyric form.

"This simple voice of song," to quote a modern author, "travelled
onward from mouth to mouth, from heart to heart, the language of the
general sorrows, hopes and memories; strange, and yet near to every
one, centuries old, yet never growing older, since the human heart,
whose history it relates in so many changing images and notes, remains
forever the same."



SLAVONIC (RUSSIA).

Schlegel says of the Russian Nation:

"Her subjection to the Greek Church was alone sufficient during the
Middle Ages, and is in some measure sufficient even in our own time, to
keep Russia politically and intellectually at a distance from the rest
of the Western world."

Little if any part was taken by the Slavs in the Crusades. They had
hardly any of the spirit of chivalry, and their belief, during their
period of barbaric heathenism, was not so romantic and ideal as the
Gothic.

The heroic prose tales of Russia are older and more popular than her
ballads. They are told in the nurseries, and recount the heroic deeds
of Vladimir the Great. The ballads are mostly a recital of the feuds
between the Poles and the Tartars, not unlike the Border ballads of
Scotland.

Their greatest hero is Yermak, who conquered the Mongols, and in the
fifteenth century won for the Czars the country that is now called
Siberia. Yermak's deeds and praises are sung from one end of Russia to
the other, even at the present day; and the poorest peasants usually
have a colored print representing him on horseback, nailed to the wall
of their cabins.



SERBIAN.

The popular poetry of the Slavic race, which still survives, is found
in its perfection among the Serbians and Dalmatians, while it is almost
extinct among the other nations. It is of unknown antiquity, and has
been handed down from one century to another.

The Slavs have always been a singing race, and must have been so from
Pagan times, as their songs abound with heathen gods and customs,
dreams, omens, and a true Eastern fatalism. Love and heroism are the
usual themes, and among the Serbians the peculiar relation of sister
and brother forms the principal subject of interest.

A Serbian woman who has no brother is considered a fit subject for
sympathy. The Serbian poetry is nearly all Epic, and in this particular
class of verse no modern nation has been so productive. There is a
grand and heroic simplicity in their song, as it recounts their daily
life; the hall where the women sit spinning near the fire, the
windswept mountain side, where the boys are pasturing their flocks, the
village square where youths and maidens dance, the country ripe for the
harvest, and the forest through which the traveller journeys, all
reecho with song. This Serbian poetry first became generally known in
Europe through Goethe and Grimm in Germany, and Bowring and Lytton in
England.



FINNISH.

The Finnish race reached a high degree of civilization at a very early
period. They have always been distinguished by a love of poetry,
especially for the elegy, and they abound in tales, legends and
proverbs. Until the middle of the twelfth century they had their own
independent kings, since then they have been alternately conquered by
the Russians and Swedes; but like the Poles, they have preserved a
strong national feeling, and have kept their native language. Their
greatest literary monument is the Kalevala, an epic poem. Elias
Lonnrot, its compiler, wandered from place to place in the remote and
isolated country in Finland, lived with the peasants, and took from
them their popular songs, then he wrote the Kalevala, which bears a
strong resemblance to Hiawatha. Max Muller says that this poem deserves
to be classed as the fifth National Epic in the world, and to rank with
the Mahabharata and the Nibelungen-lied. The songs are doubtlessly the
work of different minds in the earliest ages of the nation.



HUNGARIAN.

The Magyars, or Hungarians as they are called, came into Europe from
Asia, and first settled between the Don and the Dneiper. They possessed
from remote antiquity a national heroic poetry, the favourite subject
of which was their migration and conquests under the Seven Leaders.
They laid claim to Attila as being of their nation, and many of their
most warlike songs recounted his deeds and those of the other Gothic
heroes. The Magyars have never taken kindly to foreign influence, and
when, in the fifteenth century, Mathias Corvin tried to bring Italian
influence to bear on them, the result was a decline in literature, and
neglect of the old poems and legends. During the Turkish invasions the
last remnants of the national songs and traditions disappeared; and
under the Austrian rule the Hungarians have become decidedly Germanized.

Within the past century Kisfalud has sought to restore the national
legends of his country, and a new impetus has been given to the
restoration and preservation of the Hungarian language and literature.



GOTHIC.

Gothic poems were sung in the time of Attila; but the Gothic language
and monuments have everywhere perished except in Spain, where the
Spanish Monarchs are anxious to trace their descent from the Gothic
Kings. Attila, Odoascar, Theodoric, and the Amali, with other heroes,
Frankish and Burgundian, all appear in these old poems. The German
songs that Charlemagne had collected and put in writing are undoubtedly
the outcome of these ancient Gothic poems of the first Christian era.
Their substance is found in the Nibelungen-lied and the Heldenbuch.

As in the legends of Troy and Iceland, so also in the Nibelungen-lied,
the story centres on a young hero glowing with beauty and victory, and
possessed of loftiness of character; but who meets with an early and
untimely death. Such is Baldur the Beautiful of Iceland, and such,
also, are Hector and Achilles of Troy. These songs mark the greatness
and the waning of the heroic world In the Nibelungen-lied the final
event is a great calamity that is akin to a half historical event of
the North. Odin descends to the nether world to consult Hela; but she,
like the sphinx of Thebes, will not reply save in an enigma, which
enigma is to entail terrible tragedies, and lead to destruction the
young hero who is the prey of the gods.

In this we can trace a similarity to the life's history and death of
Christ. In the Middle Ages a passionate love of poetry developed in the
Teutonic race, and caused them to embody Christianity in verse. The
South Germans, and the Saxons in England, tried to copy the old heroic
poems.

In the time of Theodoric, the Goths began to influence the Roman
language and literature; and it is at this period that Roman antiquity
comes to an end and the Roman writers from that time are classed as
belonging to the Middle Ages.

The whole history of literature during the Middle Ages was of a twofold
character. The first, Christian and Latin, was found all over Europe,
and made the protection and extension of knowledge, its chief object.
The other was a more insular literature for each nation, and always in
the language of the people. Theodoric the Goth, Charlemagne, and Alfred
the Great, the chief patrons of the literature of their age, sought to
carry on, side by side, and to improve, these two literatures, the
Latin and the vernacular. They aimed to refine and educate man by the
Latin, and to increase the national spirit by preserving their national
poetry. While these old heroic poems of the different races are full of
interest and charm for us, we must not forget that the Latin kept alive
and preserved from extinction the whole of classical and Christian
antiquity.

The Middle Ages, so inaptly called "dark," are in truth little
understood. A German writer of the nineteenth century, Friedrich von
Schlegel, says:

"The nations have their seasons of blossoming, as well as individuals.
The age of the Crusades, of chivalry, romance and minstrelsy, was an
intellectual spring among all the nations of the West. In literature
the time of invention must precede the refinements of art. Legend must
go before history, and poetry before criticism. Vegetation must precede
spring, and spring must precede the maturity of fruit.

"The succeeding ages could have had no such burst of intellectual
vigor, if the preparing process had not been going on in the Middle
Ages. They sowed and we reaped."

Hence, it will be seen that what is looked on as a period of stagnation
and ignorance, was in truth, the waiting time, during which the inner
process of development was going on, soon to blossom into glorious
fruit.



CHIVALROUS AND ROMANTIC LITERATURE OF THE MIDDLE AGES.

From the time of the first Crusade, A.D. 1093, to the end of the
twelfth century, was the golden age of chivalry in Europe. Hence the
poetry of this period partook of the spirit that was abroad in the
world. Of this chivalrous poetry of the Middle Ages there are three
classifications: The first, taken from old legends, shows a style of
verse peopled with the Gothic, Frankish and Burgundian heroes who
flourished in the time of the great Northern emigrations; and for these
there is usually some historical foundation, while they are also
closely knit to the traditions of the old heathenish mythology of the
Gothic Nations. The second subject of chivalrous verse was Charlemagne,
the Saracens and Roncesvalle. These were chiefly composed by the
Normans, who, after the Crusades, gave a new direction to literature.
Marked changes were introduced by them, not only into France, but
throughout Europe. They were filled with the spirit of adventure and
enthusiasm, and in their onward march conquered England and Sicily, and
took the lead in the next Crusade. Essentially a poetic people, the
wonderful was the object of all their admiration and desire. Hence they
sang old war songs, especially of the battle of Roncesvalles in which
Roland dies when the Franks are conquered by the Spaniards and Turks.

In the tale of a fabulous Crusade, invented in the ninth century, and
which was embodied in poetry by the Normans, the true history of the
Empire became so bewilderingly mixed up with magicians, genii, sultans,
Oriental fables, and comical characters, who met with astonishing
adventures, that it was difficult to distinguish the true from the
false. There was nothing of the romantic and wonderful in the history
of the East, which did not find its way into the poetry that treated of
Charlemagne and Roland, until it lost all traces of the real wars and
achievements of Charlemagne. The third subject of chivalric verse was
Arthur of the Round Table; but this, at the time, was also invested
with Oriental wonders and attachments. Other chivalric poetry of this
epoch had to do with Godfrey of Bouillon, the Crusades, and old French
tales and fabliaux which were brought into Europe by the oral
narratives of the Crusaders.

The Northern mythology always abounded with mountain spirits, mermaids,
giants, dwarfs, dragons, elves and mandrakes. These reappear in the
songs of the Crusades, and are elements of the old Northern and Persian
superstitions. All that the East contributed to the song of the
chivalric period was a Southern magic, and a brilliance of Oriental
fancy with which some of the poems were clothed.

A Persian poem that became very popular in Europe in the Middle Ages
was Ferdusi's Book of Heroes. It has had a marked influence on the
Arabian "Thousand and One Nights." In this poem of Ferdusi's we note
the contest between light and darkness (an idea nowhere found in Greek
poetry). It seemed to touch the poetical thought of the age of
chivalry; for we find it reproduced in their songs, mingled with
Scriptural and love scenes.

Next to Chivalric poetry, the age of the Crusaders was essentially a
period of love songs. They attained their greatest perfection in
Provence, whence they spread over the whole of France, and from there
into Germany in the twelfth century.

Love poetry in Italy failed to attain any degree of perfection until
the time of Petrarch in the fourteenth century; and its real era in
Spain was not until a century later. Love poetry developed in different
ways in Europe, and, as we have seen, at different times. Except among
the Italians it was not so much borrowed from one nation to another as
had been the case with other branches of literature.

It is different with Chivalric poetry, which was considered the common
property of all. The form of poetical composition also varied in each
country, and the only thing common to all the nations was rhyme. Almost
all the love poems seem to have been written to be sung, and this was
carried to such lengths that in the reign of Lewis the Pious of
Germany, an edict had to be sent to the nuns of the German Cloisters by
their Bishops, forbidding them to sing their love songs, or Mynelieder.



THE DRAMA.

The history of the drama may be divided into two classes, the
Christian, which began with the Mystery and Morality plays; and the
Greek, which was eminently classic. These two types were the foundation
of all that came after them.

The first dawn of the drama was in Greece; for although the Hindus also
had dramatic poetry, it did not arise until there had been a lengthened
intercourse between Greece and India, so that the latter undoubtedly
borrowed from the former. The learned writers of ancient times agree
that both tragedy and comedy were originally choral song. It has been
said that poetry and song are divided into three periods of a nation's
history, that the Epic has to do with the first awakening of a people,
telling of their legends, or of some great deeds in remote antiquity.
This is followed by the second stage, which embraces elegiac and lyric
poetry and arose in stirring and martial times, during the development
of new forms of government, when each individual wanted to express his
own thoughts and wishes; and the third is the drama, which can only be
born in a period of civilization, and which, it has been said, implies
a nation.

Hence Greek drama arose at the height of Grecian civilization and
splendor. It originated in the natural love of imitation, of dancing
and singing, especially at the Bacchic feasts. The custom at these
feasts of taking the guise of nymphs and satyrs, and of wearing masks
while they danced and sang in chorus, seems to have been the beginnings
of the Greek drama.

Ancient tragedy was ideal, and had nothing to do with ordinary life; it
arose from the winter feasts of Bacchus, while comedy was the outcome
of the harvest feasts, and the accompanying Bacchanalian processions,
which were more in the nature of a frolic than of real acting. The
influence of the Middle and New Greek comedy, especially, that of
Menander, on the Roman comedy of Terence is well defined. Under Ennius
and Plautus the Roman comedy was fairly original; but Terence wrote for
the fashionable set, like Caecilius and Scipio Africanus, and
consequently imitated Greek models very carefully. The drama in Rome
never attained any noteworthy height although the French tragic poets
took Seneca for their model.

In the time of Lorenzo the Magnificent there was a great revival in
Italy of the ancient classic drama, of which Poliziano was the most
successful exponent. Both he and the later writers, however, made no
attempt to found any National Italian drama--their works are entirely
an imitation of the tragedies of Sophocles and Euripides, and the
comedies of Plautus and Terence.

The Melodrama, which arose in the seventeenth century, is distinctly
Italian and national, and has been extensively produced all over the
civilized world. Alfieri, in the eighteenth century, is the greatest
and most patriotic of the Italian tragedians, and he did as much to
revive the national character in modern times as Dante did in the
fourteenth century.

In France we have the dramatic representation of the Mysteries in the
twelfth and thirteenth centuries, introduced by the pilgrims who had
returned from the Crusades. At first these performances were given in
the street, but later a company was formed, called the "Confraternity
of the Passion," the suffering of Christ being its chief
representation. This Mystery is the most ancient dramatic work of
modern Europe, and gives the whole Gospel narrative from the birth of
our Saviour until His death. Being too long for a play of one act, it
was continued from day to day. What would seem irreverent on a modern
stage was regarded as perfectly simple and natural in the Middle Ages,
and it was a potent factor in teaching the masses the truths of their
faith.

Following these Mysteries of the Passion came a host of other plays
taken from the Old Testament, or from the lives of the Saints. The
earliest "Miracle" on record is the Play of St. Catherine, which was
represented at Dunstable about 1119, written in French; it was in all
probability a rude picture of the miracles and martyrdom of the saint.

The stage was divided into three different floors, with Heaven on top,
hell on the ground floor, and the earth between. Frequently the play
would proceed in all three divisions at once, with angels and devils
ascending and descending by means of ladders, as their help was needed
in the different worlds.

The Devil generally played the part of clown or jester. The modern
puppet play of Punch is a tradition handed down from these ancient
miracles, in which the Evil One was alternately the conqueror or victim
of the human Buffoon; who was also called by the names of Jester or
Vice.

These early miracle plays were generally written in mixed prose and
verse.

The oldest manuscript of a miracle play in English is The Harrowing of
Hell, believed to have been written in 1350.

The Morality plays were the outcome of the Mysteries; they were either
allegorical or else taken from the Parables, or from the historical
events in the Bible. The chief Moralities were Everyman, Lusty
Juventus, Good Counsel, and Repentance. The oldest English Morality
play now extant is The Castle of Perseverance, written about 1450. It
is a dramatic allegory of human life representing the many conflicting
influences that surround man on his way through the world. Lusty
Juventus depicts in a vivid and humorous way the extravagances and
follies of a young heir surrounded by the virtues and vices, and the
misery which follows a departure from the path of religion and virtue.
Gradually these Moralities were corrupted and became mixed with a
species of comedy called Interludes, a merry and farcical dialogue. The
Four P's, one of the best of these early Interludes, was written by
John Heywood, an entertainer at the Court of Henry VIII. It turns upon
a dispute between a Peddler, a Palmer, a Pardoner and a Poticary, in
which each tries to tell the greatest lie; plays of this kind are seen
in France at the present day. In the fifteenth century the drama in
France became more secularized and included political events and
satire, but the French were undoubtedly the fathers of drama in the
Middle Ages. Their plays were known a whole century before Spain or
Italy had any theater, while the romantic drama in other countries of
Europe was founded on the early French drama. Modern drama in France
during the time of Corneille, Racine and Voltaire was almost entirely
classic. The French regarded the Greek standard as the highest art; and
sought to imitate it faithfully, so much so that the French Academy,
criticizing a tragedy of Corneille, said "that the poet, from the fear
of sinning against the rules of art, had chosen rather to sin against
the rules of nature."

Comic drama in France from the end of the sixteenth to the middle of
the seventeenth century was borrowed from Spain, and had to do with a
multiplication of trap doors, dark lanterns, intrigues, and puzzling
disguises, until Moliere, in his "Precieuses Ridicules" successfully
attacked these follies of his age.

The Romantic drama, which arose in the second quarter of the nineteenth
century, holds at present the first place in France. Its chief
exponents have been Victor Hugo, the two Dumases, Sardou and Octave
Feuillet. Between them and the followers of the Classic School there
was for some time a lively war. The latter wanted to exclude the
Romanticists from the Theatre Francais, but without success. In spite
of the beauty of its French, and the polish of its style, this latest
form of the drama in France frequently offends strongly against
morality. In Spain the drama was at all times thoroughly national. Even
when they introduced mythological, Greek or Roman characters, it was
always in a Castilian dress. In this respect Spain stands alone among
the nations of Europe, as it borrowed nothing from France, Italy or
England. Its earliest plays were the Mysteries, which it is supposed to
have obtained from Constantinople, where the ancient theatre of Greece
and Rome was kept up, in a grosser form, far into the Middle Ages. In
later times this Eastern drama became so corrupt that the Christian
Church tried to offset it by introducing the Mysteries, and it became a
common custom every year at Christmas, for the Manger at Bethlehem, the
Worship of the Shepherds, and the Adoration of the Magi, to be
exhibited before the Altar, just as the Mysteries of the Passion were
introduced during Lent. The Passion Play at Oberammergau and the
Creche, representing the Manger at Bethlehem, as seen in Catholic
Churches at Christmas, are the sole survivals of these ancient
Mysteries.

The second dramatic period in Spain was pastoral and satirical. Nothing
worthy of note adorns this period in the fifteenth century. In the
sixteenth century de Rueda and Lope de Vega founded the true national
drama of Spain. It was unlike anything of an earlier period, and yet,
resting faithfully on tradition, it gave a vivid picture of the
National Spanish life in all classes of society. From the gallantries
of the "dramas of the Cloak and Sword," to the historical plays in
which Dings and Princes figure; down to the manners and incidents of
common life, all is essentially Spanish. A fourth class still
represented Scriptural and sacred scenes. Calderon wrote at the height
of the Spanish drama during the reign of Philip II; and after his time
the drama in Spain declined until, in the eighteen century, it was at
its lowest ebb. At this time plays were still held in open courtyards,
and in the daytime, as in the earlier ages. Efforts were made to
subject it to French and Italian rule, but this had only a limited
success; stiff, cold translation from the French could not please a
people who always found in the Spanish drama an essentially popular
entertainment.

In Germany traces of the drama first appeared in the thirteenth
century, when rude attempts to imitate the Mystery plays were conducted
in churches by the priests. But when the populace tried to introduce
the Burlesque, the performances were banished to the open fields.
Students in the universities took part in them, and they continued
until after the Reformation. Brought into Europe from Constantinople by
the Crusaders and pilgrims, the Mystery plays became the chief
amusement of an illiterate age. Christianity was first thoroughly
impressed on the mind of Northern Europe by means of them; and the
first missionaries familiarized the rude Goths and Huns with Biblical
incidents at a time when reading was unknown outside of the Cloister.
No change in German drama occurred until the seventeenth century, when
operas after the Italian superseded the Mysteries and Moralities. The
production of this age, however, were characterized by bad taste and
pedantry; and it was not until Goethe brought his genius to bear on the
subject, that the Germans acquired any drama worthy of the name.
Whether in his national play Gotz von Berlichingen or in his classical
drama of Iphigenia, this great German master stands at the summit of
his art. Lessing attacked French drama as enacted in Germany prior to
Goethe, and brought forward the Shakespearian plays as a model.

Schiller's Wallenstein obtained a worldwide reputation, and among the
Romantic dramatists Werner's Attila and Grillparzer's Ancestress are
the best examples of the extravagant and fertile mind of the German
romanticist.

Modern German drama has found the highest art it has ever attained in
the compositions of Richard Wagner, whose operas are entirely German
and National, and mostly founded on the old German legends. Tannhauser
is taken from the epic poem of "Parzifal," written by Wolfram von
Eschenbach in the Middle Ages. Lohengrin, which is touched on in the
"Parzifal," Wagner also found in the poem of an obscure Bavarian poet;
and a more complete account of the celebrated "Swan Knight" appears in
a collection of stories edited by the brothers Grimm. Lohengrin is a
Knight of the Holy Grail, so part of the legend is borrowed from
ancient Britain.

All dramatic effort in England before the sixteenth century was so rude
as to be of little account. The Miracle and Mystery plays were
introduced into England in the reign of Henry VI, and many of them had
a personage called "Iniquity," a coarse buffoon, whose object was to
amuse the audience. After the Reformation the Protestant Bishop Bale
wrote plays on the same plan as the Mysteries, intended to instruct the
people in the supposed errors of Popery. These plays, which deal
largely in satire, became popular and after the era of Henry VIII were
known as Interludes. In the beginning of the sixteenth century real
comedy and tragedy began to exist in a rude form. The oldest known
English comedy, Ralph Royster Doyster, was written by Nicholas Udall,
and describes a character whose comic misadventures are somewhat akin
to Don Quixote.

The earliest tragedy, Gorboduc, known also Ferrex and Porrex, was
played in the Lower Temple. It is founded on the legends of fabulous
British history. The tragedies of Marlowe and the legendary plays of
Greene come next in order, followed by the golden age of English drama,
from the dawn of the Shakespeare plays in 1585 until the closing of the
theatre in 1645 on the breaking out of the Civil war in England. For a
period of sixty years the splendid genius of the world's greatest
dramatist gave to mankind a series of plays that have no equal in the
literature of any country or age.

Contemporaneous with Shakespeare, or coming after him, were Beaumont
and Fletcher, Ben Jonson, Massinger, Ford, and Shirley; these
Elizabethan dramatists took their subjects from the stories and legends
of all countries and ages--or else they depicted the national life. For
this reason English drama has been called Irregular, in contrast to the
Greek, which is called the Regular, and that of modern France, founded
upon the Greek. The chief rule of the Regular is the Unity of Time,
Place and Action. In the Greek, the time of action was allowed to
extend to twenty-four hours, and the scene to change from place to
place in the same city; but Shakespeare and his contemporaries
acknowledged no fixed limit either of time, place or action. The
operation of their plays covered many different countries, and the time
extended over many years; but the rule that laid down in the Greek
drama the principle that there should be unity of action (everything
being subordinate to a series of events, which form the thread of the
plot), was adopted by Shakespeare and his contemporaries. It has been
called "unity of impression," as opposed to unity of time and place.



ARABIAN.

The rise and development of Arabian literature occurs at an epoch when
the rest of Europe was struggling through a period of transition. From
the middle of the sixth to the beginning of the eleventh century, at a
time when the Roman dominions were overrun by Northern hordes, and the
Greek Nation was groaning under the Byzantine power, when both Greek
and Latin literature was exposed to the danger of extinction, the
splendor of Arabian literature reached its zenith and through the
mingling of the Troubadours with the Moors of the Peninsula, and of the
Crusaders with the Arabs, it began to influence the literature of
Europe.

Arabia, peopled by wandering tribes, had no history other than the
songs of the national bards, until after the rise of Mohammed in the
sixth century. The desire of the prophet was to bring his people back
from idolatry and star worship to the primitive and true worship of
God. He studied the Old and New Testament, the legends of the Talmud
and the traditions of Arabian and Persian mythology, then he wrote the
Koran, which became the sacred book of the Arabians, and in which is
traced in outline the true plan of man's salvation--Death,
Resurrection, the Judgment, Paradise and the place of torment. Good and
evil spirits, the four archangels, Gabriel, Michael, Azrael and
Izrafeel, are all found in the Koran; but clothed with a true Oriental
fancy. Besides the angels there are creatures, partly human and partly
spiritual, called Genii, Peris (or fairies) and Deev (or giants). The
Genii have the power of making themselves seen or invisible at
pleasure. Some of them delight in mischief, and raise whirlwinds, or
lead travellers astray. The Arabians used to say that shooting stars
were arrows shot by the angels against the Genii when they approached
too near the forbidden regions of bliss.

This fairy mythology of the Arabians was introduced into Europe by the
Troubadours in the eleventh century, and became an important factor in
the literature of Europe. From it, and the Scandinavian mythology
spring all the fairy tales of modern nations. And these romances of the
Koran form the groundwork of the fabliaux of the Trouveres, and of the
romantic epics of Boccaccio, Tasso, Ariosto, Spenser and Shakespeare.
Mohammed's teaching unified the different tribes of Arabia, and
fostered a feeling of national pride, and a desire for learning. So
rapidly did this develop that in less than a century the Arabian power
and religion, as well as its language, had gained the ascendency over
nearly half of Africa, a third of Asia, and a part of Spain; and from
the ninth century to the sixteenth, the Arabian literature surpassed
that of any nations of the same period.

This people, who, in a barbarous state had tried to abolish all
cultivation in science and literature, now became the masters of
learning, and they drew from the treasure houses of the countries that
they had acquired by conquest, all the riches of knowledge at their
command.

The learning of the Chaldeans and of the Magi, the poetry and fine arts
of Asia Minor, the eloquence and intellect of Africa, all became theirs.

Greece counts nearly eight centuries from the Trojan war to the summit
of her literary development. From the foundation of Rome till the age
of Augustus the same number of centuries passed over the Roman world;
while in French literature the age of Louis XIV was twelve centuries
removed from the advent of Clovis; but in Arabian literature, from the
time of the family of the Abassides, who mounted the throne in 750--and
who introduced a passionate love for poetry, science and art--until the
time of Al Mamoun, the Augustus of Arabia, there elapsed only one
hundred and fifty years, a rate of progress in the development of
literature among a nation that has no parallel in history.

Tournaments first originated among the Arabs, and thence found their
way into France and Italy. Gunpowder was known to them a century before
it appeared in Europe, and they were in possession of the compass in
the eleventh century, and this notwithstanding the fact that a German
chemist is supposed to have discovered gunpowder a century after the
Arabs made use of it, while the compass is more frequently supposed to
be a French or Italian invention of the thirteenth century.

Botany and chemistry were more familiar to them than they were to the
Greeks or Romans. Bagdad and Cordova had famous schools of astronomy
and medicine, and here in the tenth and eleventh centuries the Arabians
were the teachers of the world. Students came to them from France and
other parts of Europe; and their progress, especially in arithmetic,
geometry and astronomy, was marvellous. The poetry of the Arabs is
rhymed like ours, and is always the poetry of passion and love; but it
is in their prose works, the Arabian tales of the Thousand and One
Nights, that they have become most famous. Their richness of fancy in
these prose tales is different from that of the other chivalric
nations. The supernatural world is identical in both; but the moral
world is different. The Arabian tales, like the old chivalric romances,
take us to the realms of fairyland, but the human beings they introduce
are very unlike. Their people are less noble and heroic, more moved by
love and passion, and they depict women by turn as slaves and
divinities. The original author of the Arabian Nights is unknown; but
the book has become a household possession in every civilized country
in the world.



SPANISH.

For six centuries before the advent of the Arabs in Spain the country
was under the Roman yoke, and had adopted the language and arts of the
Romans; but in the eighth century the overthrow of the Romans, the
coming of the Arabs, and contact with Arabian civilization--as well as
the struggle against their Moorish invaders--began to develop in the
Spaniards a spirit that was the foundation of their national
literature. No other people have ever possessed in so strong a degree
the true national feeling--no other has produced such a uniformly pure,
deeply religious, and elevated tone, in poetry and literature. Their
poetry remained at all times free from any foreign influence, and is
entirely romantic, while the Christian chivalric poetry of the Middle
Ages remained with them longer than with any other nation, and received
from their hands a more finished and elegant polish.

After the Moorish conquest the Spaniards withdrew to the mountains of
Asturias; they took with them a corrupted form of the Latin language,
as they had received it from the Romans; reaching these mountains, they
found themselves thrown with the Iberians (the earliest of the Spanish
races). These people had remained half barbaric, had resisted both
Romans and Goths, and retained their original or Basque language.
Coming now in contact with them, the Christian Spaniards learned their
language. Later they met with another tribe of their own race who had
remained with the Arabians, known as the Mocarabes, a people of
superior refinement and civilization. Hence a new dialect from these
contending elements was gradually formed, and became known, like the
other languages of southern Europe, as the Romanic. The distinguishing
feature of Spanish literature, from its birth, to the time of Ferdinand
and Isabella, is religious faith and knightly loyalty. Qualities which
sustained the whole nation in its struggle against the infidel Moors.

The first great Spanish work is the poem of the Cid. It is the only
epic Spain has ever produced, and is the most ancient of any in the
Romance language. It is also valuable as a faithful picture of the
manners and characters of the eleventh century. Indeed, the chief
characteristic of Spanish song and poetry is its delineation of the
national life. It is said that the Cid is the foremost poem produced in
Europe from the thousand years that marked the decline of Greek and
Roman civilization, to the appearance of the Divine Comedy. The Count
Lucanor, a work of the fourteenth century, was one of the earliest
prose writings in the Spanish tongue, as the Decameron, which was
written about the same time, was the first in Italian. Both are
narrative tales; but their moral tone is very dissimilar--the Decameron
was written to amuse, while the Count Lucanor is addressed to a grave
and serious nation. These stories have frequently been dramatized, and
one of them gave Shakespeare the outline of his Taming of the Shrew.

Alfonso the Wise, in the thirteenth century, was the author of a
legislative code known as Las Sieta Partides, or the Seven Parts. It
forms the Spanish common law, and has been the foundation of Spanish
Jurisprudence ever since; and being used also in the colonies of Spain,
it has, since the Louisiana Purchase, become in some cases the law in
our own country.

Juan Ruiz, who lived in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, wrote
a poem, partly fiction and partly allegorical, called the Battle of Don
Carnival, which strongly resembles Chaucer; both poets found their
material in northern French verse.

Santob, a Jew in the fourteenth century, wrote a poem called the Dance
of Death, which became a favourite subject with both painters and poets
for several succeeding ages.

The literature of Spain may be divided into four classes--the old
Ballads, the Chronicles, the Romances of Chivalry, and the Drama. The
most interesting of the old ballads are historical; but there are also
ballads that have to do with private life wherein appear the effusions
of love, the shafts of satire, the descriptions of pastoral life, and
the oddities of burlesque. One and all, however, faithfully represent
Spanish life. No such popular poetry is found in any other language.
The English and Scotch ballads belong to a more barbarous state of
society, and their verse is less dignified and lofty than that of the
Spaniards, who were uplifted by a deep religious sense, and an
unswerving loyalty to their sovereign. A state of feeling that elevated
them far above the men and events of border feuds, and the wars of
rival Barons.

The great Spanish heroes, the Cid, Bernardo del Carpo, and Pelayo, are
to this day a vital part of the belief and poetry of the lower classes
in Spain, and are revered as they were hundreds of years ago. The
wandering Mulateers still sing of Guarinos and of the defeat at
Roncesvalles as they did when Don Quixote heard them on his way to
Toboso; and the street showmen in Seville rehearse to this day the same
wonderful adventures that the Don saw in the Inn at Montesinos. The
Chronicles developed among the more refined and educated classes. The
most celebrated is the Chronicle of Spain, written by Alfonso the Wise.
It starts with the creation of the world, and ends with the death of
Alfonso's father, St. Ferdinand. It contains all the time-honored
traditions of the country, as well as exact historical truth. The story
of the Cid is supposed to be taken from this work.

From the time of Alfonso the Wise to the accession of Charles V (or
from the thirteenth century to the sixteenth), Spain was flooded by
romantic chronicles. The most celebrated is that of Don Roderick, or an
account of the reign of King Roderick in the eighth century, the
conquest of the country by the Moors, and the efforts to wrest it from
them. On this chronicle Robert Southey has founded most of his poem of
Roderic the Last of the Goths. Whether resting on truth or fable, these
old records struck their roots deep down in the hearts of the people;
and their romance, their chivalry, their antique traditions, and their
varied legends, form a rich deposit from which all the nations of
Europe have drawn material for their own literature. It was not until
the fourteenth century that the romances of chivalry--known in France
two centuries earlier in the stories of Arthur and the Round Table, and
the deeds of Charlemagne--found their way across the Pyrenees.

Spain, so essentially the land of knighthood, welcomed them eagerly,
and speedily produced a number of like romances which were translated
into French and became famous. The most celebrated is Amadis, written
by de Lobeira, a Portuguese. Its sole purpose is to set forth the type
of a perfect knight, sans peur et sans reproche. Amadis is an
imaginative character; but he is the first of a long line of doers of
knightly deeds, culminating in Don Quixote, whose adventures have
charmed and delighted the Spaniards, as well as the men of other
nations.

Provencal literature began to have an influence on the Spanish in 1113,
after the crown of Provence had been transferred from Arles to
Barcelona by the marriage of the then Provencal heiress to Beranger,
Count of Barcelona. This introduction of the Provencal literature into
northeastern Spain had a beneficial result on the two literatures,
fusing them into a more vigorous spirit.

Spain had always maintained the closest relations with the See of Rome,
and numerous Spanish students were educated at the Italian
Universities, hence the Italian literature had some influence on the
Spanish, more lasting as a whole than the effects of Provencal
literature. From 1407 to 1454 King John II tried to form an Italian
school in Spain, gathering around him a poetical court. This Italian
influence extended into the sixteenth century. Diego de Mendoza, during
the reign of Charles V wrote a clever satirical prose work called
Lazarillo de Tormes, which became the foundation of a class of fiction
of which Gil Blas, by Le Sage, is the best known and most celebrated
example.

Except for the Cid, Spain had no historical narrative poems of any
account, and her prose historical works, especially on the discovery
and conquest of America, are of a purely local character, and had no
influence outside of Spain. The beginning of the eighteenth century saw
the accession to the throne of Philip V, a grandson of Louis XIV; and
this brought a strong French influence into the country, which for a
time dominated the national literature.

A new poetical system founded on Boileau was introduced by Luzan in his
Art of Poetry; but it did not seem to bring about any real advance in
literature; and it was not until Spain threw off this foreign yoke,
that any revival in her literature took place. It is due to a monk,
Benito Feyjoo, in the middle of the eighteen century that a renaissance
in Spanish literature took place. Feyjoo, a devout Catholic, labored to
bring to light scientific truths, and to show how they harmonized with
the true Catholic spirit. In the same century Isla, a Jesuit, undertook
with entire success, to purify the Spanish pulpit, which had become
lowered both in style and tone. His history of Friar Gerund, which
slightly resembles Don Quixote, aimed a blow at bombastic oratory,
causing it soon to die out. Proverbs which Cervantes had styled "short
sentences drawn from long experience," have always been a distinctive
Spanish product, and can be traced back to the earliest ages of the
country. No fewer than 24,000 have been collected, and many more
circulate among the lower classes which have not been recorded in
writing.



PORTUGUESE.

The earliest imitators in Europe of the bucolic poetry of Virgil, were
the Portuguese; and as a people they thought that the pastoral life was
the ideal model for poetry. This idea is strongly brought out by
Ribeyro in the sixteenth century.

The great number of Mocarbians that settled in Portugal infused into
them as a nation, a stronger Orientalism than is found elsewhere in
Europe, and their poetry was of an enthusiastic order, more marked than
that of the Spaniards.

Henry of Burgundy, who married a daughter of Alfonso XI of Spain, in
the eleventh century, introduced Provencal poetry. The Cancioneros, or
courtly ballads, in imitation of the Provencal, were sung by wandering
minstrels, and Portuguese poetry retained its Provencal character until
the end of the fourteenth century.

In the fifteenth century, the Portuguese invaded Africa, and Vasco de
Gama pointed out to Europe the new and unknown route to India. Fifteen
years later, toward the close of the century, a Portuguese kingdom was
founded in Hindostan, causing a strong counter-current of Orientalism
to invade Portugal. The people awoke to a desire for greatness; and
poetry and the arts flourished. This period, extending into the
sixteenth century, is called the golden age of Portuguese literature.

The Os Lusiades, an epic poem, that has been called "one of the noblest
monuments ever raised to the national glory of any people," was written
by Luis de Camoens, a Portuguese of the sixteenth century. It is
intensely patriotic, although it is touched by both Greek mythology,
and the Italian style, which during this epoch had been slightly
blended with the Portuguese. Portugal had little or no influence on the
literature of any nation but her own, receiving her strongest
impressions from outsiders. In the eighteenth century she was dominated
both in taste and manners by the French, and the beginning of the
nineteenth century found her a great admirer and imitator of English
literature.

National songs are known to have been sung in Portugal during the
earliest times; but none of them have come down to us. They were
doubtless similar to the other bardic songs of Europe.



FRENCH.

It is in the first ages of national existence that the foundations of
national character and poetry are laid; and the farther back that
history is studied, the more closely do we find the different peoples
of the world united in their literature. Its first history in France is
undoubtedly that of the Troubadours. Provence, where it originated,
early became an independent kingdom, while in the north the literature
of the Trouveres became the foundation of the national literature of
France. Latin was the language of the country after its conquest by
Julius Caesar; then came the Northern hordes, when language became
corrupted, until, in the time of Charlemagne, German was the Court
language, Latin the written language, and the Romance dialect, still in
its barbaric state, was the speech of the people. The Gauls in the
North, who used the Romance, were also called the Roman-Wallons; they
were distinguished from Charlemagne's German subjects, while in the
South the natives were called the Romans-Provencaux.

In the tenth century the Normans invaded France, and infused another
element in the language, which gradually became Norman-French; and from
the twelfth century the two dialects were known as Provencal and
French. The Provencal dialect, although much changed, is still spoken
in Provence, Languedoc, Catalonia, Valencia, Majorca, and Minorca,
while the French was brought, by gradual polish, to its present
perfection.

The Troubadours who flourished for three centuries, from 950 to 1250,
used the Romance language in their poems. The brilliance of this period
of literature, its sudden rise, and as sudden disappearance, is not
unlike the rise and fall of the Arabian literature.

Among the thousands of poets who flourished during this time, none ever
wrote anything of any special note. The love, romance and imagination
of these poems breathes that chivalry toward women, amounting almost to
veneration, which was a feature of this class of poetry. It is
therefore to be regretted that as actual tales, shorn of the poetical
and chivalric setting, there was something left to be desired. The
immorality of the incidents, and the coarseness of the language, makes
this "Gay Science," as the Troubadours called it, unfit to be classed
with the best literature. In 1092 the crown of Provence passing to the
Count of Barcelona brought a more refined taste into the Provencal
poetry; the arts and the sciences of the Arabians obtained a foothold
in the country; rhyme--the method used in Arabian poetry, was adopted
by the Troubadours, and from them has been handed down to the nations
of modern Europe.

This period has been described as "one that shone out at once over
Provence and all the south of Europe, like an electric flash in the
midst of profound darkness, illuminating all things with the splendor
of its flame."

During the Crusades many of the Troubadours departed for the Holy Land.
In the history of the world there is no event that fired the poetry and
imagination of the people like these holy wars, and religious
enthusiasm began to influence the poetry of the time. When the
Plantagenet kings of England assumed by right the sovereignty over
Languedoc (as Provence was called), a new impetus was given to the
Provencal poetry, as well as a wider scope, when it was introduced into
England. Chaucer, the father of English literature, found in the
Provencal literature all his first models.

With the decline of the Troubadours occurred the rise of the Trouveres
in northern France.

In the tenth century Normandy was invaded by Rollo the Dane, who
incorporated himself and his followers with the Normans. They adopted
the Norman-French; but gave it a power and scope it had hitherto
lacked. While the Romance-Provencal in the South was a language of
sweetness and beauty, the Northern language after the advent of Rollo,
was strong and warlike. Its poetry, which differed from the love
chansons of the South, was the song of brave warriors, recounting the
heroic deeds of their ancestors.

The Langue d'oui, as this Northern speech was called, became, in the
twelfth century, the universal medium of literature. The poets and
story writers called themselves Trouveres, and they invented the
fabliaux, the dramatic mysteries and romances of ancient chivalry. The
first great literary work of this class is a marvellous history of the
early kings of England, commencing with Brutus, a grandson of Aeneas,
who, sailing among many enchanted Isles, at length settles in England,
where he meets Arthur of the Round Table, and the old wizard, Merlin,
one of the most popular creations of the Middle Ages. Born of this
legend were some of the best known of modern romances. The word
romance, which in the early history of France was used to distinguish
the common dialect from the Latin, was later applied to all imaginative
and inventive tales. Of this class was "Tristam de Leonois," written in
1190; the "San Graal," and "Lancelot." In the same century appeared
"Alexander," a poem which became so celebrated that poetry, written in
the same measure, is to this day called Alexandrine verse.

A poetess known as Marie of France, wrote twelve lays to celebrate the
glories of the Round Table. She addresses herself to a king supposed to
be Henry VI, and has made extensive use of early British legends.
Chaucer and other English poets, have drawn many inspirations from her
poems.

The Trouveres not only originated the romances of chivalry; but they
also invented allegorical poems. The most celebrated is the "Romance of
the Rose," written in the thirteenth century. It consisted of 20,000
verses, and although tedious, because of its length, it was universally
admired, and became the foundation of all subsequent allegory among the
different nations. The poetry of the Trouveres was unlike anything in
antiquity, and unlike, too, to what came after it. It dealt with
high-minded love and honor, the devotion of the strong to the weak, and
the supernatural in fiction. All this, which formed part of its
composition, has been attributed to both the Arabians and the Germans;
but it was in truth a peculiar production of the Normans, the most
active and enterprising people in Europe, a nation who pushed into
Russia, Constantinople, England, France, Sicily and Syria. A treasury
of a later date, from which the Trouveres drew their fabliaux in the
thirteenth century, was a collection of Indian tales that had been
translated into Latin in the tenth century. These fabliaux show that
inventiveness, gaiety, and simple, yet delightful esprit, which is
found nowhere but among the French. The Arabian tales, which had found
their way into France, were also turned into verse, while the anecdotes
that were picked up in the castles and towns of France, furnished other
material for the fabliaux. These tales were the common property of the
country at large, and are the source from which Boccaccio, La Fontaine,
and others drew their inspiration. Some of them became famous and have
been passed down from one age to another.

The Renard of Goethe, and the Zaire of Voltaire were taken from the old
fabliaux. In the fourteenth century the coming of the Popes and the
Roman Court to Avignon introduced an Italian element, and the language
of Tuscany took the place of the Provencal among the upper classes.

La Fontaine, called the "Prince of Fablists," appeared in the
seventeenth century. Many of his fables were borrowed from ancient
sources; but clothed in a new dress. He has been closely imitated by
his Confreres and by the fablists of other nations; but has easily
remained the most renowned of them all.

The philosophy of Descartes in the sixteenth century prepared the way
for Locke, Newton and Leibnitz; and his system, although now little
used, was really the foundation of what followed. He is said to have
given new and fresher impulse to mathematical and philosophical study
than any other student, either ancient or modern.

Pascal, a contemporary of Descartes, is renowned for his Provencal
Letters, a book that has become a classic in France. It is full of wit,
and of exquisite beauty of language; but its teaching is pure
sophistry. Pascal first set the example of writing about religion in a
tone of mock levity, especially when by so doing, he could abuse the
Jesuits. In the end this weapon of keen and delicate satire was turned
against Christianity itself, when Voltaire in the eighteenth century
recognized its possibilities, and made use of it.

The older French literature in the sixteenth century had become so
neglected, and was so lacking in cultivation; so little adapted to
poetry, that the nation seemed in danger of losing all its earlier
traditions. For a hundred years France was given over to profane and
light literature. Montaigne, Charyon, Ronsard and de  Balzac are some
of the names of this period. The death of a cat or dog was made the
subject of a poem that was no real poetry. It is due to the women of
France--to Madame de Rambouillet and her confreres, and to the literary
coteries that arose in the middle of the seventeenth century--that
French literature acquired a deeper and more serious tone. This period
was followed by the founding of the French Academy, of which Cardinal
Richelieu was the chief patron. The tragic dramatists, Corneille and
Racine, now appeared on the literary horizon. Racine's language and
versification was said to be far superior to either Milton in English
or Virgil in Latin.

In tragedy the French stand pre-eminent; but it is matter for regret
that their subjects are never taken from their own nation--they rarely
represent French heroes; and it is a weakness of their literature that
they make no direct appeal to the national feeling. There is a close
connection between the classical dramas of Racine and Corneille, and
such works as Pope's Iliad, Addison's Cato and Dryden's Alexander's
Feast, showing the general interest in Greek and Roman subjects during
their time.

The older poetry of the chivalric period was entirely discarded, though
it would have been possible to unite the old chivalric spirit, the
freedom and romance of mediaeval times, with the later renaissance, as
was done by other nations. The French literature is more closely formed
on the model of the earlier refined nations of antiquity, as the Roman
was on the Greek.

The later French poetry of the seventeenth century came into opposition
with the teaching of Rousseau, this gave birth to a taste for English
poetry and the classic poetry of France was a copy of the descriptive
poetry of England. In the eighteenth century prose writings superseded
verse. At this time the English had taken the lead in literature, and
modern French philosophy was built on that of Bacon and Locke. It was
no part of the plan of the English philosophers, however, to inculcate
such ideas as the French philosophers drew from their writings. Bacon,
who was profoundly Christian, believed that man alone was the type of
God, and nature the work of God's hands; but the French leaders in
philosophy went beyond this, they deified nature, and threw aside as
mysticism whatever could not be proved by sense. Voltaire made use of
all the wonderful greatness of science, as revealed by Bacon and
Newton, not to exalt the Creator; but to lower man to the level of the
brute. Like the old Greek sophists, who defended first one side of a
question, and then the one diametrically opposed to it, Voltaire would
write one book in favor of God, and another to deny Him; but it is not
difficult to see which is his real belief. This perverted philosophy of
Voltaire in turn reacted on the English mind, and particularly on
history. We see its workings in both Gibbon and Hume. The "little
philosophy" which "inclineth a man's mind to atheism," led the
eighteenth century philosophers to fancy that Newton's discoveries
meant that everything could be attained without religion, and that the
only true and wide vision could be reached by the senses alone. They
taught a pure materialism, to their own undoing; for it is not possible
to thus lightly throw aside our great links with the past, in which
both Christian and heathen, knowingly and unknowingly, in mediaeval
poetry, in heroic ballad, and in Egyptian prose, testified to the
existence of God.

The nineteenth century in France has been rich in dramatists,
novelists, historians and poets, as well as in science and learning of
all kinds; but it has had no especial power, or aim, and its opinions
are constantly changing. The early novelists were strongly directed by
the writings of Sir Walter Scott, while later ones have sought to
imitate Victor Hugo and George Sand. The literature of this period has
had no effect outside of France. Poetry has not risen any higher than
Alfred de Musset; and any further greatness in French poetry must come
from a revival of their own ancient poems and legends.

Poetry that deals only with the present becomes local, and in the end
is influenced by the constant caprice and change of fashion instead of
by the deep, heart-stirring beliefs of a strong and united people.



ITALIAN.

The first general language of Italy was the Latin, and so strongly was
the Italian mind dominated by the influence of ancient Rome that her
earliest writers sought to keep alive the Roman tradition. This spirit
of freedom led to the establishment of the Italian Republics, and after
the Lombard cities threw off the yoke of Frederick Barbarossa they
turned their chief attention to education and literature. The spirit of
chivalry and chivalric poetry never took such root in Italy as it did
in other European countries. Nevertheless, Italy was not uninfluenced
by the Crusades, and the Arabs, establishing a celebrated school of
medicine at Salerno, gave a new impetus to the study of the classics.
In Bologna was opened a school of jurisprudence, where Roman law was
studied, and these schools, or universities soon appeared in other
parts of Italy.

The Italians devoted more time to the study of law and history, and to
making translations from the Greek philosophers, than to the
cultivation of chivalric poetry, although many of the Italian poets
wrote in Provencal and French; and Italian Troubadours made journeys to
the European Courts.

It has been said that the only poetry that has any real power over a
people is that which is written or composed in their own language. This
is especially true of Italy. Following this early Latin period came
Dante, the most glorious, and inventive of the Italian poets, and
indeed one of the greatest masters of verse in the world. He perfected
the Tuscan, or Florentine dialect, which was gradually becoming the
literary language of Italy. Petrarch, who succeeded Dante, is greatest
in his Italian poems, and it is by these that he is best known, while
his Latin works, which he hoped would bring him fame, have been almost
forgotten.

In the fifteenth century the use of the national language in literature
entirely died out, through the rise of the Humanists, and the craze for
Greek and Latin classics; but toward the end of the fifteenth century,
under Lorenzo de'Medici and Leo X, interest in their own literature
among the Italians began to revive again. Ariosto and Tasso wrote their
magnificent epics; and once more Italian poetry was read and
appreciated, and reached the height of its renown. Again in the
seventeenth century it declined under the influence of the Marini
school; whose bad taste and labored and bombastic style, was
unfortunately imitated in both France and Spain. In the eighteenth
century, under the patronage of Benedict XIV, the Arcadian poets of the
Marini school were banished from literature, and other and more
brilliant writers arose, possessed of the true national feeling. Under
Pope Pius VI, by whom he was liberally patronized, Quirico Visconti
undertook his "Pio Clementine Museum," and his "Greek and Roman
Iconography," said to be the two greatest archaeological works of all
ages.

With the rise of Napoleon, Italy was flooded with French writings, and
French translations, not always of the best, and even the French
language was used instead of the Italian. The Italian literature again
suffered a decline, and it was not until after the treaty of Vienna in
1815 that the foreign influence was again shaken off. It will thus be
seen that it was when Italian poets wrote in their own language that
their greatest and most lasting success was attained. During the
periods when a craze for imitating foreign works existed, the national
languages deteriorated. In Germany, under the Emperor Maximilian, a
crown was publicly bestowed on any poet who achieved success in Latin
verse, while no reward or emolument was given to those who wrote in
German. The religion of Humanism in Italy went to such lengths that
many seemed to lose not only their belief but also their good sense, as
they considered it vulgar to talk of the Deity in the language of the
Bible. God was spoken of in the plural--gods. The Father was Jupiter,
the Son, Apollo; and the Devil, Pluto; but these various errors had no
lasting or far-reaching influence. The Divine Comedy, the most powerful
and lifelike exponent of the thoughts and feelings of the age in which
Dante lived--an allegory, written in the form of a vision, at a time
when men believed that the things that are unseen are eternal--is the
most perfect and magnificent monument of earthly love, refined and
spiritualized, that has ever been written. It stands alone; for no man
of any country, coming after Dante, has been able to write from the
same motive, and in the same spirit, that he did. Petrarch, the next
greatest after Dante, is chiefly celebrated for his lyrical poems,
which were used as models by all the most celebrated poets of the South
of Europe. They are written in two forms, the canzone taken from the
Provencals, and the sonnet, taken from the Sicilians. Petrarch kept up
a wide correspondence with the literary men of Europe; and through his
influence a sort of literary republic arose which joined together the
literati of many different countries. Boccaccio, next in rank to
Petrarch, evolved a poetry consisting of Norman wit and Provencal love,
joined to an elaborate setting of his own. He took Livy and Cicero for
his models, and tried to combine ancient mythology with Christian
history, the result being that his writings were not so fine as they
would have been had they displayed a greater freedom a of style. His
most celebrated work is the Decameron, the idea of which is taken from
an old Hindu romance which was translated into Latin in the twelfth
century. Most of these tales have also been found in the ancient French
fabliaux, and while Boccaccio cannot be said to have really invented
them, he did clothe them anew, and his tales in their turn have been
translated into all the European languages.

It is due to Cosmo and Lorenzo de' Medici, and to Pope Leo X, that
there was such a glorious development of the fine arts in the fifteenth
century, an era whose benefits have been felt among the cultivated
nations for over three hundred years.

At the same time Poliziano created the pastoral tragedy, which served
to revive the study of Virgil. Other poets seizing on the old romance
of the Trouveres, added to them an element of mockery, in place of the
old religious belief. This new spirit was adopted by Ariosto. From the
East he borrowed the magic and sorcery interwoven in the adventures of
his knights and ladies, giants and magicians. It remained for Torquato
Tasso to revive the heroic epic in his Jerusalem Delivered, in which he
depicts the struggle between the Christians and Saracens. Neither the
Siege of Trod, nor the Adventures of Aeneas could compare with the
splendid dramatic element in Tasso's immortal poem, which has been said
to combine the classic and the romantic style in a new and unusual
degree.

In the sixteenth century Strapparola, an Italian novelist, wrote a
number of fairy tales, which have been a treasure house for later
writers, and to which we are indebted for Puss in Boots, Fortunio, and
other stories which have now become familiar in the nursery lore of
most modern nations. Bandello, in the same century, was a novelist from
whom Shakespeare and other English dramatists have borrowed much
material.

One thing which is peculiar to Italy, and which has found its way into
nearly the whole civilized world, is Italian Opera or melodrama. It was
an outcome of the Pastoral drama, and first took shape in 1594 under
Rinuccini, a Florentine. But the true father of Italian opera is
Metastasio, who flourished in the eighteenth century. He regarded opera
as the national drama of Italy, and raised it to a plane that it has
ever since retained; though of late years it has become more the
fashion to cultivate German opera.



DUTCH.

Erasmus said of Ghent at the end of the fifteenth century that there
was no city in Europe that could compare with it in greatness, power,
and the cultivation of its people. The lays of the minstrels and the
chivalric romances of other nations were translated into Dutch. In the
middle of the thirteenth century Reynard the Fox was rendered into the
same language, while this era also saw a translation of the Bible made
into Flemish rhyme.

The close of the fourteenth century saw the rise of some wandering
poets called Sprekers, who visited the courts of Kings and Princes and
became so popular that in the fifteenth century they were federated
into different societies that became known as "Chambers of Rhetoric,"
somewhat similar to the German Guilds of the Meistersingers. These
societies spread rapidly through the country, and from rhyme the
members passed to the mystery plays, and to the beginnings of the drama.

The Court of Burgundy in the fifteenth century brought a strong French
element into the literature of the Dutch nation, and the poets and
chroniclers of that age are chiefly Flemish.

The taste for Greek and Latin was introduced into Holland in the
fifteenth and sixteenth centuries by Erasmus and Grotius, the two most
learned men among the Dutch literati of their age.

Hooft in the seventeenth century made an extensive study of Italian
poetry, and succeeded in imparting to his tragic and lyric verse a
certain quality of sweetness and volume which it has since retained.
His style, which also embraces tragedy, has been extensively imitated
by his own countrymen.

Nearly the whole of the eighteenth century passed without any
advancement in Dutch literature. The country experienced the French
influence, in common with the rest of Europe; and French works and
translations abounded. Toward the close of this century German taste
began to predominate, and a young Dutchman, Van Effen, founded a
magazine in French, called the "Spectator," which was in imitation of,
and on the same lines as the English magazine of the same name. Many
native writers arose at this time and gained distinction in poetry,
prose and the drama; but the overthrow of the Dutch Republic, and the
confusion attending it, for a time extinguished the national
literature, and the beginning of the nineteenth century saw the country
flooded with poor translations of foreign books, and all the noble
national literature was forgotten. This evil was partly remedied in the
latter part of the nineteenth century; but as a whole, the Dutch
literature, while it has been influenced by foreign taste, has had
little or no weight outside of its own nation, and has not in any way
shaped the literature of other peoples.



GERMAN.

Germany, like the other Northern nations, had primitive war songs sung
by the bards. Her mythology is akin to the Scandinavian, and like the
latter she assigns a high place to women. Tacitus says: "It is believed
that there is something holy and prophetic about them, and therefore
the warriors neither despise their counsels nor disregard their
responses."

This German paganism was eminently fanciful--it peopled the earth, air
and sea with supernatural beings--the rivers had their Undines, the
caverns their Gnomes, the woods their Sprites, and the ocean its Nixes.
Besides these, there were a host of mythological figures--the Walkyres
or bridal maidens, the river maids; and the white women, Hertha and
Frigga. These legends have formed a rich treasure house from which
later German authors have freely drawn for song or story. Before the
Christian age Germany had no literature and the first national work
that can be dignified by the name is a translation of the Bible into
Moeso-Gothic by Ulphilas, a bishop of the Goths, in the fourth century
A.D. This is a Catholic work that antedated Luther by a thousand years.

Bishop Ulphilas invented an alphabet of Runic, Greek and Roman letters,
and this translation of the Bible remained the only literary monument
of the Germans for four hundred years. The minstrel lays of this period
were later collected by Charlemagne, of which two specimens have come
down to us. Like the Icelandic, Anglo-Saxon, Scandinavian, old English,
and old Saxon, they are in a measure called alliteration, that is, a
repetition of the sound without the regular rhyme at the end of lines,
or such as we call rhyme. This circumstance made Klopstock, at a later
period, try to banish rhyme as not being correct according to ancient
usage. One of these poems, the Hildebrand-lied, belongs to the time of
Theodoric the Great. The songs collected by Charlemagne, were later
remodelled and have come down to us as the Heldenbuch and the
Nibelungen-lied. The intellectual light in Germany went out with the
death of Charlemagne, except in the cloisters.

The Normans on the West and the Hungarians in the East menaced the
country, and the only important literary work of the time is a poem
written by a monk at the close of the ninth century. It is called
"Ludwig's Lied;" and celebrates the triumph of Louis over the Normans.
Roswitha, a nun in the tenth century, wrote some Christian dramas in
Latin that are remarkable as coming from the pen of a woman in the
Middle Ages.

The invasions of the Hungarians and Slavs in the eleventh century
effectually prevented the blossoming of any literary effort, except for
some poems known as the Lombard Cycle, in which the rude pagan legends
of antiquity were blended with the dawnings of Christianity. But in
1138, when Conrad III became Emperor of Germany, his accession was
followed by the Crusades, which spread a flame of enthusiasm and
chivalry among the Germans.

In 1149 Conrad and Louis VII of France joined forces to lead a Crusade
to the Holy Land, and thus the German and French nobility became
intimately acquainted, and Provencal poetry soon began to have an
effect on German literature.

Emperors and nobles held court and received their foreign guests with
splendid display and hospitality. Poets and singers were welcomed, and
the chivalric literature was soon taken up by the Suabian minstrels who
became known as the Minnesingers.

From 1150 to 1300 was the golden age of Suabian literature and German
chivalry. During this period numerous romances of chivalry were
translated into German.

They have been divided into different classes, or cycles.

The first, and most ancient, have to do with Arthur and the Knights of
the Round Table. Their origin is Anglo-Norman, and they were probably
taken from old Welsh chronicles in an early age, and were known in
Britain and Brittany before the poets began to put them in rhyme.

The most popular of these romances was the San Graal, or Holy Grail, a
subject that has engaged some of the best poets of all countries. In
this legend the Cup, which was supposed to have been used at the Last
Supper, in some way is brought to Golgotha during the Crucifixion, and
is used to preserve some of the blood that flows from Christ's side,
when it is opened by the soldier's spear. Joseph of Arimathea is
thought to have brought this precious Cup to Europe, and to have given
it into the keeping of Sir Parsifal. Knowledge of its whereabouts was
then lost, so that knights and heroes make it the object of long and
fruitless quests.

The second cycle of romance has to do with Charlemagne, and is mostly
in the form of translations from French literature.

The third, or classic cycle, relates to the great ones of ancient
times, presented in the role of chivalry. These embrace stories of
Alexander the Great, the Aeneid, and the Trojan war. During this period
there were two classes of songs in Germany; the minstrelsy, most in
favor with the nobility; and the old ballads, which were most popular
with the people. The latter were gradually collected by different poets
of the time, especially by Wolfram of Eschenbach and put into epic
verse, in which form they have come down to us as the Heldenbuch (or
book of heroes), and the Nibelungen-lied.

The Heldenbuch relates the deeds of Theodoric and Attila and the
outpouring of the Goths into the Roman Empire. In the Nibelungen-lied
the hero is Siegfried, the Achilles of the North, the embodiment of
beauty, courage and virtue. The same personages are met with in these
German legends, as in the Scandinavian mythology, only in the latter
they take on a more godlike form. The German Brunhild, in the
Scandinavian story becomes a Valkyriur.

The fourteenth and fifteenth centuries witnessed the decline of the
romanticists, the loss of most of the Southern culture, and all the
literature of this time is at a low ebb, partly owing to the wars of
the Germans against the Huns.

The fourteenth century was productive of one class of literature that
was common to all Europe; namely, simple and humorous fables and
satires. "Reynard the Fox" was one of the earliest of these fables, and
remained a great favorite with the Germans, being finally immortalized
by Goethe. The same author has made us familiar with a personage who
figures in an interesting legend of the fifteenth century. Doctor
Faust, or Faustus, is a magician who by unlawful arts gains a mastery
over nature. This legend became the foundation of a number of stories
and dramas, and was put into verse by Christopher Marlowe, the English
dramatist.

The end of the sixteenth century saw a craze for Latin in Germany. The
national tongue was neglected and national poetry was translated into
Latin verse. German poets wrote in the same classic language, and the
university lectures were all delivered in the same tongue. The
seventeenth century saw the Thirty Years' War, during which all
literary activity was completely paralyzed, and in the course of these
thirty years a whole generation, especially among the lower classes,
had grown up unable either to read or write. But after the Treaty of
Westphalia matters began to improve, and a desire to cultivate the
native language awoke. In 1688 German superseded Latin in the
universities. Novels were published; and about this time appeared a
German translation of Defoe's "Robinson Crusoe" that became very
popular. Poets wrote plays in the style of Terence, or copied English
models; and even in the present day the Germans recall with pride the
fact that the Shakespearean plays were appreciated by them during and
after the Elizabethan age much more than they were by the English
Nation.

Science under Leibnitz also began to take shape in this century, while
Opitz wrote operas in imitation of the Italian style; and translations
from the Italian Marini came into vogue. In the eighteenth century
arose the Saxonic and Swiss schools of literature, neither of which was
devoted to national works. Gottsched, the founder and imitator of
French standards in art and poetry, is known as the leader in the
Saxonic school at Leipsic, and an advocate of classical poetry.

Bodmer cultivated the English style, and retired to Switzerland with
his friends, where they founded the Swiss school. The English lyric and
elegiac poets had a wonderful influence in Germany. The followers of
this school who were, or pretended to be, poets, began to write
"Seasons" in imitation of Thomson; and the novels of the time were full
of shepherds and shepherdesses. The craze spread to France, where the
French Court took up the fad of living in rustic lodges, and Marie
Antoinette posed as a shepherdess tending sheep. Each of these poets
had numerous followers, of whom Rambler is known as the German Horace.

Frederick the Great preferred French works, and no one seems to have
thought of starting a German school except Klopstock, who stands almost
alone in the literature of his time and country. A man of lofty ideals,
he believed that Christianity on the one hand and Gothic mythology on
the other, should be the chief elements in all new European poetry and
inspiration. Had he been encouraged by the German Court he would have
been as powerful for good in German literature during the eighteenth
century, as Voltaire was powerful for evil in France. Wielland, a
friend of Klopstock, and a romantic poet, might have been the German
Ariosto had he not abandoned poetry for prose. He tried to copy the
Greek, in which he failed to excel. During this conflict in Germany
between the French and English school, German literature was much
influenced by Macpherson's Ossian, and Scotch names are found in a
great many German works of this period. The literature of Germany
attained its highest beauty and finish in the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries; and its people may well be proud of the splendid names that
adorn that period. The Gottingen School, which embraced Goethe and
Schiller, includes love, philosophy and the classics for its theme,
with a touch of the bucolic, modelled after Virgil, as in the "Louise"
of Voss. But it remained for the Romantic School, founded by Novalis,
the two Schlegels and Tieck, to oppose the study of the classic antique
on the ground that it killed all native originality and power. They
turned to the Middle Ages, and drew from its rich stores all that was
noblest and best. The lays of the Minnesingers were revived--the true
German spirit was cultivated, and the romantic German imagination
responded readily, so that during the dark period of the French
invasion, the national feeling was preserved pure and untouched by
means of these stirring and patriotic songs of the past.

About the same time as the advent of the Romanticists in Germany
appeared Walpole's "Castle of Otranto" in England, which is supposed to
belong to the same school of literature and to have been influenced by
the German. Scott was also numbered in this class; and it is from these
old German legends of the Minnesingers that Richard Wagner has drawn
the material for Lohengrin, Parsifal, and others of his magnificent
operas. In one department German scholars have attained a high
standard, and that is as historians of ancient classical literature.

Their researches into the language, religion, philosophy, social
economy, arts and sciences of ancient nations, has brought to light
much for which the student of literature will always be their debtor.



LATIN LITERATURE AND THE REFORMATION.

It has been said that the literati of the Middle Ages--the monks and
schoolmen--sought to keep the people in ignorance by writing in Latin.
Those who so think can ill have studied the trend of events in Europe
for several hundred years before the Reformation, or its bearing on
literature.

After the fall of the Roman Empire vast hordes of barbarians invaded
Europe. In every country the language was in a state of transition. One
nation often spoke two or three different dialects according to
locality. In England the Gaelic, Anglo-Saxon, the Cymric (or Welsh) and
the Norman-French all had their day. Under these circumstances it was
impossible to have a literature in the language of the people until, in
the course of time, the national languages were formed, and during this
period of transition the Latin was the language of literature, the one
medium of communication between the literati of different countries;
and had it not been for the preservation of learning in the cloisters
during these ages, all knowledge, and literature, and even Christianity
itself, would have been lost. The monks, therefore, deserve more credit
than is usually meted out to them by hasty or superficial critics.

In the earliest ages Ireland was the seat of the greatest learning in
Europe. While England was still plunged in barbarism, and France and
Germany could boast of no cultivation, Ireland was full of monasteries
where learned men disseminated knowledge. The Latin language thus
became a means for preserving the records of history, and it has also
been a treasure house of stories, furnishing material for much of the
poetry of Europe. One of these legends gave Scott the story of the
combat between Marmion and the Spectre Knight.

It has been said that the Ancients did not know how to hold converse
with nature, and that little or no sign of it can be found in their
writings. Matthew Arnold has traced to a Celtic source the sympathy
with, and deep communing with nature that first appeared among European
poets. Under the patronage of Charlemagne the cloisters and
brotherhoods became even more learned and cultivated than they had been
before. Whatever the people knew of tilling the soil, of the arts of
civilization, and of the truths of religion, they learned from the
monks. By their influence States were rendered more secure, and it is
to the monks alone that Western Europe is indebted for the superiority
she attained over the Byzantines on the one hand (who were possessed of
far more hereditary knowledge than she), and over the Arabs on the
other, who had the advantage of eternal power. The cloisters were
either the abode, or the educators, of such men as the Venerable Bede,
Lanfranc and Anselm, Duns Scotius, William of Malmesbury, Geoffrey of
Monmouth (who preserved the legends of Arthur, of King Lear, and
Cymbeline), of Geraldus Cambrensis, of St. Thomas a Kempis, of Matthew
Paris, a Benedictine monk, and of Roger Bacon, a Franciscan friar, who
came very near guessing several important truths which have since been
made known to the world by later scholars.

The Bible was protected and cherished from age to age in these
cloisters, where it was, in fact, preserved solely by the labors of the
monks, who translated it by hand, with illuminated border and text.
When a new religious house was opened, it would obtain from some older
monastery a copy of one of these priceless copies of the Sacred
Scriptures; and then this new house in its turn, would set to work to
multiply the number of Bibles, through the labor of its monks and
brothers.

The German translation of the Bible was made in classic High Dutch, and
many later writers have fashioned their style from it, although modern
scholars, Catholic and Protestant, have found many faults in it,
especially whole passages, wherein Luther has erred. This craze for
High Dutch caused the historians of both Denmark and Sweden to utter a
vigorous protest against the influx of High Dutch literature into their
respective countries in the sixteenth century. They averred it was
ruining the native language and literature; but, in spite of this,
Lutheranism got a firm foothold in both these nations.

In the sixteenth century the poetry of all Southern Europe was affected
by the upheaval caused by Luther and his teachings, while in the
Northern countries it was even worse; for, as a great German author
(von Schlegel), has said:

"The old creed could not be driven into contempt without carrying along
with it a variety of images, allusions, poetic traditions and legends,
and modes of composition, all more or less connected with the old
faith."

The struggle that we can trace (in all the works Luther has left) of
his own internal conflict between light and darkness, faith and
passion, God and himself, is a type and indication of what took place
in literature during the Reformation, when the old was in opposition to
the new.



SEVENTEENTH AND EIGHTEENTH CENTURY PHILOSOPHY.

Eighteenth century philosophy in France, Germany and England was a very
different thing from the philosophy of the Ancients. The latter, says a
profound German writer, "recognized in time and space an endless
theatre for the display of the eternal, and of the living pulsation of
eternal love. By the contemplation of such things, however imperfect,
the natural, even the merely sensible man, was affected by a stupendous
feeling of admiration, well calculated to prepare the way for religious
thoughts. It extended and ennobled his soul to thus regard the past,
present, and future."

French philosophy took its rise in the seventeenth century, but the
philosophers of that age--Descartes, Bayle and others--assumed the soul
of man to be the starting point in all investigations of physical
science. The eighteenth century philosophers went a step further and
rejected all idea of God and the soul. Voltaire, De Montesquieu,
D'Holbach, D'Alembert, Diderot, Helvetius and the Abbe Raynal, are the
chief minds who shaped the thought of France in the eighteenth century,
and by their cynicism, sensuality, and contempt for law and order,
helped to pave the war for the horrors of the French Revolution. What
they offered to the world the lower classes could only grasp in its
most material sense, and they wrested it indeed to their own, and to
others, destruction.

Voltaire, Diderot, D'Holbach and their school in France, with Hume,
Bolingbroke and Gibbon in England, formed a coterie whose desire it was
to edit a vast encyclopaedia, giving the latest discoveries, in
philosophy and science in particular, and in literature in general.
These men became known as the Encyclopaedists, and their history is
fully set forth by Condillac. They rejected all divine revelation and
taught that all religious belief was the working of a disordered mind,
and that physical sensibility is the origin of all our thoughts.
Alternately gross or flippant, or else both, the French philosophers
offered nothing pure or elevating in philosophic thought. Their
teaching spread to England, where the philosophy of the eighteenth
century, less gross than the French, is chiefly distinguished for being
cold and indifferent, rather than actively opposed, to religion. Hume
is a type of the class of thinkers whom we find uncertain and unworthy
of confidence. The histories of Hume, Robertson and Gibbon are the
offspring of this degraded material philosophy of the eighteenth
century. They surpassed the histories of other nations in
comprehensiveness and power, and became standard works in France and
Germany, but in all of them we can trace a lack of true philosophy, due
to the blighting influence of the eighteenth century skepticism; for,
as the greatest minds, in which Christianity and science are blended,
have agreed--"without some reasonable and due idea of the destiny and
end of man, it is impossible to form just and consistent opinions on
the progress of events, and the development and fortunes of nations.
History stripped of philosophy becomes simply a lifeless heap of
useless materials, without either inward unity, right purpose, or
worthy result; while philosophy severed from history results in a
disturbed existence of different sects, allied to formality."

The originator of English philosophy was John Locke, whose teachings
were closely allied to the sensual philosophy of the French. It
remained for the Scottish school under Thomas Reid to combat both the
sensualistic philosophy of Voltaire and Locke, and the skepticism of
Hume. Reid was a sincere lover of truth, a man of lofty character, and
his philosophy, such as it is, is the purest that can be found, more
akin to the profound reasoning of Plato.

In Italy, during the eighteenth century, the theory that experience is
the only ground of knowledge, as taught by Locke and Condillac, gained
some followers; but none of them were men of any great influence.
Gallupi in the beginning of the nineteenth century endeavored to reform
this philosophy; others took up his work, and the result was a change
of thought similar to that brought about by Reid in England and
Scotland.

The earlier German philosophers were influenced by the grosser forms of
the science, as found in Locke and Helvetius. Leibnitz and Wolf taught
pure Idealism, as did Bishop Berkeley in England. It remained for Kant
to create a new era in modern philosophy. His system vas what has
become known as the Rationalistic, or what we can know by pure reason.
Kant was followed by Lessing, Herder, Hegel, Fichte, and a host of
others.

These German philosophers of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries
have had a powerful influence in shaping literature in England, France,
Denmark, Sweden and America. The mystic and profound German mind has
often been led astray; but its intellectual strength cannot be
questioned. Schelling was the author of theories in philosophy that
have been adopted and imitated by both Coleridge and Wordsworth, while
Van Hartmann teaches that there is but one last principle of
philosophy, known by Spinoza as substance, by Fichte as the absolute
I., by Plato and Hegel as the absolute Idea, by Schopenhauer as Will,
and by himself as a blind, impersonal, unconscious, all-pervading Will
and Idea, independent of brain, and in its essence purely spiritual,
and he taught that there could be no peace for man's heart or intellect
until religion, philosophy and science were recognized as one root,
stem and leaves all of the same living tree.

It is curious to trace how these various philosophies, recognized by
Van Hartmann under different names to be one, can be merged into the
sublime Christian philosophy of St. Thomas Aquinas, who taught that
religion, philosophy and science were indeed one--root, stem and leaves
of the one life-giving tree, which is God.

All that is deepest and most profound is to be found in this modern
German philosophy, which is diametrically opposed to the flippant and
sensual philosophy of the Voltarian school. However far the German
philosophers are from true philosophy as seen in the light of Christian
truth, they command a respect as earnest thinkers and workers, which it
is impossible to accord the eighteenth century French school.



ENGLISH.

No country in the beginning owed so much to the language and literature
of other nations as the English.

Anglo-Saxon, Latin, Norman-French, Cymric and Gaelic have all been
moulded into its literature.

Three periods stand out in its history--the first beginning with the
end of the Roman occupation, to the Norman conquest--this includes the
literature of the Celtic, Latin and Anglo-Saxon tongues. The second
from the Norman conquest to the time of Henry VIII, embracing the
literature of the Norman-French, the Latin and Anglo-Saxon; the gradual
evolution of the Anglo-Saxon into English; and the literature of the
fourteenth and fifteenth centuries.

The third period includes the Reformation, and the golden age of
Elizabethan literature; followed by the Restoration, Revolution, and
the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.

Another division is called the Old English, Early English, and Middle
English. The latter was used by Chaucer, and with a little care in
reading can readily be understood by any educated person at the present
day, though it contains many words nationalized from the French. It is
a curious fact that the Anglo-Saxons, who in the present day, through
their descendants, the English, have the strongest national life and
literature, cannot boast of such a treasure house of ancient literature
as is possessed by the Irish and Welsh.

Ireland has its bardic songs and historical legends older than the
ninth century, at which time appeared the "Psalter of Cashel," which
has come down to the present day.

There are also prose chronicles, said to be the outcome of others of a
still earlier period, and which give a contemporary history of the
country in the Gaelic language of the fifth century. There is no other
modern nation in Europe that can point to such a literary past. The
Scotch Celts had early metrical verse, of which the Ossian, wherein is
related the heroic deeds of Fingal, was supposed to have been sung by
all the ancient Celtic bards. In the eighteenth century, Macpherson, a
Scotchman, found some of these poems sung in the Highlands of Scotland;
and, making a careful study of them, he translated all he could find
from the Gaelic into English, and gave them to the world. At the time
of publication, in 1762, their authenticity was questioned, and even at
the present day scholars are divided in their opinion as to their
genuineness. The literature of the Cymric Celts, the early inhabitants
of Britain, has given us the glorious legends of King Arthur and the
Knights of the Round Table. All the bardic songs refer to this mighty
prince, who resisted the Saxon invaders, and whose deeds were sung by
all the Welsh Britons. Some of these people took refuge in France, and
gradually the fame of their legends spread all over Europe, and were
eagerly seized upon and rendered into song, by the chivalric poets of
all countries. From these tales Geoffrey of Monmouth in the twelfth
century compiled a Latin historical work of Britain, while in later
times Tennyson in England, and Richard Wagner in Germany, have made the
deeds of Arthur and his Knights the theme of some of their most
magnificent creations.

Other ancient Welsh writings are still extant, among them the Triads,
which is a work that has come down from primitive times. It comprises a
collection of historical and mythological maxims, traditions,
theological doctrines, and rules for constructing verse.

The Mabinogi, or "Tales of Youth," are old Welsh romances similar to
the Norse Sagas, which are supposed by critics to date from a very rude
and early age.

The Anglo-Saxon is very different from these ancient literatures. It
has no legends or romances, no national themes, and its early prose and
verse were written more in the style of religious narrative, and to
give practical information, than to amuse.

The poems of Beowulf, a thorough Norse Saga, embodies the doings of the
Anglo-Saxons before they emigrated to England, and must have been
written long before they set foot on English soil. Older than Beowulf
is the lyric poem of Widsith, which has some historical interest as
depicting the doings of kings, princes and warriors. It contains traces
of the epic, which in Beowulf, whose English poem is next in point of
time, is more markedly developed.

During the fifth and sixth centuries the Germanic tribes who emigrated
to Britain brought with them a heathen literature. The oldest fragment
now extant are the Hexenspruche and the Charms. They have elements of
Christian teaching in them, which would seem to imply that the Church
tried to give them a Christian setting. In some respects they resemble
the old Sanskrit, and are supposed to be among the earliest examples of
lyric poetry in England.

Alfred the Great improved the Anglo-Saxon prose and soon after his time
a translation of the Bible in that language was made, forming the
second known copy in a national language, the first being the
Moeso-Gothic of Bishop Ulphilus. The Saxon Chronicles, dating from the
time of Alfred to 1154 were copies of the Latin Chronicles kept in the
monasteries.

The twelfth and thirteenth centuries saw the age of the Crusades, which
added a new impulse to learning through the co-mingling of different
races. French poetry was translated into English, which, in the
thirteenth century, in its evolution from the Anglo-Saxon became a
fixed language. Classical learning in this age was generally diffused
through the schoolmen, of whom Lanfranc, Anselm, John of Salisbury,
Duns Scotius, William of Malmesbury, and other great names of this
period, mentioned elsewhere, are instances.

In the thirteenth century appeared also the Gesta Romanorum, a
collection of fables, traditions, and various pictures of society,
changing with the different countries that the stories dealt with. The
romance of Apollonius in this collection gave Chaucer the plots for two
or three of his tales, and furnished Cowers with the theme for most of
his celebrated poem, the Confessio Amantis. This poem, in its turn,
suggested to Shakespeare the outlines for his characters of Pericles,
Prince of Tyre, and the Merchant of Venice. Other and less celebrated
works are also taken from the Gesta Romanorum.

After the accession of the Norman kings of England, the chief literary
works in England for two centuries are those of the Norman poets. Wace
in the twelfth century wrote in French his "Brut d'Angleterre." Brutus
was the mythical son of Aeneas, and the founder of Britain. The Britons
were settled in Cornwall, Wales and Bretagne, and were distinguished
for traditionary legends, which had been collected by Godfrey of
Monmouth in 1138. They formed the groundwork for Wace's poem, which was
written in 1160, and from that time proved to be an inexhaustible
treasury from which romantic writers of fiction drew their materials.

From this source Shakespeare obtained King Lear; Sackville found his
Ferrex and Porrex; and Milton and other poets are also indebted to
these legends. They furnished, also, the romances of chivalry for the
English Court, and have had an effect on English poetry that can be
seen even in the present day. The six romances of the British cycle,
celebrating Arthur, his Knights, and the Round Table, were written in
the last part of the twelfth century, at the instigation of Henry II.
They were the work of Englishmen; but were composed in French, and from
them the poets of France fashioned a number of metrical romances.

Geoffrey Chaucer in the fourteenth century borrowed freely from French,
Latin and Italian works. The comic Fabliaux and the allegorical poetry
of the Trouveres and Troubadours furnished him with many of his
incidents and characters. The Romance of the Rose was taken from a
French poem of the thirteenth century.

Troilus and Cressida is regarded as a translation from Boccaccio, and
Chaucer's Legend of Good Women is founded on Ovid's Epistles. John
Lydgate, a Benedictine monk in the fifteenth century, wrote poetry in
imitation of Chaucer, taking his ideas from the Gesta Romanorum, while
Thomas Mallory, a priest in the time of Edward IV, has given us one of
the best specimens of old English in the romantic prose fiction of
Morte d'Arthur, in which the author has told in one tale the whole
history of the Round Table.

The "Bruce" of the Scotch John Barbour in the same century, gives the
adventures of King Robert, from which Sir Walter Scott has drawn
largely for his "Lord of the Isles."

The close of the fifteenth century saw a passion develop for Scotch
poetry, which speedily became the fashion. Henry the Minstrel, or Blind
Harry, wrote his "Wallace," which is full of picturesque incident and
passionate fervor.

Robert Henryson wrote his Robin and Makyne, a charming pastoral, which
has come down to us in Percy's Reliques.

Gavin Douglas, Scotch Bishop of Dunkeld in the beginning of the
sixteenth century, translated the Aeneid into English. This is the
earliest known attempt in the British Isles to render classical poetry
into the national language.

In the sixteenth century Erasmus gave a new impulse in England to the
study of Latin and Greek, and Sir Thomas More in his "Utopia" (wherein
he imagines an ideal commonwealth with community of property),
unconsciously gave birth to a word (utopia), which has ever since been
used to designate the ideally impossible.

Henry Howard, Earl of Surrey, in the same century made a translation of
the Aeneid and wrote sonnets and lyrical poems. The sonnet he borrowed
from Petrarch, giving it the amatory tone common to the Italians. He
also took from the Italian poets the blank verse of his Aeneid, a style
in which the best poetry of England has since been written.

The genius of John Milton has been greatly hampered by the
self-inflicted laws under which he labored, conditions which did not
affect Dante and Tasso, who were his models; for Milton denied in a
great measure the use of history, tradition and symbolism. Of this
defect he was sensible, so he tried to make amends for it by borrowing
fables and allegories out of the Koran and Talmud. English poetry has
inclined more to the style of Milton than to that of Spenser, who was
thoroughly embued with the romantic spirit of the Teutons and the
Troubadours, though, like Milton, he was influenced by Tasso; and
unlike him, by Ariosto. His Faerie Queene, Gloriana, is supposed to be
the beloved of the courtly Arthur of the British legends.

The English poets of the Elizabethan age were under deep obligations to
the Italian poets, especially Tasso; and this is particularly true of
Spenser, many critics think his eighty-first sonnet is almost a literal
translation of Tasso. Be that as it may, the obligations of many
English poets of the age to the Italians, is unmistakable.

After the Puritan period the English language and literature was
strongly influenced by the French, and in both Pope and Addison there
is a marked leaning toward French poetry. Pope's translation of Homer
while it lacks the simple majesty and naturalness of the original (a
trait which Bryant in the nineteenth century happily caught),
nevertheless gave to the English world the opportunity to become
somewhat acquainted with the incomparable poet of antiquity.

Thomson's descriptive poetry of nature found many imitators in Germany
and France, and a taste for outdoor life and simplicity became the
rage, so that some years after the author of the "Castle of Indolence"
had passed away, Marie Antoinette in her rustic bower, "Little
Trianon," pretended to like to keep sheep and pose as a shepherdess, as
has been said elsewhere.

Percy's Reliques of ancient English poetry, in 1765 opened a storehouse
of the fine old English ballads, which speedily became popular through
the patronage of Scott, who made them his textbook for a variety of
subjects. These poems, with Macpherson's "Fingal" introduced a new
school of poetry into England. The originals of Scott were these
romances of chivalry, and even Byron has not disdained to follow the
same trend in the pilgrimage of his "Childe Harold." The nineteenth
century poets and novelists do not seem to have borrowed especially
from any foreign element; but in history Niebuhr's researches in
Germany have greatly influenced Arnold in his "Roman History." The
close of the nineteenth century and opening of the twentieth is chiefly
remarkable for the interdependence of literature through the magazines
and reviews. Translations of any striking or brilliant articles are
immediately made, and appear in the magazines of different countries
almost as soon as the originals, so that the literature of the future
bids fair to become more cosmopolitan, and perhaps less strongly
directed by racial and social influence than in the past.

And yet--in studying the literature of ancient and modern times--we are
struck by the unity in diversity of its history, just as a world-wide
traveller comes to see the similarity of nature everywhere. In
literature strange analogies occur in ages and races remote from each
other, as, when the mother in the old North country Scotch ballad sings
to her child, and says:

  "The wild wind is ravin,' thy minnies heart's sair,
  The wild wind is ravin,' but ye dinna care."

And we find nearly the same verse in the song of Danae to the infant
Perseus:

  "The salt spume that is blown o'er thy locks,
  Thou heedst not, nor the roar of the gale;
  Sleep babe, sleep the sea,
  And sleep my sea of trouble."

There is also the story of the Greek child who in ancient times sang
nearly the same invocation for fair weather that we used in our nursery
days, when, with noses flattened against the window pane, we uttered
our sing-song:

  "Rain, rain, go to Spain."

And in blindman's buff, perhaps the most ancient of games, we have
words that have come down from remote times. The blindfolded one says:

  "I go a-hunting a brassy fly."

To which the others answer:

  "A-hunting thou goest; but shalt not come nigh."

And there are the marvellous stories of the Giant Killer, and the
wonders of Puss in Boots and Cinderella, which have descended to us
from that vast cloud-country of bygone ages; that dreamland of fairy
imagery, which is as real to the little maid in the twentieth century
as it was to her young sisters in the shadow of the Pyramids, on the
banks of the Tiber and the Ganges, in the neighborhood of solemn Druid
Temples, or among the fjords and floes of the far-off Icelandic
country, in centuries long since gone by.









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Interdependence of Literature, by 
Georgina Pell Curtis

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE INTERDEPENDENCE OF LITERATURE ***

***** This file should be named 3778.txt or 3778.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/7/7/3778/

Produced by Dianne Bean.  HTML version by Al Haines.

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
