Project Gutenberg's Capitola the Madcap, by Emma D. E. N. Southworth

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Capitola the Madcap

Author: Emma D. E. N. Southworth

Posting Date: May 19, 2009 [EBook #3792]
Release Date: February, 2003
First Posted: September 11, 2001

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CAPITOLA THE MADCAP ***




Produced by Charles Franks and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team. HTML version by Al Haines.










CAPITOLA THE MADCAP


PART II OF

THE HIDDEN HAND


BY

MRS. EMMA D. E. N. SOUTHWORTH




CONTENTS

CHAPTER

      I.   The Orphan's Trial
     II.   Old Hurricane Storms
    III.   Cap's Visit to the Hidden House
     IV.   The Hidden Hollow
      V.   The Hidden House
     VI.   The Inmate of the Hidden House
    VII.   Cap's Return
   VIII.   Another Mystery at the Hidden House
     IX.   Cap Frees the Captive
      X.   Cap in Captivity
     XI.   An Unexpected Visitor at Marsh's Cottage
    XII.   Cap "Rests on her Laurels" and "Spoils for a Fight"
   XIII.   Black Donald
    XIV.   Glory
     XV.   Cap Captivates a Craven
    XVI.   Cap's Rage
   XVII.   Capitola Caps the Climax
  XVIII.   Black Donald's Last Attempt
    XIX.   The Awful Peril of Capitola
     XX.   The Next Morning
    XXI.   A Fatal Hatred
   XXII.   The Court-Martial
  XXIII.   The Verdict
   XXIV.   The End of the War
    XXV.   The Fortunate Bath
   XXVI.   The Mysterious Maniac
  XXVII.   The Maniac's Story
 XXVIII.   End of the Lady's Story
   XXIX.   Prospects Brighten
    XXX.   Capitola a Capitalist
   XXXI.   "There shall be light at the eventide."--Holy Bible




CAPITOLA THE MADCAP
    SEQUEL TO
 THE HIDDEN HAND




CHAPTER I.

THE ORPHAN'S TRIAL


    "We met ere yet the world had come
     To wither up the springs of youth,
     Amid the holy joys of home,
     And in the first warm blush of youth.
     We parted as they never part,
     Whose tears are doomed to be forgot;
     Oh, by what agony of heart.
     Forget me not!--forget me not!"

                           --Anonymous.


At nine o'clock the next morning Traverse went to the library to keep
his tryst with Colonel Le Noir.

Seated in the doctor's leathern chair, with his head thrown back, his
nose erect and his white and jeweled hand caressing his mustached chin,
the colonel awaited the young man's communication.

With a slight bow Traverse took a chair and drew it up to the table,
seated himself and, after a little hesitation, commenced, and in a
modest and self-respectful manner announced that he was charged with
the last verbal instructions from the doctor to the executor of his
will.

Colonel Le Noir left off caressing his chin for an instant, and, with a
wave of his dainty hand, silently intimated that the young man should
proceed.

Traverse then began and delivered the dying directions of the late
doctor, to the effect that his daughter Clara Day should not be removed
from the paternal mansion, but that she should be suffered to remain
there, retaining as a matronly companion her old friend Mrs. Marah
Rocke.

"Umm! umm! very ingenious, upon my word!" commented the colonel, still
caressing his chin.

"I have now delivered my whole message, sir, and have only to add that
I hope, for Miss Day's sake, there will be no difficulty thrown in the
way of the execution of her father's last wishes, which are also, sir,
very decidedly her own" said Traverse.

"Umm! doubtless they are--and also yours and your worthy mother's."

"Sir, Miss Day's will in this matter is certainly mine. Apart from the
consideration of her pleasure, my wishes need not be consulted. As soon
as I have seen Miss Day made comfortable I leave for the far West,"
said Traverse, with much dignity.

"Umm! and leave mama here to guard the golden prize until your return,
eh?" sneered the colonel.

"Sir, I do not--wish to understand you," said Traverse with a flushed
brow.

"Possibly not, my excellent young friend," said the colonel,
ironically; then, rising from his chair and elevating his voice, he
cried, "but I, sir, understand you and your mother and your pretty
scheme perfectly! Very ingenious invention, these 'last verbal
instructions.' Very pretty plan to entrap an heiress; but it shall not
avail you, adventurers that you are! This afternoon Sauter, the
confidential attorney of my late brother-in-law, will be here with the
will, which shall be read in the presence of the assembled household.
If these last verbal directions are also to be found duplicated in the
will, very good, they shall be obeyed; if they not, shall be
discredited."

During this speech Traverse stood with kindling eyes and blazing
cheeks, scarcely able to master his indignation; yet, to his credit be
it spoken, he did "rule his own spirit" and replied with dignity and
calmness:

"Colonel Le Noir, my testimony in regard to the last wishes of Doctor
Day can, if necessary, be supported by other evidence--though I do not
believe that any man who did not himself act in habitual disregard of
truth would wantonly question the veracity of another."

"Sir! this to me!" exclaimed Le Noir, growing white with rage and
making a step toward the young man.

"Yes, Colonel Le Noir, that to you! And this in addition; You have
presumed to charge my mother, in connection with myself, with being an
adventuress; with forming dishonorable 'schemes,' and in so charging
her, Colonel Le Noir, you utter a falsehood!"

"Sirrah!" cried Le Noir, striding toward Traverse and raising his hand
over his head, with a fearful oath, "retract your words or--"

Traverse calmly drew himself up, folded his arms and replied coolly:

"I am no brawler, Colonel Le Noir; the pistol and the bowie-knife are
as strange to my hands as abusive epithets and profane language are to
my lips; nevertheless, instead of retracting my words, I repeat and
reiterate them. If you charge my mother with conspiracy you utter a
falsehood. As her son I am in duty bound to say as much."

"Villain!" gasped Le Noir, shaking his fist and choking with rage;
"villain! you shall repent this in every vein of your body!"

Then, seizing his hat, he strode from the room.

"Boaster!" said Traverse to himself, as he also left the library by
another door.

Clara was waiting for him in the little parlor below.

"Well, well, dear Traverse," she said, as he entered. "You have had the
explanation with my guardian, and--he makes no objection to carrying
out the last directions of my father and our own wishes--he is willing
to leave me here?"

"My dear girl, Colonel Le Noir defers all decision until the reading of
the will, which is to take place this afternoon," said Traverse,
unwilling to add to her distress by recounting the disgraceful scene
that had just taken place in the library.

"Oh! these delays! these delays! Heaven give me patience! Yet I do not
know why I should be so uneasy. It is only a form; of course he will
regard my father's wishes."

"I do not see well how he can avoid doing so, especially as Doctor
Williams is another witness to them, and I shall request the doctor's
attendance here this afternoon. Dear Clara, keep up your spirits! A few
hours now and all will be well," said Traverse, as he drew on his
gloves and took his hat to go on his morning round of calls.

An early dinner was ordered, for the purpose of giving ample time in
the afternoon for the reading of the will.

Owing to the kind forbearance of each member of this little family,
their meeting with their guest at the table was not so awkward as it
might have been rendered. Mrs. Rocke had concealed the insults that had
been offered her; Traverse had said nothing of the affronts put upon
him. So that each, having only their own private injuries to resent,
felt free in forbearing. Nothing but this sort of prudence on the part
of individuals rendered their meeting around one board possible.

While they were still at the table the attorney, Mr. Sauter, with
Doctors Williams and Dawson, arrived, and was shown into the library.

And very soon after the dessert was put upon the table the family left
it and, accompanied by Colonel Le Noir, adjourned to the library. After
the usual salutations they arranged themselves along each side of an
extension table, at the head of which the attorney placed himself.

In the midst of a profound silence the will was opened and read. It was
dated three years before.

The bulk of his estate, after the paying a few legacies, was left to
his esteemed brother-in-law, Gabriel Le Noir, in trust for his only
daughter, Clara Day, until the latter should attain the age of
twenty-one, at which period she was to come into possession of the
property. Then followed the distribution of the legacies. Among the
rest the sum of a thousand dollars was left to his young friend
Traverse Rocke, and another thousand to his esteemed neighbor Marah
Rocke. Gabriel Le Noir was appointed sole executor of the will, trustee
of the property and guardian of the heiress.

At the conclusion of the reading Mr. Sauter folded the document and
laid it upon the table.

Colonel Le Noir arose and said:

"The will of the late Doctor Day has been read in your presence. I
presume you all heard it, and that there can be no mistake as to its
purport. All that remains now is to act upon it. I shall claim the
usual privilege of twelve months before administering upon the estate
or paying the legacies. In the mean time, I shall assume the charge of
my ward's person, and convey her to my own residence, known as the
Hidden House. Mrs. Rocke," he said, turning toward the latter, "your
presence and that of your young charge is no longer required here. Be
so good as to prepare Miss Day's traveling trunks, as we set out from
this place to-morrow morning."

Mrs. Rocke started, looked wistfully in the face of the speaker and,
seeing that he was in determined earnest, turned her appealing glances
toward Traverse and Doctor Williams.

As for Clara, her face, previously blanched with grief, was now flushed
with indignation. In her sudden distress and perplexity she knew not at
once what to do--whether to utter a protest or continue silent; whether
to leave the room or remain. Her embarrassment was perceived by
Traverse, who, stooping, whispered to her:

"Be calm, love; all shall be well. Doctor Williams is about to speak."

And at that moment, indeed, Doctor Williams arose and said:

"I have, Colonel Le Noir to endorse a dying message from Doctor Day
entrusted to my young friend here to be delivered to you, to the effect
that it was his last desire and request that his daughter, Miss Clara
Day, should be permitted to reside during the term of her minority in
this her patrimonial home, under the care of her present matronly
friend, Mrs. Marah Rocke, Doctor Rocke and myself are here to bear
testimony to these, the last wishes of the departed, which wishes, I
believe, also express the desires of his heiress."

"Oh, yes, yes!" said Clara, earnestly. "I do very much desire to remain
in my own home, among my old familiar friends. My dear father only
consulted my comfort and happiness when he left these instructions."

"There can be, therefore, no reason why Miss Day should be disturbed in
her present home," said Traverse.

Colonel Le Noir smiled grimly, saying:

"I am sorry, Doctor Williams, to differ with you or to distress Miss
Day. But if, as she says, her lamented father consulted her pleasure in
those last instructions, he certainly consulted nothing else--not the
proprieties of conventionalism, the opinion of the world, nor the
future welfare of his daughter. Therefore, as a man of Doctor Day's
high position and character in his sane moments never could have made
such a singular arrangement, I am forced to the conclusion that he
could not, at the time of giving those instructions, have been in his
right mind. Consequently, I cannot venture to act upon any 'verbal
instructions,' however well attested, but shall be guided in every
respect by the will, executed while yet the testator was in sound body
and mind."

"Doctor Rocke and myself are both physicians competent to certify that,
at the time of leaving these directions, our respected friend was
perfectly sound in mind at least," said Doctor Williams.

"That, sir, I repeat, I contest. And, acting upon the authority of the
will, I shall proceed to take charge of my ward as well as of her
estate. And as I think this house, under all the circumstances, a very
improper place for her to remain, I shall convey her without delay to
my own home. Mrs. Rocke, I believe I requested you to see to the
packing of Miss Day's trunks."

"Oh, heaven! shall this wrong be permitted?" ejaculated Marah.

"Mrs. Rocke, I will not go unless absolutely forced to do so by a
decree of the court. I shall get Doctor Williams to make an appeal for
me to the Orphans' Court," said Clara, by way of encouraging her friend.

"My dear Miss Day, that, I hope, will not be required. Colonel Le Noir
acts under a misapprehension of the circumstances. We must enter into
more explanations with him, In the mean time, my dear young lady, it is
better that you should obey him for the present, at least so far as
retiring from the room," said Doctor Williams.

Clara immediately rose and, requesting Mrs. Rocke to accompany her,
withdrew from the library.

Doctor Williams then said;

"I advised the retirement of the young lady, having a communication to
make the hearing of which in a mixed company might have cost her an
innocent blush. But first I would ask you, Colonel Le Noir, what are
those circumstances to which you allude which render Miss Day's
residence here, in her patrimonial mansion, with her old and faithful
friends, so improper?" inquired Doctor Williams, courteously.

"The growing intimacy, sir, between herself and a very objectionable
party--this young man Rocke!" replied Colonel Le Noir.

"Ah! and is that all?"

"It is enough, sir," said Colonel Le Noir, loftily.

"Then suppose I should inform you, sir, that this young man, Doctor
Rocke, was brought up and educated at Doctor Day's cost and under his
own immediate eye?"

"Then, sir, you would only inform me that an eccentric gentleman of
fortune had done--what eccentric gentlemen of fortune will sometimes
do--educated a pauper."

At this opprobrious epithet Traverse, with a flushed face, started to
his feet.

"Sit down, my boy, sit down; leave me to deal with this man," said
Doctor Williams, forcing Traverse back into his seat. Then, turning to
Colonel Le Noir, he said:

"But suppose, sir, that such was the estimation in which Doctor Day
held the moral and intellectual worth of his young protege that he
actually gave him his daughter?"

"I cannot suppose an impossibility, Doctor Williams," replied Colonel
Le Noir, haughtily.

"Then, sir, I have the pleasure of startling you a little by a prodigy
that you denominate an impossibility! Clara Day and Traverse Rocke were
betrothed with full knowledge and cordial approbation of the young
lady's father."

"Impossible! preposterous! I shall countenance no such ridiculous
absurdity!" said Colonel Le Noir, growing red in the face.

"Miss Day, Doctor Rocke, Mrs. Rocke, and myself are witnesses to that
fact."

"The young lady, and the young man are parties immediately
concerned--they cannot be received as witnesses in their own case; Mrs.
Rocke is too much in their interest for her evidence to be taken; you,
sir, I consider the dupe of these cunning conspirators--mother and
son," replied Colonel Le Noir, firmly.

"Tut!" said Doctor Williams, almost out of patience. "I do not depend
upon the words of Miss Day and her friends, although I hold their
veracity to be above question; I had Doctor Day's dying words to the
same effect. And he mentioned the existing betrothal as the very reason
why Clara should remain here in the care of her future mother-in-law."

"Then, sir, that the doctor should have spoken and acted thus, is only
another and a stronger reason for believing him to have been deranged
in his last moments! You need give yourself no farther trouble! I shall
act upon the authority of this instrument which I hold in my hand,"
replied Colonel Le Noir, haughtily.

"Then, as the depository of the dying man's last wishes and as the next
friend of his injured daughter, I shall make an appeal to the Orphans'
Court," said Doctor Williams, coldly.

"You can do as you please about that; but in the mean time, acting upon
the authority of the will, I shall to-morrow morning set out with my
ward for my own home."

"There may be time to arrest that journey," said Doctor Williams,
arising and taking his hat to go.

In the passage he met Mrs. Rocke.

"Dear Doctor Williams," said Mrs. Rocke, earnestly, "pray come up to
poor Clara's room and speak to her, if you can possibly say anything to
comfort her; she is weeping herself into a fit of illness at the bare
thought of being, so soon after her dreadful bereavement, torn away
from her home and friends."

"Tut! tut! no use in weeping! all will yet be right."

"You have persuaded that man to permit her to remain here, then?" said
Marah, gladly.

"Persuaded him! no, nor even undertaken to do so! I never saw him
before to-day, yet I would venture to say, from what I have now seen of
him, that he never was persuaded by any agent except his own passions
and interests, to any act whatever. No, I have endeavored to show him
that we have law as well as justice on our side, and even now I am
afraid I shall have to take the case before the Orphans' Court before I
can convince him. He purposes removing Clara to-morrow morning. I will
endeavor to see the Judge of the Orphans' Court to-night, take out a
habeas corpus, ordering Le Noir to bring his ward into court, and serve
it on him as he passes through Staunton on his way home."

"But is there no way of preventing him from taking Clara away from the
house to-morrow morning."

"No good way. No, madam, it is best that all things should be done
decently and in order. I advise you, as I shall also advise my young
friends, Traverse and Clara, not to injure their own cause by unwise
impatience or opposition. We should go before the Orphans' Court with
the very best aspect."

"Come, then, and talk to Clara. She has the most painful antipathy to
the man who claims the custody of her person, as well as the most
distressing reluctance to leaving her dear home and friends; and all
this, in addition to her recent heavy affliction, almost overwhelms the
poor child," said Mrs. Rocke, weeping.

"I will go at once and do what I can to soothe her," said Doctor
Williams, following Mrs. Rocke, who led him up to Clara's room.

They found her prostrate upon her bed, crushed with grief.

"Come, come, my dear girl, this is too bad! It is not like the usual
noble fortitude of our Clara," said the old man, kindly taking her hand.

"Oh, Doctor, forgive--forgive me! but my courage must have been very
small, for I fear it is all gone. But then, indeed, everything comes on
me at once. My dear, dear father's death; then the approaching
departure and expected long absence of Traverse! All that was grievous
enough to bear; and now to be torn away from the home of my childhood,
and from the friend that has always been a mother to me, and by a man,
from whom every true, good instinct of my nature teaches me to shrink.
I, who have always had full liberty in the house of my dear father, to
be forced away against my will by this man, as if I were his slave!"
exclaimed Clara, bursting into fresh tears of indignation and grief.

"Clara, my dear, dear girl, this impatience and rebellion is so unlike
your gentle nature that I can scarcely recognize you for the mild and
dignified daughter of my old friend. Clara, if the saints in heaven
could grieve at anything, I should think your dear father would be
grieved to see you thus!" said the old man in gentle rebuke that
immediately took effect upon the meek and conscientious maiden.

"Oh! I feel--I feel that I am doing very wrong, but I cannot help it. I
scarcely know myself in this agony of mingled grief, indignation and
terror--yes, terror--for every instinct of my nature teaches me to
distrust and fear that man, in whom my father must have been greatly
deceived before he could have entrusted him with the guardianship of
his only child."

"I think that quite likely," said the old man; "yet, my dear, even in
respect to your dear father's memory, you must try to bear this trial
patiently."

"Oh, yes, I know I must. Dear father, if you can look down and see me
now, forgive your poor Clara, her anger and her impatience. She will
try to be worthy of the rearing you have given her and to bear even
this great trial with the spirit worthy of your daughter!" said Clara
within her own heart; then, speaking up, she said: "You shall have no
more reason to reprove me, Doctor Williams."

"That is my brave girl! That is my dear Clara Day! And now, when your
guardian directs you to prepare yourself for your journey, obey him--go
with him without making any objection. I purpose to arrest your journey
at Staunton with a habeas corpus that he dare not resist, and which
shall compel him to bring you into the Orphans' Court. There our side
shall be heard, and the decision will rest with the judge."

"And all will be well! Oh, say that, sir! to give me the courage to act
with becoming docility," pleaded Clara.

"I have not a doubt in this world that it will all be right, for,
however Colonel Le Noir may choose to disregard the last wishes of your
father, as attested by myself and young Rocke, I have not the least
idea that the judge will pass them over. On the contrary, I feel
persuaded that he will confirm them by sending you back here to your
beloved home."

"Oh, may heaven grant it!" said Clara. "You do, indeed, give me new
life."

"Yes, yes, be cheerful, my dear; trust in Providence and expect nothing
short of the best! And now I dare not tarry longer with you, for I must
see the Judge at his house this night. Good-by, my dear; keep up a good
heart!" said the old man, cheerfully, pressing her hand and taking his
leave.

Mrs. Rocke accompanied him to the hall door.

"My dear madam, keep up your spirits also for the sake of your young
charge! Make her go to bed early! To-morrow, when she thinks she is
about to be torn from you forever, remind her in her ear that I shall
meet the carriage at Staunton with a power that shall turn the horses'
heads."

And so saying, the worthy old gentleman departed.

As Marah Rocke looked after him, she also saw with alarm that Colonel
Le Noir had mounted his horse and galloped off in the direction of
Staunton, as if impelled by the most urgent haste.

She returned to the bedside of Clara, and left her no more that night.
As the colonel did not return to supper, they, the family party, had
their tea in Clara's room.

Late at night Mrs. Rocke heard Colonel Le Noir come into the house and
enter his chamber.

Poor Clara slept no more that night; anxiety, despite of all her
efforts, kept her wide awake. Yet, though anxious and wakeful, yet by
prayer and endeavor she had brought her mind into a patient and
submissive mood, so that when a servant knocked at her door in the
morning with a message from Colonel Le Noir that she should be ready to
set forth immediately after breakfast, she replied that she should obey
him, and without delay she arose and commenced her toilet.

All the family met for the last time around the board. The party was
constrained. The meal was a gloomy one. On rising from the table
Colonel Le Noir informed his ward that his traveling carriage was
waiting, and that her baggage was already on, and requested her to put
on her bonnet and mantle, and take leave of her servants.

Clara turned to obey--Traverse went to her side and whispered:

"Take courage, dear love. My horse is saddled. I shall ride in
attendance upon the carriage whether that man likes it or not; nor lose
sight of you for one moment until we meet Williams with his habeas
corpus."

"Nor even then, dear Traverse, nor even then! You will attend me to the
court and be ready to take me back to this dear, dear home!" murmured
Clara in reply.

"Yes, yes, dear girl! There, be cheerful," whispered the young man, as
he pressed her hand and released it.

Colonel Le Noir had been a silent but frowning spectator of this little
scene, and now that Clara was leaving the room, attended by Mrs. Rocke,
he called the latter back, saying:

"You will be so kind as to stop here a moment, Mrs. Rocke and you also,
young man."

The mother and son paused to hear what he should have to say.

"I believe it is the custom here in discharging domestics to give a
month's warning, or in lieu of that, to pay a month's wages in advance.
There, woman, is the money. You will oblige me by leaving the house
to-day, together with your son and all your other trumpery, as the
premises are put in charge of an agent, who will be here this
afternoon, clothed with authority to eject all loiterers and intruders."

While the colonel spoke Marah Rocke gazed at him in a panic from which
she seemed unable to rouse herself, until Traverse gravely took her
hand, saying:

"My dear mother, let me conduct you from the presence of this man, who
does not know how to behave himself toward women. Leave me to talk with
him, and do you, dear mother, go to Miss Day, who I know is waiting for
you."

Marah Rocke mechanically complied and allowed Traverse to lead her from
the room.

When he returned he went up to Colonel Le Noir, and, standing before
him and looking him full and sternly in the face, said, as sternly:

"Colonel Le Noir, my mother will remain here and abide the decision of
the Orphans' Court; until that has been pronounced, she does not stir
at your or any man's bidding!"

"Villain, out of my way!" sneered Le Noir, endeavoring to pass him.

Traverse prevented him, saying:

"Sir, in consideration of your age, which should be venerable, your
position which should prove you honorable, and of this sacred house of
mourning in which you stand, I have endeavored to meet all the insults
you have offered me with forbearance. But, sir, I am here to defend my
mother's rights and to protect her from insult! And I tell you plainly
that you have affronted her for the very last time! One more word or
look of insult leveled at Marah Rocke and neither your age, position
nor this sacred roof shall protect you from personal chastisement at
the hands of her son!"

Le Noir, who had listened in angry scorn, with many an ejaculation of
contempt, now at the conclusion which so galled his pride, broke out
furiously, with:

"Sir, you are a bully! If you were a gentleman I would call you out!"

"And I should not come if you did, sir! Dueling is unchristian,
barbarous and abominable in the sight of God and all good men. For the
rest you may call me anything you please; but do not again insult my
mother, for if you do I shall hold it a Christian duty to teach you
better manners," said Traverse, coolly taking his hat and walking from
the room. He mounted his horse and stood ready to attend Clara to
Staunton.

Colonel Le Noir ground his teeth in impotent rage, muttering;

"Take care, young man! I shall live to be revenged upon you yet for
these affronts!" and his dastard heart burned with the fiercer
malignity that he had not dared to meet the eagle eye, or encounter the
strong arm of the upright and stalwart young man. Gnashing his teeth
with ill-suppressed fury, he strode into the hall just as Mrs. Rocke
and Clara, in her traveling dress, descended the stairs.

Clara threw her arms around Mrs. Rocke's neck, and, weeping, said:

"Good-by, dear, best friend--good-by! Heaven grant it may not be for
long! Oh, pray for me, that I may be sent back to you!"

"May the Lord have you in His holy keeping, my child I shall pray until
I hear from you!" said Marah, kissing and releasing her.

Colonel Le Noir then took her by the hand, led her out, and put her
into the carriage.

Just before entering Clara had turned to take a last look at her old
home--all, friends and servants, noticed the sorrowful, anxious, almost
despairing look of her pale face, which seemed to ask:

"Ah, shall I ever, ever return to you, dear old home, and dear,
familiar friends?"

In another instant she had disappeared within the carriage, which
immediately rolled off.

As the carriage was heavily laden, and the road was in a very bad
condition, it was a full hour before they reached the town of Staunton.
As the carriage drew up for a few moments before the door of the
principal hotel, and Colonel Le Noir was in the act of stepping out, a
sheriff's officer, accompanied by Dr. Williams, approached, and served
upon the colonel a writ of habeas corpus, commanding him to bring his
ward, Clara Day, into court.

Colonel Le Noir laughed scornfully, saying:

"And do any of you imagine this will serve your purposes? Ha, ha! The
most that it can do will be to delay my journey for a few hours until
the decision of the judge, which will only serve to confirm my
authority beyond all future possibility of questioning."

"We will see to that," said Doctor Williams.

"Drive to the Court House!" ordered Colonel Le Noir.

And the carriage, attended by Traverse Rocke, Doctor Williams and the
Sheriff's officer, each on horseback, drove thither.

And now, reader, I will not trouble you with a detailed account of this
trial. Clara, clothed in deep mourning, and looking pale and terrified,
was led into the court room on the arm of her guardian. She was
followed closely by her friends, Traverse Rocke and Doctor Williams,
each of whom whispered encouraging words to the orphan.

As the court had no pressing business on its hands, the case was
immediately taken up, the will was read and attested by the attorney
who had drawn it up and the witnesses who had signed it. Then the
evidence of Doctor Williams and Doctor Rocke was taken concerning the
last verbal instruction of the deceased. The case occupied about three
hours, at the end of which the judge gave a decision in favor of
Colonel Le Noir.

This judgment carried consternation to the heart of Clara and of all
her friends.

Clara herself sank fainting in the arms of her old friend, the
venerable Doctor Williams.

Traverse, in bitterness of spirit, approached and bent over her.

Colonel Le Noir spoke to the judge.

"I deeply thank your honor for the prompt hearing and equally prompt
decision of this case, and I will beg your honor to order the Sheriff
and his officers to see your judgment carried into effect, as I foresee
violent opposition, and wish to prevent trouble."

"Certainly. Mr. Sheriff, you will see that Colonel Le Noir is put in
possession of his ward, and protected in that right until he shall have
placed her in security," said the judge.

Clara, on hearing these words, lifted her head from the old man's
bosom, nerved her gentle heart, and in a clear, sweet, steady voice
said:

"It is needless precaution, your honor; my friends are no law-breakers,
and since the court has given me into the custody of my guardian, I do
not dispute its judgment. I yield myself up to Colonel Le Noir."

"You do well, young lady," said the judge.

"I am pleased, Miss Day, to see that you understand and perform your
duty; believe me, I shall do all that I can to make you happy," said
Colonel Le Noir.

Clara replied by a gentle nod, and then, with a slight blush mantling
her pure cheeks she advanced a step and placed herself immediately in
front of the judge, saying:

"But there is a word that I would speak to your honor."

"Say on, young lady," said the judge.

And as she stood there in her deep mourning dress, with her fair hair
unbound and floating softly around her pale, sweet face, every eye in
that court was spellbound by her almost unearthly beauty. Before
proceeding with what she was about to say, she turned upon Traverse a
look that brought him immediately to her side.

"Your honor," she began, in a low, sweet, clear tone, "I owe it to
Doctor Rocke here present, who has been sadly misrepresented to you, to
say (what, under less serious circumstances, my girl's heart would
shrink from avowing so publicly) that I am his betrothed wife--sacredly
betrothed to him by almost the last act of my dear father's life. I
hold this engagement to be so holy that no earthly tribunal can break
or disturb it. And while I bend to your honor's decision, and yield
myself to the custody of my legal guardian for the period of my
minority, I here declare to all who may be interested, that I hold my
hand and heart irrevocably pledged to Doctor Rocke, and that, as his
betrothed wife, I shall consider myself bound to correspond with him
regularly, and to receive him as often as he shall seek my society,
until my majority, when I and all that I possess will become his own.
And these words I force myself to speak, your honor, both in justice to
my dear lost father and his friend, Traverse Rocke, and also to myself,
that hereafter no one may venture to accuse me of clandestine
proceedings, or distort my actions into improprieties, or in any manner
call in question the conduct of my father's daughter." And, with
another gentle bow, Clara retired to the side of her old friend.

"You are likely to have a troublesome charge in your ward," said the
sheriff apart to the colonel, who shrugged his shoulders by way of
reply.

The heart of Traverse was torn by many conflicting passions, emotions
and impulses; there was indignation at the decision of the court; grief
for the loss of Clara, and dread for her future!

One instant he felt a temptation to denounce the guardian as a villain
and to charge the judge with being a corrupt politician, whose
decisions were swayed by party interests!

The next moment he felt an impulse to catch Clara up in his arms, fight
his way through the crowd and carry her off! But all these wild
emotions, passions and impulses he succeeded in controlling.

Too well he knew that to rage, do violence, or commit extravagance as
he might, the law would take its course all the same.

While his heart was torn in this manner, Colonel Le Noir was urging the
departure of his ward. And Clara came to her lover's side and said,
gravely and sweetly:

"The law, you see, has decided against us, dear Traverse! Let us bend
gracefully to a decree that we cannot annul! It cannot, at least, alter
our sacred relations; nor can anything on earth shake our steadfast
faith in each other; let us take comfort in that, and in the thought
that the years will surely roll round at length and bring the time that
shall reunite us."

"Oh, my angel-girl! My angel-girl! Your patient heroism puts me to the
blush, for my heart is crushed in my bosom and my firmness quite gone!"
said Traverse, in a broken voice.

"You will gain firmness, dear Traverse. 'Patient!' I patient! You
should have heard me last night! I was so impatient that Doctor
Williams had to lecture me. But it would be strange if one did not
learn something by suffering. I have been trying all night and day to
school my heart to submission, and I hope I have succeeded, Traverse.
Bless me and bid me good-by."

"The Lord forever bless and keep you, my own dear angel, Clara!" burst
from the lips of Traverse. "The Lord abundantly bless you!"

"And you," said Clara.

"Good-by!--good-by!"

"Good-by!"

And thus they parted.

Clara was hurried away and put into the carriage by her guardian.

Ah, no one but the Lord knew how much it had-cost that poor girl to
maintain her fortitude during that trying scene. She had controlled
herself for the sake of her friends. But now, when she found herself in
the carriage, her long strained nerves gave way--she sank exhausted and
prostrated into the corner of her seat, in the utter collapse of woe!

But leaving the travelers to pursue their journey, we must go back to
Traverse.

Almost broken-hearted, Traverse returned to Willow Heights to convey
the sad tidings of his disappointment to his mother's ear.

Marah Rocke was so overwhelmed with grief at the news that she was for
several hours incapable of action.

The arrival of the house agent was the first event that recalled her to
her senses.

She aroused herself to action, and, assisted by Traverse, set to work
to pack up her own and his wardrobe and other personal effects.

And the next morning Marah Rocke was re-established in her cottage.

And the next week, having equally divided their little capital, the
mother and son parted--Traverse, by her express desire, keeping to his
original plan, set out for the far West.




CHAPTER II.

OLD HURRICANE STORMS.


    "At this sir knight flamed up with ire!
     His great chest heaved! his eyes flashed fire.
     The crimson that suffused his face
     To deepest purple now gave place."


Who can describe the frenzy of Old Hurricane upon discovering the fraud
that had been practised upon him by Black Donald?

It was told him the next morning in his tent, at his breakfast table,
in the presence of his assembled family, by the Rev Mr. Goodwin.

Upon first hearing it, he was incapable of anything but blank staring,
until it seemed as though his eyes must start from their sockets!

Then his passion, "not loud but deep," found utterance only in emphatic
thumps of his walking stick upon the ground!

Then, as the huge emotion worked upward, it broke out in grunts, groans
and inarticulate exclamations!

Finally it burst forth as follows:

"Ugh! ugh! ugh! Fool! dolt! blockhead! Brute that I've been! I wish
somebody would punch my wooden head! I didn't think the demon himself
could have deceived me so! Ugh! Nobody but the demon could have done
it! and he is the demon! The very demon himself! He does not
disguise--he transforms himself! Ugh! ugh! ugh! that I should have been
such a donkey!"

"Sir, compose yourself! We are all liable to suffer deception," said
Mr. Goodwin.

"Sir," broke forth Old Hurricane, in fury, "that wretch has eaten at my
table! Has drunk wine with me!! Has slept in my bed!!! Ugh! ugh!!
ugh!!!"

"Believing him to be what he seemed, sir, you extended to him the
rights of hospitality; you have nothing to blame yourself with!"

"Demmy, sir, I did more than that! I've coddled him up with negusses!
I've pampered him up with possets and put him to sleep in my own bed!
Yes, sir--and more! Look there at Mrs. Condiment, sir! The way in which
she worshiped that villain was a sight to behold!" said Old Hurricane,
jumping up and stamping around the tent in fury.

"Oh, Mr. Goodwin, sir, how could I help it when I thought he was such a
precious saint?" whimpered the old lady.

"Yes, sir! when 'his reverence' would be tired with delivering a
long-winded mid-day discourse, Mrs. Condiment, sir, would take him into
her own tent--make him lie down on her own sacred cot, and set my niece
to bathing his head with cologne and her maid to fanning him, while she
herself prepared an iced sherry cobbler for his reverence! Aren't you
ashamed of yourself, Mrs. Condiment, mum!" said Old Hurricane, suddenly
stopping before the poor old woman, in angry scorn.

"Indeed, I'm sure if I'd known it was Black Donald, I'd no more have
suffered him inside of my tent than I would Satan!"

"Demmy, mum, you had Satan there as well! Who but Satan could have
tempted you all to disregard me, your lawful lord and master, as you
every one of you did for that wretch's sake! Hang it, parson, I wasn't
the master of my own house, nor head of my own family! Precious Father
Gray was! Black Donald was! Oh, you shall hear!" cried Old Hurricane,
in a frenzy.

"Pray, sir, be patient and do not blame the women for being no wiser
than you were yourself," said Mr. Goodwin.

"Tah! tah! tah! One act of folly is a contingency to which any man may
for once in his life be liable; but folly is the women's normal
condition! You shall hear! You shall hear! Hang it, sir, everybody had
to give way to Father Gray! Everything was for Father Gray! Precious
Father Gray! Excellent Father Gray! Saintly Father Gray! It was Father
Gray here and Father Gray there, and Father Gray everywhere and always!
He ate with us all day and slept with us all night! The coolest cot in
the dryest nook of the tent at night--the shadiest seat at the table by
day--were always for his reverence! The nicest tit-bits of the choicest
dishes--the middle slices of the fish, the breast of the young ducks,
and the wings of the chickens, the mealiest potatoes, the juiciest
tomatoes, the tenderest roasting ear, the most delicate custard, and
freshest fruit always for his reverence! I had to put up with the necks
of poultry, and the tails of fishes, watery potatoes, specked apples
and scorched custards--and if I dared to touch anything better before
his precious reverence had eaten and was filled, Mrs. Condiment
there--would look as sour as if she had bitten an unripe lemon--and Cap
would tread on my gouty toe! Mrs. Condiment, mum, I don't know how you
can look me in the face!" said Old Hurricane, savagely. A very
unnecessary reproach, since poor Mrs. Condiment had not ventured to
look any one in the face since the discovery of the fraud of which she,
as well as others, had been an innocent victim.

"Come, come, my dear major, there is no harm done to you or your
family; therefore, take patience!" said Mr. Goodwin.

"Demmy, sir, I beg you pardon, parson, I won't take patience! You don't
know! Hang it, man, at last they got me to give up one-half of my own
blessed bed to his precious reverence--the best half which the fellow
always took right out of the middle, leaving me to sleep on both sides
of him, if I could! Think of it--me, Ira Warfield--sleeping between the
sheets--night after night--with Black Donald! Ugh! ugh! ugh! Oh, for
some lethean draught that I might drink and forget! Sir, I won't be
patient! Patience would be a sin! Mrs. Condiment, mum, I desire that
you will send in your account and supply yourself with a new situation!
You and I cannot agree any longer. You'll be putting me to bed with
Beelzebub next!" exclaimed Old Hurricane, besides himself with
indignation.

Mrs. Condiment sighed and wiped her eyes under her spectacles.

The worthy minister, now seriously alarmed, came to him and said:

"My dear, dear major, do not be unjust--consider. She is an old
faithful domestic, who has been in your service forty years--whom you
could not live without! I say it under advisement--whom you could not
live without!"

"Hang it, sir, nor live with! Think of her helping to free the
prisoners! Actually taking Black Donald--precious Father Gray!--into
their cell and leaving them together to hatch their--beg you
pardon--horrid plots!"

"But, sir, instead of punishing the innocent victim of his deception,
let us be merciful and thank the Lord, that since those men were
delivered from prison, they were freed without bloodshed; for remember
that neither the warden nor any of his men, nor any one else has been
personally injured."

"Hang it, sir, I wish they had cut all our throats to teach us more
discretion!" broke forth Old Hurricane.

"I am afraid that the lesson so taught would have come too late to be
useful!" smiled the pastor.

"Well, it hasn't come too late now! Mrs. Condiment, mum, mind what I
tell you! As soon as we return to Hurricane Hall, send in your accounts
and seek a new home! I am not going to suffer myself to be set at
naught any longer!" exclaimed Old Hurricane, bringing down his cane
with an emphatic thump.

The sorely troubled minister was again about to interfere, when, as the
worm if trodden upon, will turn, Mrs. Condiment herself spoke up,
saying:

"Lor, Major Warfield, sir, there were others deceived besides me, and
as for myself, I never can think of the risk I've run without growing
cold all over!"

"Serves you right, mum, for your officiousness, and obsequiousness and
toadying to--precious Mr. Gray!--serves you doubly right for famishing
me at my own table!"

"Uncle!" said Capitola, "'Honor bright! Fair play is a jewel! If you
and I, who have seen Black Donald before, failed to recognize that
stalwart athlete in a seemingly old and sickly man, how could you
expect Mrs. Condiment to do so, who never saw him but once in her life,
and then was so much frightened that she instantly fainted?"

"Pah! pah! pah! Cap, hush! You, all of you, disgust me, except Black
Donald! I begin to respect him! Confound if I don't take in all the
offers I have made for his apprehension, and at the very next
convention of our party I'll nominate him to represent us in the
National Congress; for, of all the fools that ever I have met in my
life, the people of this county are the greatest! And fools should at
least be represented by one clever man--and Black Donald is the very
fellow! He is decidedly the ablest man in this congressional district."

"Except yourself, dear uncle!" said Capitola.

"Except nobody, Miss Impudence!--least of all me! The experience of the
last week has convinced me that I ought to have a cap and bells awarded
me by public acclamation!" said Old Hurricane, stamping about in fury.

The good minister finding that he could make no sort of impression upon
the irate old man, soon took his leave, telling Mrs. Condiment that if
he could be of any service to her in her trouble she must be sure to
let him know.

At this Capitola and Mrs. Condiment exchanged looks, and the old lady,
thanking him for his kindness, said that if it should become necessary,
she should gratefully avail herself of it.

That day the camp meeting broke up.

Major Warfield struck tents and with his family and baggage returned to
Hurricane Hall.

On their arrival, each member of the party went about his or her own
particular business.

Capitola hurried to her own room to take off her bonnet and shawl.
Pitapat, before attending her young mistress, lingered below to
astonish the housemaids with accounts of "Brack Donel, dress up like an
ole parson, an' 'ceiving everybody, even ole Marse!"

Mrs. Condiment went to her store room to inspect the condition of her
newly put up preserves and pickles, lest any of them should have
"worked" during her absence.

And Old Hurricane, attended by Wool, walked down to his kennels and his
stables to look after the well-being of his favorite hounds and horses.
It was while going through this interesting investigation that Major
Warfield was informed--principally by overhearing the gossip of the
grooms with Wool--of the appearance of a new inmate of the Hidden
House--a young girl, who, according to their description, must have
been the very pearl of beauty.

Old Hurricane pricked up his ears! Anything relating to the "Hidden
House" possessed immense interest for him.

"Who is she, John?" he inquired of the groom.

"Deed I dunno, sir, only they say she's a bootiful young creature, fair
as any lily, and dressed in deep mourning."

"Humph! humph! humph! another victim! Ten thousand chances to one,
another victim! who told you this, John?"

"Why, Marse, you see Tom Griffith, the Rev. Mr. Goodwill's man, he's
very thick long of Davy Hughs, Colonel Le Noir's coachman. And Davy he
told Tom how one day last month his marse ordered the carriage, and
went two or three days' journey up the country beyant Staunton, there
he stayed a week and then came home, fetching along with him in the
carriage this lovely young lady, who was dressed in the deepest
mourning, and wept all the way. They 'spects how she's an orphan, and
has lost all her friends, by the way she takes on."

"Another victim! My life on it--another victim! Poor child! She had
better be dead than in the power of that atrocious villain and
consummate hypocrite!" said Old Hurricane, passing on to the
examination of his favorite horses, one of which, the swiftest in the
stud, he found galled on the shoulders. Whereupon he flew into a
towering passion, abusing his unfortunate groom by every opprobrious
epithet blind fury could suggest, ordering him, as he valued whole
bones, to vacate the stable instantly, and never dare to set foot on
his premises again as he valued his life, an order which the man meekly
accepted and immediately disobeyed, muttered to himself:

"Humph! If we took ole marse at his word, there'd never be man or 'oman
left on the 'state," knowing full well that his tempestuous old master
would probably forget all about it, as soon as he got comfortably
seated at the supper table of Hurricane Hall, toward which the old man
now trotted off.

Not a word did Major Warfield say at supper in regard to the new inmate
of the Hidden House, for he had particular reasons for keeping Cap in
ignorance of a neighbor, lest she should insist upon exchanging visits
and being "sociable."

But it was destined that Capitola should not remain a day in ignorance
of the interesting fact.

That night, when she retired to her chamber, Pitapat lingered behind,
but presently appeared at her young mistress's room door with a large
waiter on her head, laden with meat, pastry, jelly and fruit, which she
brought in and placed upon the work stand.

"Why, what on the face of earth do you mean by bringing all that load
of victuals into my room to-night? Do you think I am an ostrich or a
cormorant, or that I am going to entertain a party of friends?" asked
Capitola, in astonishment, turning from the wash stand, where she stood
bathing her face.

"'Deed I dunno, Miss, whedder you'se an ostrizant or not, but I knows I
don't 'tend for to be 'bused any more 'bout wittels, arter findin' out
how cross empty people can be! Dar dey is! You can eat um or leab um
alone, Miss Caterpillar!" said little Pitapat, firmly.

Capitola laughed, "Patty" she said, "you are worthy to be called my
waiting maid!"

"And Lors knows, Miss Caterpillar, if it was de wittels you was
a-frettin' arter, you ought to a-told me before! Lors knows dere's
wittels enough!"

"Yes, I'm much obliged to you, Patty, but now I am not hungry, and I do
not like the smell of food in my bedroom, so take the waiter out and
set it on the passage table until morning."

Patty obeyed, and came back smiling and saying:

"Miss Caterpillar, has you hern de news?"

"What news, Pat?"

"How us has got a new neighbor--a bootiful young gal--as bootiful as a
picter in a gilt-edged Christmas book--wid a snowy skin, and sky-blue
eyes and glistenin' goldy hair, like the princess you was a readin' me
about, all in deep mournin' and a weepin' and a weepin' all alone down
there in that wicked, lonesome, onlawful ole haunted place, the Hidden
House, along of old Colonel Le Noir and old Dorkey Knight, and the
ghost as draws people's curtains of a night, just for all de worl' like
dat same princess in de ogre's castle!"

"What on earth is all this rigmarole about? Are you dreaming or
romancing?"

"I'm a-telling on you de bressed trufe! Dere's a young lady a-livin' at
de Hidden House!"

"Eh? Is that really true, Patty?"

"True as preaching, miss."

"Then, I am very glad of it! I shall certainly ride over and call on
the stranger," said Capitola, gaily.

"Oh, Miss Cap! Oh, miss, don't you do no sich thing! Ole Marse kill me!
I heerd him t'reaten all de men and maids how if dey telled you
anything 'bout de new neighbor, how he'd skin dem alive!"

"Won't he skin you?" asked Cap.

"No, miss, not 'less you 'form ag'in me, 'case he 'didn't tell me not
to tell you, 'case you see he didn't think how I knowed! But,
leastways, I know from what I heard, ole marse wouldn't have you to
know nothin' about it, no, not for de whole worl'."

"He does not want me to call at the Hidden House! That's it! Now why
doesn't he wish me to call there? I shall have to go in order to find
out, and so I will," thought Cap.




CHAPTER III.

CAP'S VISIT TO THE HIDDEN HOUSE


     And such a night "she" took the road in
     As ne'er poor sinner was abroad in.
     The wind blew as 'twad blawn its last
     The rattling showers rose on the blast;
     The speedy gleams the darkness swallowed
     Loud, deep and long the thunder bellowed;
     That night a child might understand
     The de'il had business on his hand.

                              --BURNS.


A week passed before Capitola carried her resolution of calling upon
the inmate of the Hidden House into effect. It was in fact a hot, dry,
oppressive season, the last few days of August, when all people, even
the restless Capitola, preferred the coolness and repose of indoors.
But that she should stay at home more than a week was a moral and
physical impossibility. So on Thursday afternoon, when Major Warfield
set out on horseback to visit his mill, Capitola ordered her horse
saddled and brought up that she might take an afternoon's ride.

"Now please, my dear child, don't go far," said Mrs. Condiment, "for
besides that your uncle does not approve of your riding alone, you must
hurry back to avoid the storm."

"Storm, Mrs. Condiment, why bless your dear old heart, there has not
been a storm these four weeks!" said Capitola, almost indignant that
such an absurd objection to a long ride should be raised.

"The more reason, my child, that we should have a very severe one when
it does come, and I think it will be upon us before sunset; so I advise
you to hurry home."

"Why, Mrs. Condiment, there's not a cloud in the sky."

"So much the worse, my dear! The blackest cloud that ever gathered is
not so ominous of mischief as this dull, coppery sky and still
atmosphere! And if forty years' observation of weather signs goes for
anything, I tell you that we are going to have the awfulest storm that
ever gathered in the heavens! Why, look out of that window--the very
birds and beasts know it, and instinctively seek shelter--look at that
flock of crows flying home! See how the dumb beasts come trooping
toward their sheds! Capitola, you had better give up going altogether,
my dear!"

"There! I thought all this talk tended to keeping me within doors, but
I can't stay, Mrs. Condiment! Good Mrs. Condiment, I can't!"

"But, my dear, if you should be caught out in the storm!"

"Why, I don't know but I should like it! What harm could it do? I'm not
soluble in water--rain won't melt me away! I think upon the whole I
rather prefer being caught in the storm," said Cap, perversely.

"Well, well, there is no need of that! You may ride as far as the
river's bank and back again in time to escape, if you choose!" said
Mrs. Condiment, who saw that her troublesome charge was bent upon the
frolic.

And Cap, seeing her horse approach, led by one of the grooms, ran
up-stairs, donned her riding habit, hat and gloves, ran down again,
sprang into her saddle and was off, galloping away toward the river
before Mrs. Condiment could add another word of warning.

She had been gone about an hour, when the sky suddenly darkened, the
wind rose and the thunder rolled in prelude to the storm.

Major Warfield came skurrying home from the mill, grasping his bridle
with one hand and holding his hat on with the other.

Meeting poor old Ezy in the shrubbery, he stormed out upon him with:

"What are you lounging there for, you old idiot! You old sky-gazing
lunatic! Don't you see that we are going to have an awful blow! Begone
with you and see that the cattle are all under shelter! Off, I say,
or," he rode toward Bill Ezy, but the old man, exclaiming:

"Yes, sir--yes, sir! In coorse, sir!" ducked his head and ran off in
good time.

Major Warfield quickened his horse's steps and rode to the house,
dismounted and threw the reins to the stable boy, exclaiming:

"My beast is dripping with perspiration--rub him down well you knave,
or I'll impale you!"

Striding into the hall, he threw down his riding whip, pulled off his
gloves and called:

"Wool! Wool, you scoundrel, close every door and window in the house!
Call all the servants together in the dining-room; we're going to have
one of the worst tempests that ever raised!"

Wool flew to do his bidding.

"Mrs. Condiment, mum," said the old man, striding into the
sitting-room, "Mrs. Condiment, mum, tell Miss Black to come down from
her room until the storm is over; the upper chambers of this old house
are not safe in a tempest. Well, mum, why don't you go, or send
Pitapat?"

"Major Warfield, sir, I'm very sorry, but Miss Black has not come in
yet," said Mrs. Condiment, who for the last half hour had suffered
extreme anxiety upon account of Capitola.

"Not come in yet! Demmy, mum! Do you tell me she has gone out?" cried
Old Hurricane, in a voice of thunder, gathering his brows into a dark
frown, and striking his cane angrily upon the floor.

"Yes, sir, I am sorry to say she rode out about an hour ago and has not
returned," said Mrs. Condiment, summoning all her firmness to meet Old
Hurricane's "roused wrath."

"Ma'am! You venture to stand there before my face and tell me
composedly that you permitted Miss Black to go off alone in the face of
such a storm as this?" roared Old Hurricane.

"Sir, I could not help it!" said the old lady.

"Demmy, mum! You should have helped it! A woman of your age to stand
there and tell me that she could not prevent a young creature like
Capitola from going out alone in the storm!"

"Major Warfield, could you have done it?"

"Me? Demmy, I should think so; but that is not the question! You--"

He was interrupted by a blinding flash of lightning, followed
immediately by an awful peal of thunder and a sudden fall of rain.

Old Hurricane sprang up as though he had been shot off his chair and
trotted up and down the floor exclaiming:

"And she--she out in all this storm! Mrs. Condiment, mum, you deserve
to be ducked! Yes, mum, you do! Wool! Wool! you diabolical villain!"

"Yes, marse, yes, sir, here I is!" exclaimed that officer, in
trepidation, as he appeared in the doorway. "De windows and doors, sir,
is all fastened close and de maids are all in the dining-room as you
ordered, and--"

"Hang the maids and the doors and windows, too! Who the demon cares
about them? How dared you, you knave, permit your young mistress to
ride, unattended, in the face of such a storm, too! Why didn't you go
with her, sir?"

"'Deed, marse--"

"Don't ''deed marse' me you atrocious villain! Saddle a horse quickly,
inquire which road your mistress took and follow and attend her home
safely--after which I intend to break every bone in your skin, sirrah!
So--"

Again he was interrupted by a dazzling flash of lightning, accompanied
by a deafening roll of thunder, and followed by a flood of rain.

Wool stood appalled at the prospect of turning out in such a storm upon
such a fruitless errand.

"Oh, you may stare and roll up your eyes, but I mean it, you varlet! So
be off with you! Go! I don't care if you should be drowned in the rain,
or blown off the horse, or struck by lightning. I hope you may be; you
knave, and I shall be rid of one villain! Off, you varlet, or--" Old
Hurricane lifted a bronze statuette to hurl at Wool's delinquent head,
but that functionary dodged and ran out in time to escape a blow that
might have put a period to his mortal career.

But let no one suppose that honest Wool took the road that night! He
simply ran down-stairs and hid himself comfortably in the lowest
regions of the house, there to tarry until the storms, social and
atmospheric, should be over.

Meanwhile the night deepened, the storm raged without and Old Hurricane
raged within!

The lightning flashed, blaze upon blaze, with blinding glare! The
thunder broke, crash upon crash, with deafening roar! The wind
gathering all its force cannonaded the old walls as though it would
batter down the house! The rain fell in floods! In the midst of all the
Demon's Run, swollen to a torrent, was heard like the voice of a
"roaring lion, seeking whom he might devour!"

Old Hurricane strode up and down the floor, groaning, swearing,
threatening, and at every fresh blast of the storm without, breaking
forth into fury!

Mrs. Condiment sat crouched in a corner, praying fervently every time
the lightning blazed into the room, longing to go and join the men and
maids in the next apartment, yet fearful to stir from her seat lest she
should attract Old Hurricane's attention, and draw down upon herself
the more terrible thunder and lightning of his wrath. But to escape Old
Hurricane's violence was not in the power of mortal man or woman. Soon
her very stillness exasperated him and he broke forth upon her with:

"Mrs. Condiment, mum, I don't know how you can bear to sit there so
quietly and listen to this storm, knowing that the poor child is
exposed to it?"

"Major Warfield, would it do any good for me to jump up and trot up and
down the floor and go on as you do, even supposing I had the strength?"
inquired the meek old lady, thoroughly provoked at his injustice!

"I'd like to see you show a little more feeling! You are a perfect
barbarian! Oh, Cap! my darling, where are you now? Heavens! what a
blast was that! Enough to shake the house about our ears! I wish it
would! blamed if I don't!"

"Oh, Major! Major! don't say such awful things, nor make such awful
wishes!" said the appalled old lady--"you don't know what you might
bring down upon us!"

"No, nor care! If the old house should tumble in, it would bury under
its ruins a precious lot of good-for-nothing people, unfit to live!
Heavens! what a flash of lightning! Oh, Cap, Cap, my darling, where are
you in this storm? Mrs. Condiment, mum! if any harm comes to Capitola
this night, I'll have you indicted for manslaughter!"

"Major Warfield, if it is all on Miss Black's account that you are
raving and raging so, I think it is quite vain of you! for any young
woman caught out in a storm would know enough to get into shelter;
especially would Miss Black, who is a young lady of great courage and
presence of mind, as we know. She has surely gone into some house, to
remain until the storm is over," said Mrs. Condiment, soothingly.

This speech, so well intended, exasperated Old Hurricane more than all
the rest; stopping and striking his cane upon the floor, he roared
forth:

"Hang it, mum! hold your foolish old tongue! You know nothing about it!
Capitola is exposed to more serious dangers than the elements! Perils
of all sorts surround her! She should never, rain or shine, go out
alone! Oh, the little villain! the little wretch! the little demon! if
ever I get her safe in this house again, won't I lock her up and keep
her on bread and water until she learns to behave herself!"

Here again a blinding flash of lightning, a deafening peal of thunder,
a terrific blast of wind and flood of rain suddenly arrested his speech.

"Oh, my Cap! my dear Cap! I needn't threaten you! I shall never have
the chance to be cruel to you again--never! You'll perish in this
terrible storm and then--and then my tough old heart will break! It
will--it will, Cap! But demmy, before it does, I'll break the necks of
every man and woman, in this house, old and young! Hear it, heaven and
earth, for I'll do it!"

All things must have an end. So, as the hours passed on, the storm
having spent all its fury, gradually grumbled itself into silence.

Old Hurricane also raged himself into a state of exhaustion so complete
that when the midnight hour struck he could only drop into a chair and
murmur:

"Twelve o'clock and no news of her yet!"

And then unwillingly he went to bed, attended by Mrs. Condiment and
Pitapat instead of Wool, who was supposed to be out in search of
Capitola, but who was, in fact, fast asleep on the floor of a dry
cellar.

Meanwhile, where did this midnight hour find Capitola?




CHAPTER IV.

THE HIDDEN HOLLOW.


     On every side the aspect was the same,
        All ruined, desolate, forlorn and savage,
     No hand or foot within the precinct came
        To rectify or ravage!
     Here Echo never mocked the human tongue;
        Some weighty crime that Heaven could not pardon.
     A secret curse on that old Building hung
        And its deserted garden!

                             --Hood's Haunted House.


Cap was a bit of a Don Quixote! The stirring incidents of the last few
months had spoiled her; the monotony of the last few weeks had bored
her; and now she had just rode out in quest of adventures.

The Old Hidden House, with its mysterious traditions, its gloomy
surroundings and its haunted reputation, had always possessed a
powerful attraction for one of Cap's adventurous spirit. To seek and
gaze upon the somber house, of which, and of whose inmates, such
terrible stories had been told or hinted, had always been a secret
desire and purpose of Capitola.

And now the presence there of a beautiful girl near her own age was the
one last item that tipped the balance, making the temptation to ride
thither outweigh every other consideration of duty, prudence and
safety. And having once started on the adventure, Cap felt the
attraction drawing her toward the frightful hollow of the Hidden House
growing stronger with every step taken thitherward.

She reached the banks of the "Demon's Run" and took the left-hand road
down the stream until she reached the left point of the Horse-Shoe
Mountain, and then going up around the point, she kept close under the
back of the range until she had got immediately in the rear of the
round bend of the "Horse Shoe," behind Hurricane Hall.

"Well," said Cap, as she drew rein here, and looked up at the lofty
ascent of gray rocks that concealed Hurricane Hall, "to have had to
come such a circuit around the outside of the 'Horse Shoe,' to find
myself just at the back of our old house, and no farther from home than
this! There's as many doubles and twists in these mountains as there
are in a lawyer's discourse! There, Gyp, you needn't turn back again
and pull at the bridle, to tell me that there is a storm coming up and
that you want to go home! I have no more respect for your opinion than
I have for Mrs. Condiment's. Besides, you carry a damsel-errant in
quest of adventures, Gyp, and so you must on, Gyp--you must on!" said
Capitola, forcibly pulling her horse's head around, and then taking a
survey of the downward path.

It was a scene fascinating from its very excess of gloom and terror!

It was a valley so deep and dark as to merit the name of the hollow, or
hole, but for its great extent and its thick growth of forest, through
which spectral-looking rocks gleamed, and moaning waters could be heard
but not seen.

"Now, somewhere in that thick forest, in the bottom of that vale,
stands the house--well called the Hidden House, since not a chimney of
it can be seen even from this commanding height! But I suppose this
path that leads down into the valley may conduct me to the building!
Come along, Gyp! You needn't turn up your head and pull at the bit!
You've got to go! I am bound this night to see the outside of the
Hidden House, and the window of the haunted chamber at the very least!"
said Cap, throwing her eyes up defiantly toward the darkening sky, and
putting whip to her unwilling horse.

As the path wound down into the valley the woods were found deeper,
thicker and darker. It occupied all Cap's faculties to push her way
through the overhanging and interlacing branches of the trees.

"Good gracious," she said, as she used her left arm rather vigorously
to push aside the obstructions to her path, "one would think this were
the enchanted forest containing the castle of the sleeping beauty, and
I was the knight destined to deliver her! I'm sure it wouldn't have
been more difficult."

Still deeper fell the path, thicker grew the forest and darker the way.

"Gyp, I'm under the impression that we shall have to turn back yet!"
said Cap, dolefully stopping in the midst of a thicket so dense that it
completely blockaded her farther progress in the same direction. Just
as she came to this very disagreeable conclusion she spied an opening
on her left, from which a bridle-path struck out. With an exclamation
of joy she immediately turned her horse's head and struck into it. This
path was very rocky, but in some degree clearer than the other, and she
went on quickly, singing to herself, until gradually her voice began to
be lost in the sound of many rushing waters.

"It must be the Devil's Punch Bowl! I am approaching!" she said to
herself, as she went on.

She was right. The roaring of the waters grew deafening and the path
became so rugged with jagged and irregularly piled rocks, that Cap
could scarcely keep her horse upon his feet in climbing over them. And
suddenly, when she least looked for it, the great natural
curiosity--the Devil's Punch Bowl--burst upon her view!

It was an awful abyss, scooped out as it were from the very bowels of
the earth, with its steep sides rent open in dreadful chasms, and far
down in its fearful depths a boiling whirlpool of black waters.

Urging her reluctant steed through a thicket of stunted thorns and over
a chaos of shattered rocks, Capitola approached as near as she safely
could to the brink of this awful pit. So absorbed was she in gazing
upon this terrible phenomenon of natural scenery that she had not
noticed, in the thicket on her right, a low hut that, with its
brown-green moldering colors, fell so naturally in with the hue of the
surrounding scenery as easily to escape observation. She did not even
observe that the sky was entirely overcast, and the thunder was
muttering in the distance. She was aroused from her profound reverie by
a voice near her asking:

"Who are you, that dares to come without a guide to the Devil's Punch
Bowl?"

Capitola looked around and came nearer screaming than she ever had been
in her life, upon seeing the apparition that stood before her. Was it
man, woman, beast or demon? She could not tell! It was a very tall,
spare form, with a black cloth petticoat tied around the waist, a blue
coat buttoned over the breast, and a black felt hat tied down with a
red handkerchief, shading the darkest old face she had ever seen in her
life.

"Who are you, I say, who comes to the Devil's Punch Bowl without leave
or license?" repeated the frightful creature, shifting her cane from
one hand to the other.

"I? I am Capitola Black, from Hurricane Hall; but who, in the name of
all the fates and furies, are you?" inquired Capitola, who, in getting
over the shock, had recovered her courage.

"I am Harriet the Seeress of Hidden Hollow!" replied the apparition, in
a melodramatic manner that would not have discredited the queen of
tragedy herself. "You have heard of me?"

"Yes, but I always heard you called Old Hat, the Witch," said Cap.

"The world is profane--give me your hand!" said the beldame, reaching
out her own to take that of Capitola.

"Stop! Is your hand clean? It looks very black!"

"Cleaner than yours will be when it is stained with blood, young
maiden!"

"Tut! If you insist on telling my fortune, tell me a pleasant one, and
I will pay you double," laughed Capitola.

"The fates are not to be mocked. Your destiny will be that which the
stars decree. To prove to you that I know this, I tell you that you are
not what you have been!"

"You've hit it this time, old lady, for I was a baby once and now I am
a young girl!" said Cap, laughing.

"You will not continue to be that which you are now!" pursued the hag,
still attentively reading the lines of her subject's hand.

"Right again; for if I live long enough I shall be an old woman."

"You bear a name that you will not bear long!"

"I think that quite a safe prophecy, as I haven't the most distant idea
of being an old maid!"

"This little hand of yours--this dainty woman's hand--will be--red with
blood!"

"Now, do you know, I don't doubt that either? I believe it altogether
probable that I shall have to cook my husband's dinner and kill the
chickens for his soup!"

"Girl, beware! You deride the holy stars--and already they are adverse
to you!" said the hag, with a threatening glare.

"Ha, ha, ha! I love the beautiful stars but did not fear them I fear
only Him who made the stars!"

"Poor butterfly, listen and beware! You are destined to imbrue that
little hand in the life current of one who loves you the most of all on
earth! You are destined to rise by the destruction of one who would
shed his heart's best blood for you!" said the beldame, in an awful
voice.

Capitola's eyes flashed! She advanced her horse a step or two nearer
the witch and raised her riding whip, saying:

"I protest! If you were only a man I should lay this ash over your
wicked shoulders until my arms ached! How dare you? Faith, I don't
wonder that in the honest old times such pests as you were cooled in
the ducking pond! Good gracious, that must have made a hissing and
spluttering in the water, though!"

"Blasphemer, pay me and begone!"

"Pay you? I tell you I would if you were only a man; but it would be
sinful to pay a wretched old witch in the only way you deserve to be
paid!" said Cap, flourishing her riding whip before a creature tall
enough and strong enough to have doubled up her slight form together
and hurled it into the abyss.

"Gold! gold!" said the hag curtly, holding out black and talon-like
fingers, which she worked convulsively.

"Gold! gold, indeed! for such a wicked fortune! Not a penny!" said Cap.

"Ho! you're stingy; you do not like to part with the yellow demon that
has bought the souls of all your house!"

"Don't I? You shall see! There! If you want gold, go fish it from the
depth of the whirlpool," said Cap, taking her purse and casting it over
the precipice.

This exasperated the crone to frenzy.

"Away! Begone!" she cried, shaking her long arm at the girl. "Away!
Begone! The fate pursues you! The badge of blood is stamped upon your
palm!"

"Fee--faw--fum" said Cap.

"Scorner! Beware! The curse of the crimson hand is upon you!"

--"'I smell the blood of an Englishman'"--continued Cap.

"Derider of the fates, you are foredoomed to crime!"

--"'Be he alive or be he dead, I'll have his brains to butter my
bread!'" concluded Cap.

"Be silent!" shrieked the beldame.

"I won't!" said Cap. "Because you see, if we are in for the horrible, I
can beat you hollow at that!"

    "'Avaunt! and quit my sight!
     Let the earth hide thee!
     Thy bones are marrowless! Thy blood is cold!
     Thou hast no speculation in those eyes
     Which thou dost glare with?'"

"Begone! You're doomed! doomed! doomed!" shrieked the witch, retreating
into her hut.

Cap laughed and stroked the neck of her horse, saying:

"Gyp, my son, that was old Nick's wife, who was with us just this
instant, and now, indeed, Gyp, if we are to see the Hidden House this
afternoon, we must get on!"

And so saying she followed the path that wound half-way around the
Punch Bowl and then along the side of a little mountain torrent called
the Spout, which, rising in an opposite mountain, leaped from rock to
rock, with many a sinuous turn, as it wound through the thicket that
immediately surrounded the Hidden House until it finally jetted through
a subterranean channel into the Devil's Punch Bowl.

Capitola was now, unconsciously, upon the very spot, where, seventeen
years before, the old nurse had been forcibly stopped and compelled to
attend the unknown lady.

As Capitola pursued the path that wound lower and lower into the dark
valley the gloom of the thicket deepened. Her thoughts ran on all the
horrible traditions connected with the Hidden House and Hollow--the
murder and robbery of the poor peddler--the mysterious assassination of
Eugene Le Noir; the sudden disappearance of his youthful widow; the
strange sights and sounds reported to be heard and seen about the
mansion; the spectral light at the upper gable window; the white form
seen flitting through the chamber; the pale lady that in the dead of
night drew the curtains of a guest that once had slept there; and above
all Capitola thought of the beautiful, strange girl, who was now an
inmate of that sinful and accursed house! And while these thoughts
absorbed her mind, suddenly, in a turning of the path, she came full
upon the gloomy building.




CHAPTER V.

THE HIDDEN HOUSE.


     The very stains and fractures on the wall
     Assuming features solemn and terrific,
     Hinted some tragedy of that old hall
     Locked up in hieroglyphic!
     Prophetic hints that filled the soul with dread;
     But to one gloomy window pointing mostly,
     The while some secret inspiration said,
     That chamber is the ghostly!

                                     --Hood.


The Hidden House was a large, irregular edifice of dark red sandstone
with its walls covered closely with the clinging ivy, that had been
clipped away only from a few of the doors and windows, and its roof
over-shadowed by the top branches of gigantic oaks and elms that
clustered around and nearly concealed the building.

It might have been a long-forsaken house, for any sign of human
habitation that was to be seen about it. All was silent, solitary and
gloomy.

As Capitola drew up her horse to gaze upon its somber walls she
wondered which was the window at which the spectral light and ghostly
face had been seen. She soon believed that she had found it.

At the highest point of the building, immediately under the sharp angle
of the roof, in the gable and nearest to view, was a solitary window.
The ivy that clung tightly to the stone, covering every portion of the
wall at this end, was clipped away from that high placed, dark and
lonely window by which Capitola's eyes were strangely fascinated.

While thus she gazed in wonder, interest and curiosity, though without
the least degree of superstitious dread, a vision flashed upon her
sight that sent the blood from her ruddy cheek to her brave heart, and
shook the foundations of her unbelief!

For while she gazed, suddenly that dark window was illumed by a
strange, unearthly light that streamed forth into the gloomy evening
air, and touched with blue flame the quivering leaves of every tree in
its brilliant line! In the midst of this lighted window appeared a
white female face wild with woe! And then the face suddenly vanished
and the light was swallowed up in darkness!

Capitola remained transfixed!

"Great heavens!" she thought, "can these things really be! Have the
ghostly traditions of this world truth in them at last? When I heard
this story of the haunted window I thought some one had surely imagined
or invented it! Now I have seen for myself; but if I were to tell what
I have seen not one in a hundred would believe me!"

While these startling thoughts disturbed her usual well-balanced mind,
a vivid flash of lightning, accompanied by a tremendous peal of thunder
and a heavy fall of rain, roused her into renewed activity.

"Gyp, my boy, the storm is upon us sure enough! We shall catch it all
around, get well drowned, beaten and buffeted here and well abused when
we get home! Meantime, Gyp, which is the worst, the full fury of the
tempest or the mysterious terrors of the Haunted House!"

Another blinding flash of lightning, a stunning crash of thunder, a
flood of rain and tornado of wind decided her.

"We'll take the Haunted House, Gyp, my friend! That spectral lady of
the lighted window looked rather in sorrow than in anger, and who knows
but the ghosts may be hospitable? So gee up, Dobbin!" said Capitola,
and, urging her horse with one hand and holding on her cap with the
other, she went on against wind and rain until she reached the front of
the old house.

Not a creature was to be seen; every door and window was closely shut.
Dismounting, Capitola led her horse under the shelter of a thickly
leaved oak tree, secured him, and then holding up her saturated skirt
with one hand and holding on her cap with the other, she went up some
moldering stone steps to an old stone portico and, seizing the heavy
iron knocker of a great black oak double door, she knocked loudly
enough to awaken all the mountain echoes.

She waited a few minutes for an answer, but receiving none, she knocked
again, more loudly than before. Still there was no reply. And growing
impatient, she seized the knocker with both hands and exerting all her
strength, made the welkin ring again!

This brought a response. The door was unlocked and angrily jerked open
by a short, squarely formed, beetle-browed, stern-looking woman,
clothed in a black stuff gown and having a stiff muslin cap upon her
head.

"Who are you? What do you want here?" harshly demanded this woman, whom
Capitola instinctively recognized as Dorky Knight, the morose
housekeeper of the Hidden House.

"Who am I? What do I want? Old Nick fly away with you! It's plain
enough to be seen who I am and what I want. I am a young woman caught
out in the storm and I want shelter!" said Cap, indignantly. And her
words were endorsed by a terrific burst of the tempest in lightning,
thunder, wind and rain!

"Come in then and when you ask favors learn to keep a civil tongue in
your head!" said the woman sternly, taking the guest by the hand and
pulling her in and shutting and locking the door.

"Favors! Plague on you for a bearess! I asked no favor! Every
storm-beaten traveler has a right to shelter under the first roof that
offers, and none but a curmudgeon would think of calling it a favor!
And as for keeping a civil tongue in my head, I'll do it when you set
me the example!" said Cap.

"Who are you?" again demanded the woman.

"Oh, I see you are no Arabian in your notions of hospitality! Those
pagans entertain a guest without asking him a single question; and
though he were their bitterest foe, they consider him while he rests
beneath their tent sacred from intrusion."

"That's because they were pagans!" said Dorky. "But as I am a
Christian, I'd thank you to let me know who it is that I have received
under this roof."

"My name," said our heroine, impatiently, "is Capitola Black! I live
with my uncle, Major Warfield, at Hurricane Hall! And now, I should
thank your ladyship to send some one to put away my horse, while you
yourself accommodate me with dry clothes."

While our saucy little heroine spoke the whole aspect of the
dark-browed woman changed.

"Capitola-Capitola," she muttered, gazing earnestly upon the face of
the unwelcome guest.

"Yes, Capitola! That is my name! You never heard anything against it,
did you?"

For all answer the woman seized her hand, and while the lightning
flashed and the thunder rolled, and the wind and rain beat down, she
drew her the whole length of the hall before a back window that
overlooked the neglected garden, and, regardless of the electric fluid
that incessantly blazed upon them, she held her there and scrutinized
her features.

"Well, I like this! Upon my word, I do!" said Cap, composedly.

Without replying, the strange woman seized her right hand, forcibly
opened it, gazed upon the palm and then, flinging it back with a
shudder, exclaimed:

"Capitola, what brought you under this roof? Away! Begone! Mount your
horse and fly while there is yet time!"

"What! expose myself again to the storm? I won't, and that's flat!"
said Cap.

"Girl! girl! there are worse dangers in the world than any to be feared
from thunder, lightning, rain or wind!"

"Very well, then, when I meet them it will be time enough to deal with
them! Meanwhile the stormy night and my soaked clothing are very
palpable evils, and as I see no good end to be gained by my longer
enduring them, I will just beg you to stop soothsaying--(as I have had
enough of that from another old witch)--and be as good as to permit me
to change my clothes!"

"It is madness! You shall not stay here!" cried the woman, in a harsh
voice.

"And I tell you I will! You are not the head of the family, and I do
not intend to be turned out by you!"

While she spoke a servant crossed the hall and the woman, whisking
Capitola around until her back was turned and her face concealed, went
to speak to the newcomer.

"When will your master be here?" Capitola heard her inquire.

"Not to-night; he saw the storm rising and did not wish to expose
himself. He sent me on to say that he would not be here until morning.
I was caught, as you see! I am dripping wet," replied the man.

"Go, change your clothes at once then, Davy,"

"Who is that stranger?" asked the man, pointing to Capitola.

"Some young woman of the neighborhood, who has been caught out in the
tempest. But you had better go and change your clothes than to stand
here gossiping," said the woman, harshly.

"I say," said the man, "the young woman is a God-send to Miss Clara;
nobody has been to see her yet; nobody ever visits this house unless
they are driven to it. I don't wonder the colonel and our young master
pass as much as ten months in the year away from home, spending all the
summer at the watering places, and all the winter in New York or
Washington!"

"Hold your tongue! What right have you to complain? You always attend
them in their travels!"

"True, but you see for this last season they have both been staying
here, old master to watch the heiress, young master to court her, and
as I have no interest in that game, I find the time hangs heavy on my
hands," complained the man.

"It will hang heavier if you take a long fit of illness by standing in
wet clothes," muttered the woman.

"Why, so 'twill, missus! So here goes," assented the man, hurrying
across the hall and passing out through the door opposite that by which
he entered.

Dorcas returned to her guest.

Eying her closely for a while, she at length inquired:

"Capitola, how long have you lived at Hurricane Hall?"

"So long," replied Cap, "that you must have heard of me! I, at least,
have often heard of Mother Dorkey Knight."

"And heard no good of her!"

"Well, no--to be candid with you, I never did," said Cap.

"And much harm of her?" continued the woman, keeping her stern black
eyes fixed upon those of her guest.

"Well, yes--since you ask me, I have heard pretty considerable harm!"
answered Cap, nothing daunted.

"Where did you live before you came to Hurricane Hall?" asked Dorcas.

"Where I learned to fear God, to speak the truth and to shame the
devil!" replied Cap.

--"And to force yourself into people's houses against their will!"

"There you are again! I tell you that when I learn from the head of
this household that I am unwelcome, then I will retreat, and not until
then! And now I demand to be presented to the master."

"To Colonel Le Noir?"

"Yes."

"I cannot curse you with the 'curse of a granted prayer! Colonel Le
Noir is away."

"Why do you talk so strangely?" inquired Capitola.

"It is my whim. Perhaps my head is light."

"I should think it was, excessively so! Well--as the master of the
house is away, be good enough to present me to the mistress?"

"What mistress? There is no mistress here!" replied Dorcas, looking
around in strange trepidation.

"I mean the young lady, Colonel Le Noir's ward. In lieu of any other
lady, she, I suppose, may be considered the mistress of the house!"

"Humph! Well, young girl, as you are fully resolved to stand your
ground. I suppose there is nothing to do but to put up with you!" said
Dorcas.

"And put up my horse," added Cap.

"He shall be taken care of! But mind, you must depart early in the
morning!" said Dorcas, sternly.

"Once more, and for the last, Mother Cerberus, I assure you I do not
acknowledge your authority to dismiss me!" retorted Capitola. "So show
me to the presence of your mistress!"

"Perverse, like all the rest! Follow me!" said the house keeper,
leading the way from the hall toward a back parlor.




CHAPTER VI.

THE INMATE OF THE HIDDEN HOUSE


     There is a light around her brow,
     A holiness in those dark eyes,
     That show, though wandering earthward now,
     Her spirit's home is in the skies.

                               --MOORE.


Pushing open the door, Dorcas Knight exclaimed:

"Here is a young lady, Miss Black, from Hurricane Hall, come to see
you, Miss Day."

And having made this announcement, the woman retired and shut the door
behind her.

And Capitola found herself in a large, dark, gloomy, wainscoted room,
whose tall, narrow windows afforded but little light, and whose immense
fireplace and blackened furniture seemed to belong to a past century.

The only occupant of this somber apartment was a young girl, seated in
pensive thought beside the central table. She was clothed in deep
mourning, which only served to throw into fairer relief the beauty of
her pearly skin, golden hair and violet eyes.

The vision of her mourning robes and melancholy beauty so deeply
impressed Capitola that, almost for the first time in her life, she
hesitated from a feeling of diffidence, and said gently:

"Indeed, I fear that this is an unwarranted intrusion on my part, Miss
Day."

"You are very welcome," replied the sweetest voice Capitola had ever
heard, as the young girl arose and advanced to meet her. "But you have
been exposed to the storm Please come into my room and change your
clothes," continued the young hostess, as she took Cap's hand and led
her into an adjoining room.

The storm was still raging, but these apartments being in the central
portion of the strong old house, were but little exposed to the sight
or sound of its fury.

There was a lamp burning upon the mantelpiece, by the light of which
the young girl furnished her visitor with dry clothing and assisted her
to change, saying as she did so:

"I think we are about the same size, and that my clothes will fit you;
but I will not offer you mourning habiliments--you shall have this
lilac silk."

"I am very sorry to see you in mourning," said Capitola, earnestly.

"It is for my father," replied Clara, very softly.

As they spoke the eyes of the two young girls met. They were both good
physiognomists and intuitive judges, of character. Consequently in the
full meeting of their eyes they read, understood and appreciated each
other.

The pure, grave, and gentle expression of Clara's countenance touched
the heart of Capitola.

The bright, frank, honest face of Cap recommended her to Clara.

The very opposite traits of their equally truthful characters attracted
them to each other.

Clara conducted her guest back into the wainscoted parlor, where a
cheerful fire had been kindled to correct the dampness of the air. And
here they sat down unmindful of the storm that came much subdued
through the thickness of the walls. And, as young creatures, however
tried and sorrowful, will do, they entered into a friendly chat. And
before an hour had passed Capitola thought herself well repaid for her
sufferings from the storm and the rebuff, in having formed the
acquaintance of Clara Day.

She resolved, let Old Hurricane rage as he might, henceforth she would
be a frequent visitor to the Hidden House.

And Clara, for her part, felt that in Capitola she had found a frank,
spirited, faithful neighbor who might become an estimable friend.

While they were thus growing into each other's favor, the door opened
and admitted a gentleman of tall and thin figure and white and
emaciated face, shaded by a luxuriant growth of glossy black hair and
beard. He could not have been more than twenty-six, but, prematurely
broken by vice, he seemed forty years of age. He advanced bowing toward
the young women.

As Capitola's eyes fell upon this newcomer it required all her presence
of mind and powers of self-control to prevent her from staring or
otherwise betraying herself--for in this stranger she recognized the
very man who had stopped her upon her night ride. She did, however,
succeed in banishing from her face every expression of consciousness.
And when Miss Day courteously presented him to her guest, saying
merely, "My cousin, Mr. Craven Le Noir, Miss Black," Capitola arose and
curtsied as composedly as if she had never set eyes upon his face
before.

He on his part evidently remembered her, and sent one stealthy, been
and scrutinizing glance into her face; but, finding that imperturbable,
he bowed with stately politeness and seemed satisfied that she had not
identified him as her assailant.

Craven Le Noir drew his chair to the fire, seated himself and entered
into an easy conversation with Clara and her guest. Whenever he
addressed Clara there was a deference and tenderness in his tone and
glance that seemed very displeasing to the fair girl, who received all
these delicate attentions with coldness and reserve. These things did
not escape the notice of Capitola, who mentally concluded that Craven
Le Noir was a lover of Clara Day, but a most unacceptable lover.

When supper was announced it was evidently hailed by Clara as a great
relief. And after the meal was over she arose and excused herself to
her cousin by saying that her guest, Miss Black, had been exposed to
the storm and was doubtless very much fatigued and that she would show
her to her chamber.

Then, taking a night lamp, she invited Capitola to come and conducted
her to an old-fashioned upper chamber, where a cheerful fire was
burning on the hearth. Here the young girls sat down before the fire
and improved their acquaintance by an hour's conversation. After which
Clara arose, and saying, "I sleep immediately below your room, Miss
Black; if you should want anything rap on the floor and I shall hear
you and get up," she wished her guest a good night's rest and retired
from the room.

Cap was disinclined to sleep; a strange superstitious feeling which she
could neither understand nor throw off had fallen upon her spirits.

She took the night lamp in her hand and got up to examine her chamber.
It was a large, dark, oak-paneled room, with a dark carpet on the floor
and dark-green curtains on the windows and the bedstead. Over the
mantelpiece hung the portrait of a most beautiful black-haired and
black-eyed girl of about fourteen years of age, but upon whose
infantile brow fell the shadow of some fearful woe. There was something
awful in the despair "on that face so young" that bound the gazer in an
irresistible and most painful spell. And Capitola remained standing
before it transfixed, until the striking of the hall clock aroused her
from her enchantment. Wondering who the young creature could have been,
what had been her history and, above all, what had been the nature of
that fearful woe that darkened like a curse her angel brow, Capitola
turned almost sorrowfully away and began to prepare for bed.

She undressed, put on the delicate nightclothes Clara had provided for
her use, said her evening prayers, looked under the bed--a precaution
taken ever since the night upon which she had discovered the
burglars--and, finding all right, she blew out her candle and lay down.
She could not sleep--many persons of nervous or mercurial temperaments
cannot do so the first night in a strange bed. Cap was very mercurial,
and the bed and room in which she lay were very strange; for the first
time since she had had a home to call her own she was unexpectedly
staying all night away from her friends, and without their having any
knowledge of her whereabouts. She was conjecturing, half in fear and
half in fun, how Old Hurricane was taking her escapade and what he
would say to her in the morning. She was wondering to find herself in
such an unforeseen position as that of a night guest in the mysterious
Hidden House--wondering whether this was the guest chamber in which the
ghost appeared to the officer and these were the very curtains that the
pale lady drew at night. While her thoughts were thus running over the
whole range of circumstances around her singular position, sleep
overtook Capitola and speculation was lost in brighter visions.

How long she had slept and dreamed she did not know, when something
gently awakened her. She opened her eyes calmly--to meet a vision that
brave as she was, nearly froze the blood in her warm veins.

Her chamber was illumined with an intense blue flame that lighted up
every portion of the apartment with a radiance bright as day, and in
the midst of this effulgence moved a figure clothed in white--a
beautiful, pale, spectral woman, whose large, motionless black eyes,
deeply set in her death-like face, and whose long unbound black hair,
fallen upon her white raiment, were the only marks of color about her
marble form.

Paralyzed with wonder, Capitola watched this figure as it glided about
the chamber. The apparition approached the dressing-table, seemed to
take something thence, and then gliding toward the bed, to Capitola's
inexpressible horror drew back the curtains and bent down and gazed
upon her! Capitola had no power to scream, to move or to avert her gaze
from those awful eyes that met her own, until at length, as the
spectral head bent lower, she felt the pressure of a pair of icy lips
upon her brow and closed her eyes!

When she opened them again the vision had departed and the room was
dark and quiet.

There was no more sleep for Capitola. She heard the clock strike four,
and was pleased to find that it was so near day. Still the time seemed
very long to her, who lay there wondering, conjecturing and speculating
on the strange adventure of the night.

When the sun arose she left her restless bed, bathed her excited head
and proceeded to dress herself. When she had finished her toilet, with
the exception of putting on her trinkets, she suddenly missed a ring
that she prized more than she did all her possessions put together--it
was a plain gold band, bearing the inscription Capitola-Eugene, and
which she had been enjoined by her old nurse never to part from but
with life. She had, in her days of destitution suffered the extremes of
cold and hunger; had been upon the very brink of death from starvation
or freezing, but without ever dreaming of sacrificing her ring. And now
for the first time it was missing. While she was still looking
anxiously for the lost jewel the door opened and Dorcas Knight entered
the room, bearing on her arm Capitola's riding dress, which had been
well dried and ironed.

"Miss Capitola, here is your habit; you had better put it on at once,
as I have ordered breakfast an hour sooner than usual, so that you may
have an early start."

"Upon my word, you are very anxious to get rid of me, but not more so
than I am to depart," said Capitola, still pursuing her search.

"Your friends, who do not know where you are, must be very uneasy about
you. But what are you looking for?"

"A ring, a plain gold circle, with my name and that of another
inscribed on it, and which I would not lose for the world. I hung it on
a pin in this pin-cushion last night before I went to bed. I would
swear I did, and now it is missing," answered Cap, still pursuing her
search.

"If you lost it in this room it will certainly be found," said Dorcas
Knight putting down the habit and helping in the search.

"I am not so sure of that. There was some one in my room last night."

"Some one in your room!" exclaimed Dorcas in dismay.

"Yes; a dark-haired woman, all dressed in white!"

Dorcas Knight gave two or three angry grunts and then harshly
exclaimed: "Nonsense! woman, indeed! there is no such woman about the
house! There are no females here except Miss Day, myself and you--not
even a waiting-maid or cook."

"Well," said Cap, "if it was not a woman it was a ghost; for I was wide
awake, and I saw it with my own eyes!"

"Fudge! you've heard that foolish story of the haunted room, and you
have dreamed the whole thing!"

"I tell you I didn't! I saw it! Don't I know?"

"I say you dreamed it! There is no such living woman here; and as for a
ghost, that is all folly. And I must beg, Miss Black, that you will not
distress Miss Day by telling her this strange dream of yours. She has
never heard the ridiculous story of the haunted room, and, as she lives
here in solitude, I would not like her to hear of it."

"Oh, I will say nothing to disquiet Miss Day; but it was no dream. It
was real, if there is any reality in this world."

There was no more said. They continued to look for the ring, but in
vain. Dorcas Knight, however, assured her guest that it should be found
and returned, and that breakfast waited. Whereupon Capitola went down
to the parlor, where she found Clara awaiting her presence to give her
a kindly greeting.

"Mr. Le Noir never gets up until very late, and so we do not wait for
him," said Dorcas Knight, as she took her seat at the head of the table
and signed to the young girls to gather around it.

After breakfast Capitola, promising to come again soon, and inviting
Clara to return her visit, took leave of her entertainers and set out
for home.

"Thank heaven! I have got her off in time and safety!" muttered Dorcas
Knight, in triumph.




CHAPTER VII.

CAP'S RETURN.


     Must I give way and room for your rash choler?
     Shall I be frighted when a madman stares?
     Go show your slaves how choleric you are!
     And make your bondsmen tremble! I'll not blench!

                                      --SHAKESPEARE.


It happened that about sunrise that morning Wool awoke In the cellar,
and remembered that on the night previous his master had commanded him
to sally forth in the storm end seek his young mistress, and had
forbidden him, on pain of broken bones, to return without bringing her
safe. Therefore, what did the honest soul do but steal out to the
stables, saddle and mount a horse and ride back to the house just as
Mrs. Condiment had come out into the poultry yard to get eggs for
breakfast.

"Missus Compliment, ma'am, I'se been out all night in search of Miss
Caterpillar, without finding of her. Is she come back, ma'am?"

"Lor', no, indeed, Wool! I'm very anxious, and the major is taking on
dreadful! But I hope she is safe in some house. But, poor Wool, you
must have had a dreadful time out all night in the storm looking for
her!"

"Awful! Missus Compliment, ma'am, awful!" said Wool.

"Indeed, I know you had, poor creature, come in and get some warm
breakfast," said the kind old lady.

"I dare'nt, Missus Compliment. Old marse forbid me to show my face to
him until I fotch Miss Caterpillar home safe," said Wool, turning his
horse's head as if to go. In doing so he saw Capitola galloping toward
the house, and with an exclamation of joy pointed her out to the old
lady and rode on to meet her.

"Oh, Miss Caterpillar, I'se so glad I've found you! I'se done been out
looking for you all night long!" exclaimed Wool, as he met her.

Capitola pulled up her horse and surveyed the speaker with a comical
expression, saying:

"Been out all night looking for me! Well, I must say you seem in a fine
state of preservation for a man who has been exposed to the storm all
night. You have not a wet thread on you."

"Lor', miss, it rained till one o'clock, and then the wind riz and
blowed till six and blowed me dry," said Wool, as he sprang off his
horse and helped his young mistress to alight.

Then, instead of taking the beasts to the stable, he tied them to the
tree and hurried into the house and upstairs to his master's room, to
apprise him of the return of the lost sheep, Capitola.

Old Hurricane was lying awake, tossing, groaning and grumbling with
anxiety.

On seeing Wool enter he deliberately raised up and seized a heavy iron
candlestick and held it ready to hurl at the head of that worthy, whom
he thus addressed:

"Ah, you have come, you atrocious villain! You know the conditions. If
you have dared to show your face without bringing your young mistress--"

"Please, marse, I wur out looking for her all night."

"Have you brought her?" thundered Old Hurricane, rising up.

"Please, marse, yes, sir; I done found her and brought her home safe."

"Send her up to me," said Old Hurricane, sinking back with a sigh of
infinite relief.

Wool flew to do his bidding.

In five minutes Capitola entered her uncle's chamber.

Now, Old Hurricane had spent a night of almost intolerable anxiety upon
his favorite's account, bewailing her danger and praying for her safety
but no sooner did he see her enter his chamber safe and sound and
smiling than indignation quite mastered him, and jumping out of his bed
in his nightgown, he made a dash straight at Capitola.

Now, had Capitola run there is little doubt but that, in the blindness
of his fury, he would have caught and beat her then and there. But Cap
saw him coming, drew up her tiny form, folded her arms and looked him
directly in the face.

This stopped him; but, like a mettlesome old horse suddenly pulled up
in full career, he stamped and reared and plunged with fury, and foamed
and spluttered and stuttered before he could get words out.

"What do you mean, you vixen, by standing there and popping your great
eyes out at me? Are you going to bite, you tigress? What do you mean by
facing me at all?" he roared, shaking his fist within an inch of
Capitola's little pug nose.

"I am here because you sent for me, sir," was Cap's unanswerable
rejoinder.

"Here because I sent for you! humph! humph! humph! and come dancing and
smiling into my room as if you had not kept me awake all the live-long
night--yes, driven me within an inch of brain fever! Not that I cared
for you, you limb of Old Nick! not that I cared for you, except to wish
with all my heart and soul that something or other had happened to you,
you vagrant! Where did you spend the night, you lunatic?"

"At the old Hidden House, where I went to make a call on my new
neighbor, Miss Day, and where I was caught in the storm."

"I wish to heaven you had been caught in a man-trap and had all your
limbs broken, you--you--you--Oh!" ejaculated Old Hurricane, turning
short and trotting up and down the room. Presently he stopped before
Capitola and rapping his cane upon the floor, demanded:

"Who did you see at that accursed place, you--you--infatuated maniac?"

"Miss Day, Mr. Le Noir, Mrs. Knight and a man servant, name unknown,"
coolly replied Cap.

"And the head demon, where was he?"

"Uncle, if by the 'head demon' you mean Old Nick, I think it quite
likely, from present appearances, that he passed the night at Hurricane
Hall."

"I mean--Colonel Le Noir!" exclaimed Old Hurricane, as if the name
choked him.

"Oh! I understood that he had that day left home."

"Umph! Oh! Ah! That accounts for it; that accounts for it," muttered
Old Hurricane to himself; then, seeing that Cap was wistfully regarding
his face and attending to his muttered phrases, he broke out upon her
with:

"Get out of this--this--this--" He meant to say "get out of this
house," but a sure instinct warned him that if he should speak thus
Capitola, unlike the other members of his household, would take him at
his word.

"Get out of this room, you vagabond!" he vociferated.

And Cap, with a curtsey and a kiss of her hand, danced away.

Old Hurricane stamped up and down the floor, gesticulating like a
demoniac and vociferating:

"She'll get herself burked, kidnapped, murdered or what not! I'm sure
she will! I know it! I feel it! It's no use to order her not to go; she
will be sure to disobey, and go ten times as often for the very reason
that she was forbidden. What the demon shall I do? Wool! Wool! you
brimstone villain, come here!" he roared, going to the bell-rope and
pulling it until he broke it down.

Wool ran in with his hair bristling, his teeth chattering and his eyes
starting.

"Come here to me, you varlet! Now, listen: You are to keep a sharp
look-out after your young mistress. Whenever she rides abroad you are
to mount a horse and ride after her, and keep your eyes open, for if
you once lose sight of her, you knave, do you know what I shall do to
you, eh?"

"N--no, marse," stammered Wool, pale with apprehension.

"I should cut your eyelids off to improve your vision! Look to it, sir,
for I shall keep my word! And now come and help me to dress," concluded
Old Hurricane.

Wool, with chattering teeth, shaking knees and trembling fingers,
assisted his master in his morning toilet, meditating the while whether
it were not better to avoid impending dangers by running away.

And, in fact, between his master and his mistress, Wool had a hot time
of it. The weather, after the storm had cleared the atmosphere, was
delightful, and Cap rode out that very day. Poor Wool kept his eyeballs
metaphorically "skinned," for fear they should be treated literally
so--held his eyes wide open, lest Old Hurricane should keep his word
and make it impossible for him ever to shut them.

When Cap stole out, mounted her horse and rode away, in five minutes
from the moment of starting she heard a horse's hoofs behind her, and
presently saw Wool gallop to her side.

At first Cap bore this good-humoredly enough, only saying:

"Go home, Wool, I don't want you; I had much rather ride alone."

To which the groom replied:

"It is old marse's orders, miss, as I should wait on you."

Capitola's spirit rebelled against this; and, suddenly turning upon her
attendant, she indignantly exclaimed:

"Wool, I don't want you, sir; I insist upon being left alone, and I
order you to go home, sir!"

Upon this Wool burst into tears and roared.

Much surprised, Capitola inquired of him what the matter was.

For some time Wool could only reply by sobbing, but when he was able to
articulate he blubbered forth:

"It's nuf to make anybody go put his head under a meat-ax, so it is!"

"What is the matter, Wool?" again inquired Capitola.

"How'd you like to have your eyelids cut off?" howled Wool, indignantly.

"What?" inquired Capitola.

"Yes; I axes how'd you like to have your eyelids cut off? Case that's
what ole marse t'reatens to do long o' me, if I don't follow arter you
and keep you in sight. And now you forbids of me to do it,
and--and--and I'll go and put my neck right underneaf a meat-ax!"

Now, Capitola was really kind-hearted, and, well knowing the despotic
temper of her guardian, she pitied Wool, and after a little hesitation
she said:

"Wool, so your old master says if you don't keep your eyes on me he'll
cut your eyelids off?"

"Ye--ye--yes, miss," sobbed Wool.

"Did he say if you didn't listen to me he'd cut your ears off?"

"N--n--no, miss."

"Did he swear if you didn't talk to me he'd cut out your tongue out?"

"N--n--no, miss."

"Well, now, stop howling and listen to me! Since, at the peril of your
eyelids, you are obliged to keep me in sight, I give you leave to ride
just within view of me, but no nearer, and you are never to let me see
or hear you, if you can help it for I like to be alone."

"I'll do anything in this world for peace, Miss Caterpillar," said poor
Wool.

And upon this basis the affair was finally settled. And no doubt
Capitola owed much of her personal safety to the fact that Wool kept
his eyes open.

While these scenes were going on at Hurricane Hall, momentous events
were taking place elsewhere, which require another chapter for their
development.




CHAPTER VIII.

ANOTHER MYSTERY AT THE HIDDEN HOUSE.


    "Hark! what a shriek was that of fear intense,
     Of horror and amazement!
     What fearful struggle to the door and thence
     With mazy doubles to the grated casement!"


An hour after the departure of Capitola, Colonel Le Noir returned to
the Hidden House and learned from his man David that upon the preceding
evening a young girl of whose name he was ignorant had sought shelter
from the storm and passed the night at the mansion.

Now, Colonel Le Noir was extremely jealous of receiving strangers under
his roof, never, during his short stay at the Hidden House, going out
into company, lest he should be obliged in return to entertain
visitors. And when he learned that a strange girl had spent the night
beneath his roof, he frowningly directed that Dorcas should be sent to
him.

When his morose manager made her appearance he harshly demanded the
name of the young woman she had dared to receive beneath his roof.

Now, whether there is any truth in the theory of magnetism or not, it
is certain that Dorcas Knight--stern, harsh, resolute woman that she
was toward all others--became as submissive as a child in the presence
of Colonel Le Noir.

At his command she gave him all the information he required, not even
withholding the fact of Capitola's strange story of having seen the
apparition of the pale-faced lady in her chamber, together with the
subsequent discovery of the loss of her ring.

Colonel Le Noir sternly reprimanded his domestic manager for her
neglect of his orders and dismissed her from his presence.

The remainder of the day was passed by him in moody thought. That
evening he summoned his son to a private conference in the parlor--an
event that happily delivered poor Clara Day from their presence at her
fireside.

That night Clara, dreading lest at the end of their interview they
might return to her society, retired early to her chamber where she sat
reading until a late hour, when she went to bed and found transient
forgetfulness of trouble in sleep.

She did not know how long she had slept when she was suddenly and
terribly awakened by a woman's shriek sounding from the room
immediately overhead, in which, upon the night previous, Capitola had
slept.

Starting up in bed, Clara listened.

The shriek was repeated--prolonged and piercing--and was accompanied by
a muffled sound of struggling that shook the ceiling overhead.

Instinctively springing from her bed, Clara threw on her dressing-gown
and flew to the door; but just as she turned the latch to open it she
heard a bolt slipped on the outside and found herself a prisoner in her
own chamber.

Appalled, she stood and listened.

Presently there came a sound of footsteps on the stairs and a heavy
muffled noise as of some dead weight being dragged down the staircase
and along the passage. Then she heard the hall door cautiously opened
and shut. And, finally, she distinguished the sound of wheels rolling
away from the house.

Unable longer to restrain herself, she rapped and beat upon her own
door, crying aloud for deliverance.

Presently the bolt was withdrawn, the door jerked open and Dorcas
Knight, with a face of horror, stood before her.

"What is the matter! Who was that screaming? In the name of mercy, what
has happened?" cried Clara, shrinking in abhorrence from the ghastly
woman.

"Hush! it is nothing! There were two tomcats screaming and fighting in
the attic, and they fought all the way downstairs, rolling over and
over each other. I've just turned them out," faltered the woman,
shivering as with an ague fit.

"What--what was that--that went away in the carriage?" asked Clara
shuddering.

"The colonel, gone to meet the early stage at Tip-Top, to take him to
Washington. He would have taken leave of you last night, but when he
came to your parlor you had left it."

"But--but--there is blood upon your hand, Dorcas Knight!" cried Clara,
shaking with horror.

"I--I know; the cats scratched me as I put them out," stammered the
stern woman, trembling almost as much as Clara herself.

These answers failed to satisfy the young girl, who shrank in terror
and loathing from that woman's presence, and sought the privacy of her
own chamber, murmuring:

"What has happened? What has been done? Oh, heaven! oh, heaven! have
mercy on us! some dreadful deed has been done in this house to-night!"

There was no more sleep for Clara. She heard the clock strike every
hour from one to six in the morning, when she arose and dressed herself
and went from her room, expecting to see upon the floor and walls and
upon the faces of the household signs of some dreadful tragedy enacted
upon the previous night.

But all things were as usual--the same dark, gloomy and neglected
magnificence about the rooms and passages, the same reserved, sullen
and silent aspect about the persons.

Dorcas Knight presided as usual at the head of the breakfast table, and
Craven Le Noir at the foot. Clara sat in her accustomed seat at the
side, midway between them.

Clara shuddered in taking her cup of coffee from the hand of Dorcas,
and declined the wing of fowl that Craven Le Noir would have put upon
her plate.

Not a word was said upon the subject of the mystery of the preceding
night until Craven Le Noir, without venturing to meet the eyes of the
young girl, said:

"You look very pale, Clara."

"Miss Day was frightened by the cats last night," said Dorcas.

Clara answered never a word. The ridiculous story essayed to be palmed
off upon her credulity in explanation of the night's mystery had not
gained an instant's belief.

She knew that the cry that had startled her from sleep had burst in
strong agony from human lips!

That the helpless weight she had heard dragged down the stairs and
along the whole length of the passage was some dead or insensible human
form!

That the blood she had seen upon the hand of Dorcas Knight was--oh,
heaven! her mind shrank back appalled with horror at the thought which
she dare not entertain! She could only shudder, pray and trust in God.




CHAPTER IX.

CAP FREES THE CAPTIVE.


     Hold, daughter! I do spy a kind of hope,
     Which craves as desperate an execution
     As that is desperate, which we would prevent
     And if thou darest, I'll give thee remedy!
     Hold, then! go home, be merry, give consent
     To marry Paris! Wednesday is to-morrow!

                                 --Shakespeare.


As the autumn weather was now very pleasant, Capitola continued her
rides, and, without standing on ceremony, repeated her visit to the
Hidden House. She was, as usual, followed by Wool, who kept at a
respectful distance, and who during his mistress' visit, remained
outside in attendance upon the horses.

Capitola luckily was in no danger of encountering Colonel Le Noir, who,
since the night of the mysterious tragedy, had not returned home, but
had gone to and settled in his winter quarters in Washington city.

But she again met Craven Le Noir, who, contrary to his usual custom of
accompanying his father upon his annual migrations to the metropolis,
had, upon this occasion, remained home in close attendance upon his
cousin, the wealthy orphan.

Capitola found Clara the same sweet, gentle and patient girl, with this
difference only, that her youthful brow was now overshadowed by a heavy
trouble which could not wholly be explained by her state of orphanage
or her sorrow for the dead--it was too full of anxiety, gloom and
terror to have reference to the past alone.

Capitola saw all this and, trusting in her own powers, would have
sought the confidence of the poor girl, with the view of soothing her
sorrows and helping her out of her difficulties; but Miss Day, candid
upon all other topics, was strangely reserved upon this subject, and
Capitola, with all her eccentricity, was too delicate to seek to
intrude upon the young mourner's sanctuary of grief.

But a crisis was fast approaching which rendered further concealment
difficult and dangerous, and which threw Clara for protection upon the
courage, presence of mind and address of Capitola.

Since Clara Day had parted with her betrothed and had taken up her
residence beneath her guardian's roof, she had regularly written both
to Traverse at St. Louis and to his mother at Staunton. But she had
received no reply from either mother or son. And months had passed,
filling the mind of Clara with anxiety upon their account.

She did not for one moment doubt their constancy. Alas! it required but
little perspicacity on her part to perceive that the letters on either
side must have been intercepted by the Le Noirs--father and son.

Her greatest anxiety was lest Mrs. Rocke and Traverse, failing to hear
from her, should imagine that she had forgotten them. She longed to
assure them that she had not; but how should she do this? It was
perfectly useless to write and send the letter to the post-office by
any servant at the Hidden House, for such a letter was sure to find its
way--not into the mail bags, but into the pocket of Colonel Le Noir.

Finally, Clara resolved to entrust honest Cap with so much of her story
as would engage her interest and co-operation, and then confide to her
care a letter to be placed in the post-office. Clara had scarcely come
to this resolution ere, as we said, an imminent crisis obliged her to
seek the further aid of Capitola.

Craven Le Noir had never abated his unacceptable attentions to the
orphan heiress. Day by day, on the contrary, to Clara's unspeakable
distress, these attentions grew more pointed and alarming.

At first she had received them coldly and repulsed them gently; but as
they grew more ardent and devoted she became colder and more reserved,
until at length, by maintaining a freezing hauteur at variance with her
usually sweet temper, she sought to repel the declaration that was ever
ready to fall from his lips.

But, notwithstanding her evident abhorrence of his suit, Craven Le Noir
persisted in his purpose.

And so one morning he entered the parlor and, finding Clara alone, he
closed the door, seated himself beside her, took her hand and made a
formal declaration of love and proposal of marriage, urging his suit
with all the eloquence of which he was master.

Now, Clara Day, a Christian maiden, a recently bereaved orphan and an
affianced bride, had too profound a regard for her duties toward God,
her father's will and her betrothed husband's rights to treat this
attempted invasion of her faith in any other than the most deliberate,
serious and dignified manner.

"I am very sorry, Mr. Le Noir, that it has at length come to this. I
thought I had conducted myself in such a manner as totally to
discourage any such purpose as this which you have just honored me by
disclosing. Now, however, that the subject may be set at rest forever,
I feel bound to announce to you that my hand is already plighted," said
Clara, gravely.

"But, my fairest and dearest love, your little hand cannot be plighted
without the consent of your guardian, who would never countenance the
impudent pretensions which I understand to be made by the low-born
young man to whom I presume you allude. That engagement was a very
foolish affair, my dear girl, and only to be palliated on the ground of
your extreme childishness at the time of its being made. You must
forget the whole matter, my sweetest love, and prepare yourself to
listen to a suit more worthy of your social position," said Craven Le
Noir, attempting to steal his arm around her waist.

Clara coldly repelled him, saying:

"I am at a loss to understand, Mr. Le Noir, what act of levity on my
part has given you the assurance to offer me this affront!"

"Do you call it an affront, fair cousin, that I lay my hand and heart
and fortune at your feet?"

"I have called your act, sir, by its gentlest name. Under the
circumstances I might well have called it an outrage!"

"And what may be those circumstances that convert an act
of--adoration--into an outrage, my sweet cousin?"

"Sir, you know them well. I have not concealed from you or my guardian
that I am the affianced bride of Doctor Rocke, nor that our troth was
plighted with the full consent of my dear father," said Clara, gravely.

"Tut, tut, tut, my charming cousin, that was mere child's play--a
school-girl's romantic whim. Do not dream that your guardian will ever
permit you to throw yourself away upon that low-bred fellow."

"Mr. Le Noir, if you permit yourself to address me in this manner, I
shall feel compelled to retire. I cannot remain here to have my honored
father's will and memory, and the rights of my betrothed, insulted in
my person!" said Clara, rising to leave the room.

"No--stay! forgive me, Clara! pardon me, gentlest girl, if, in my great
love for you, I grow impatient of any other claim upon your heart,
especially from such an unworthy quarter. Clara, you are a mere child,
full of generous but romantic sentiments and dangerous impulses. You
require extra vigilance and firm exercise of authority on the part of
your guardian to save you from certain self-destruction. And some day,
sweet girl, you will thank us for preserving you from the horrors of
such a mesalliance," said Craven Le Noir, gently detaining her.

"I tell you, Mr. Le Noir, that your manner of speaking of my betrothal
is equally insulting to myself, Doctor Rocke and my dear father, who
never would have plighted our hands had he considered our prospective
marriage a mesalliance."

"Nor do I suppose he ever did plight your hands--while in his right
senses!"

"Oh, sir, this has been discussed before. I beg of you to let the
subject drop forever, remembering that I hold myself sacredly betrothed
to Traverse Rocke, and ready when, at my legal majority, he shall claim
me--to redeem my plighted faith by becoming his wife."

"Clara, this is madness! It must not be endured, nor shall not! I have
hitherto sought to win your hand by showing you the great extent of my
love; but be careful how you scorn that love or continue to taunt me
with the mention of an unworthy rival. For, though I use gentle means,
should I find them fail of their purpose, I shall know how to avail
myself of harsher ones."

Clara disdained reply, except by permitting her clear eye to pass over
him from head to foot with an expression of consuming scorn that
scathed him to the quick.

"I tell you to be careful, Clara Day! I come to you armed with the
authority of your legal guardian, my father, Colonel Le Noir, who will
forestall your foolish purpose of throwing yourself and your fortune
away upon a beggar, even though to do so he strain his authority and
coerce you into taking a more suitable companion," said Craven Le Noir,
rising impatiently and pacing the floor. But no sooner had he spoken
these words than he saw how greatly he had injured his cause and
repented them. Going to Clara and intercepting her as she was about to
leave the room, he gently took her hand and, dropping his eyes to the
floor with a look of humility and penitence, he said:

"Clara, my sweet cousin, I know not how sufficiently to express my
sorrow at having been hurried into harshness toward you--toward you
whom I love more than my own soul, and whom it is the fondest wish of
my heart to call wife. I can only excuse myself for this or any future
extravagance of manner by my excessive love for you and the jealousy
that maddens my brain at the bare mention of my rival. That is it,
sweet girl. Can you forgive one whom love and jealousy have hurried
into frenzy?"

"Mr. Le Noir, the Bible enjoins me to forgive injuries. I shall
endeavor, when I can, to forgive you, though for the present my heart
is still burning under the sense of wrongs done toward myself and those
whom I love and esteem, and the only way in which you can make me
forget what has just passed will be--never to repeat the offence." And
with these words Clara bent her head and passed from the room.

Could she have seen the malignant scowl and gesture with which Craven
Le Noir followed her departure, she would scarcely have trusted his
expressions of penitence.

Lifting his arm above his head he fiercely shook his fist after her and
exclaimed:

"Go on, insolent girl, and imagine that you have humbled me; but the
tune shall be changed by this day month, for before that time whatever
power the law gives the husband over his wife and her property shall be
mine over you and your possessions. Then we will see who shall be
insolent; then we shall see whose proud blue eye shall day after day
dare to look up and rebuke me. Oh: to get you in my power, my girl! Not
that I love you, moon-faced creature, but I want your possessions,
which is quite as strong an incentive."

Then he fell into thought. He had an ugly way of scowling and biting
his nails when deeply brooding over any subject, and now he walked
slowly up and down the floor with his head upon his breast, his brows
drawn over his nose and his four fingers between his teeth, gnawing
away like a wild beast, while he muttered:

"She is not like the other one; she has more sense and strength; she
will give us more trouble. We must continue to try fair means a little
longer. It will be difficult, for I am not accustomed to control my
passions, even for a purpose--yet, penitence and love are the only
cards to be played to this insolent girl for the present.
Afterwards!--" Here his soliloquy muttered itself into silence, his
head sank deeper upon his breast, his brows gathered lower over his
nose and he walked and gnawed his nails like a hungry wolf.

The immediate result of this cogitation was that he went into the
library and wrote off a letter to his father, telling him all that had
transpired between himself and Clara, and asking his further counsel.

He dispatched this letter and waited an answer.

During the week that ensued before he could hope to hear from Colonel
Le Noir, he treated Clara with marked deference and respect.

And Clara, on her part, did not tax his forbearance by appearing in his
presence oftener than she could possibly avoid.

At the end of the week the expected letter came. It was short and to
the purpose. It ran thus:

                                           Washington, Dec. 14, 18--

     MY DEAR CRAVEN--You are losing time. Do not hope to win the girl
     by the means you propose. She is too acute to be deceived, and
     too firm to be persuaded. We must not hesitate to use the only
     possible means by which we can coerce her into compliance. I shall
     follow this letter by the first stage-coach, and before the
     beginning of the next month Clara Day shall be your wife.

                                            Your Affectionate Father,

                                            GABRIEL LE NOIR,

                                            C. LE NOIR, ESQ., Hidden House.


When Craven Le Noir read this letter his thin, white face and deep-set
eyes lighted up with triumph. But Craven Le Noir huzzaed before he was
out of the woods. He had not calculated upon Capitola.

The next day Colonel Le Noir came to the Hidden House. He arrived late
in the afternoon.

After refreshing himself with a bath, a change of clothing and a light
luncheon, he went to the library, where he passed the remainder of the
evening in a confidential conference with his son. Their supper was
ordered to be served up to them there; and for that evening Clara had
the comfort of taking her tea alone.

The result of this conference was that the next morning, after
breakfast, Colonel Le Noir sent for Miss Day to come to him in the
library.

When Clara, nerving her gentle heart to resist a sinful tyranny,
entered the library, Colonel Le Noir arose and courteously handed her
to a chair, and then, seating himself beside her, said:

"My dear Clara, the responsibilities of a guardian are always very
onerous, and his duties not always very agreeable, especially when his
ward is the sole heiress of a large property and the object of pursuit
by fortune hunters and maneuverers, male and female. When such is the
case, the duties and responsibilities of the guardian are augmented a
hundredfold."

"Sir, this cannot be so in my case, since you are perfectly aware that
my destiny is, humanly speaking, already decided," replied Clara, with
gentle firmness.

"As--how, I pray you, my fair ward?"

"You cannot possibly be at a loss to understand, sir. You have been
already advised that I am betrothed to Doctor Rocke, who will claim me
as his wife upon the day that I shall complete my twenty-first year."

"Miss Clara Day! no more of that, I beseech you! It is folly,
perversity, frenzy! But, thanks to the wisdom of legislators, the law
very properly invests the guardian with great latitude of discretionary
power of the person and property of his ward--to be used, of course,
for that ward's best interest. And thus, my dear Clara, it is my duty,
while holding this power over you, to exercise it for preventing the
possibility of your ever--either now or at any future time, throwing
yourself away upon a mere adventurer. To do this, I must provide you
with a suitable husband. My son, Mr. Craven Le Noir, has long loved and
wooed her. He is a young man of good reputation and fair prospects. I
entirely approve his suit, and as your guardian I command you to
receive him for your destined husband."

"Colonel Le Noir, this is no time 'for bated breath and whispered
humbleness.' I am but a simple girl of seventeen, but I understand your
purpose and that of your son just as well as though I were an old man
of the world. You are the fortune hunters and maneuverers! It is the
fortune of the wealthy heiress and friendless orphan that you are in
pursuit of! But that fortune, like my hand and heart, is already
promised to one I love; and, to speak very plainly to you, I would die
ere I would disappoint him or wed your son," said Clara, with
invincible firmness.

"Die, girl! There are worse things than death in the world!" said
Colonel Le Noir, with a threatening glare.

"I know it! and one of the worst things in the world would be a union
with a man I could neither esteem nor even endure!" exclaimed Clara.

Colonel Le Noir saw that there was no use in further disguise. Throwing
off, then, the last restraints of good breeding, he said:

"And there are still more terrible evils for a woman than to be the
wife of one she 'can neither esteem nor endure!'"

Clara shook her head in proud scorn.

"There are evils to escape which such a woman would go down upon her
bended knees to be made the wife of such a man."

Clara's gentle eyes flashed with indignation.

"Infamous!" she cried. "You slander all womanhood in my person!"

"The evils to which I allude are--comprised in--a life of dishonor!"
hissed Le Noir through his set teeth.

"This to my father's daughter!" exclaimed Clara, growing white as death
at the insult.  "Aye, my girl! It is time we understood each other. You
are in my power, and I intend to coerce you to my will!"

These words, accompanied as they were by a look that left no doubt upon
her mind that he would carry out his purpose to any extremity, so
appalled the maiden's soul that she stood like one suddenly struck with
catalepsy.

The unscrupulous wretch then approached her and said:

"I am now going to the county seat to take out a marriage license for
you and my son. I shall have the carriage at the door by six o'clock
this evening, when I desire that you shall be ready to accompany us to
church, where a clerical friend will be in attendance to perform the
marriage ceremony. Clara Day, if you would save your honor, look to
this!"

All this time Clara had neither moved nor spoken nor breathed. She had
stood cold, white and still as if turned to stone.

"Let no vain hope of escape delude your mind. The doors will be kept
locked; the servants are all warned not to suffer you to leave the
house. Look to it, Clara, for the rising of another sun shall see my
purpose accomplished!"

And with these words the atrocious wretch left the room. His departure
took off the dreadful spell that had paralyzed Clara's life; her blood
began to circulate again; breath came to her lungs and speech to her
lips.

"Oh, Lord," she cried, "oh, Lord, who delivered the children from the
fiery furnace, deliver the poor handmaiden now from her terrible foes!"

While she thus prayed she saw upon the writing table before her a small
penknife. Her cheeks flushed and her eyes brightened as she seized it.

"This! this!" she said, "this small instrument is sufficient to save
me! Should the worst ensue, I know where to find the carotid artery,
and even such a slight puncture as my timorous hand could make would
set my spirit free! Oh, my father! oh, my father! you little thought
when you taught your Clara the mysteries of anatomy to what a fearful
use she would put your lessons! And would it be right? Oh, would it be
right? One may desire death, but can anything justify suicide? Oh,
Father in heaven, guide me! guide me!" cried Clara, falling upon her
knees and sobbing forth this prayer of agony.

Soon approaching footsteps drew her attention. And she had only time to
rise and put back her damp, disheveled hair from her tear-stained face
before the door opened and Dorcas Knight appeared and said:

"Here is this young woman come again."

"I declare, Miss Day," said Cap, laughing, "you have the most
accomplished, polite and agreeable servants here that I ever met with!
Think with what a courteous welcome this woman received me--' Here you
are again!' she said. 'You'll come once too often for your own good,
and that I tell you.' I answered that every time I came it appeared to
be once too often for her liking. She rejoined, 'The colonel has come
home, and he don't like company, so I advise you to make your call a
short one.' I assured her that I should measure the length of my visit
by the breadth of my will--But good angels, Clara! what is the matter?
You look worse than death!" exclaimed Capitola, noticing for the first
time the pale, wild, despairing face of her companion.

Clara clasped her hands as if in prayer and raised her eyes with an
appealing gaze into Capitola's face.

"Tell me, dear Clara, what is the matter? How can I help you? What
shall I do for you?" said our heroine.

Before trusting herself to reply, Clara gazed wistfully into Capitola's
eyes, as though she would have read her soul.

Cap did not blanch nor for an instant avert her own honest, gray orbs;
she let Clara gaze straight down through those clear windows of the
soul into the very soul itself, where she found only truth, honesty and
courage.

The scrutiny seemed to be satisfactory for Clara soon took the hand of
her visitor and said:

"Capitola, I will tell you. It is a horrid, horrid story, but you shall
know all. Come with me to my chamber."

Cap pressed the hand that was so confidingly placed in hers and
accompanied Clara to her room, where, after the latter had taken the
precaution to lock the door, the two girls sat down for a confidential
talk.

Clara, like the author of Robin Hood's Barn, "began at the beginning"
of her story, and told everything--her betrothal to Traverse Rocke; the
sudden death of her father; the decision of the Orphans' Court; the
departure of Traverse for the far West; her arrival at the Hidden
House; the interruption of all her epistolary correspondence with her
betrothed and his mother; the awful and mysterious occurrences of that
dreadful night when she suspected some heinous crime had been
committed; and finally of the long, unwelcome suit of Craven Le Noir
and the present attempt to force him upon her as a husband.

Cap listened very calmly to this story, showing very little sympathy,
for there was not a bit of sentimentality about our Cap.

"And now," whispered Clara, while the pallor of horror overspread her
face, "by threatening me with a fate worse than death, they would drive
me to marry Craven Le Noir!"

"Yes, I know I would!" said Cap, as if speaking to herself, but by her
tone and manner clothing these simple words in the very keenest sarcasm.

"What would you do, Capitola?" asked Clara, raising her tearful eyes to
the last speaker.

"Marry Mr. Craven Le Noir and thank him, too!" said Cap. Then, suddenly
changing her tone, she exclaimed:

"I wish--oh! how I wish it was only me in your place--that it was only
me they were trying to marry against my will!"

"What would you do?" asked Clara, earnestly.

"What would I do? Oh! wouldn't I make them know the difference between
their Sovereign Lady and Sam the Lackey? If I had been in your place
and that dastard Le Noir had said to me what he said to you, I do
believe I should have stricken him down with the lightning of my eyes!
But what shall you do, my poor Clara?"

"Alas! alas! see here! this is my last resort!" replied the unhappy
girl, showing the little pen-knife.

"Put it away from you! put it away from you!" exclaimed Capitola
earnestly; "suicide is never, never, never justifiable! God is the Lord
of life and death! He is the only judge whether a mortal's sorrows are
to be relieved by death, and when He does not Himself release you, He
means that you shall live and endure! That proves that suicide is never
right, let the Roman pagans have said and done what they pleased. So no
more of that! There are enough other ways of escape for you!"

"Ah! what are they? You would give me life by teaching me how to
escape!" said Clara, fervently.

"The first and most obvious means that suggests itself to my mind,"
said Cap, "is to--run away!"

"Ah! that is impossible. The servants are warned; the doors are all
locked; I am watched!"

"Then the next plan is equally obvious. Consent to go with them to the
church, and when you get there, denounce them and claim the protection
of the clergyman!"

"Ah! dear girl, that is still more impracticable. The officiating
clergyman is their friend, and even if I could consent to act a
deceitful part, and should go to church as if to marry Craven and upon
getting there denounce him, instead of receiving the protection of the
clergyman I should be restored to the hands of my legal guardian and be
brought back here to meet a fate worse than death," said Clara, in a
tone of despair.

Capitola did not at once reply, but fell into deep thought, which
lasted many minutes. Then, speaking more gravely than she had spoken
before, she said:

"There is but one plan of escape left, your only remaining chance, and
that full of danger!"

"Oh, why should I fear danger? What evil can befall me so great as that
which now threatens me?" said Clara.

"This plan requires on your part great courage, self-control and
presence of mind."

"Teach me! teach me, dear Capitola. I will be an apt pupil!"

"I have thought it all out, and will tell you my plan. It is now eleven
o'clock in the forenoon, and the carriage is to come for you at six
this evening, I believe?"

"Yes! yes!"

"Then you have seven hours in which to save yourself! And this is my
plan: First, Clara, you must change clothes with me, giving me your
suit of mourning and putting on my riding habit, hat and veil! Then,
leaving me here in your place, you are to pull the veil down closely
over your face and walk right out of the house! No one will speak to
you, for they never do to me. When you have reached the park, spring
upon my horse and put whip to him for the village of Tip Top. My
servant, Wool, will ride after you, but not speak to you or approach
near enough to discover your identity--for he has been ordered by his
master to keep me in sight, and he has been forbidden by his mistress
to intrude upon her privacy. You will reach Tip Top by three o'clock,
when the Staunton stage passes through. You may then reveal yourself to
Wool, give my horse into his charge, get into the coach and start for
Staunton. Upon reaching that place, put yourself under the protection
of your friends, the two old physicians, and get them to prosecute your
guardian for cruelty and flagrant abuse of authority. Be cool, firm and
alert, and all will be well!"

Clara, who had listened to this little Napoleon in petticoats with
breathless interest, now clasped her hands in a wild ecstasy of joy and
exclaimed:

"I will try it! Oh, Capitola I will try it! Heaven bless you for the
counsel!"

"Be quick, then; change your dress! provide yourself with a purse of
money, and I will give you particular directions how to make a short
cut for Tip Top. Ha, ha, ha!, when they come for the bride she will be
already rolling on the turnpike between Tip Top and Staunton!"

"But you! Oh, you, my generous deliverer?"

"I shall dress myself in your clothes and stay here in your place to
keep you from being missed, so as to give you full time to make your
escape."

"But--you will place yourself in the enraged lion's jaws! You will
remain in the power of two men who know neither justice nor mercy! Who,
in their love or their hate, fear neither God nor man! Oh, Capitola!
how can I take an advantage of your generosity, and leave you here in
such extreme peril? Capitola, I cannot do it!"

"Well, then, I believe, you must be anxious to marry Craven Le Noir!"

"Oh, Capitola!"

"Well, if you are not, hurry and get ready; there is no time to be
lost!"

"But you! but you, my generous friend!"

"Never mind me. I shall be safe enough! I am not afraid of the Le
Noirs. Bless their wigs; I should like to see them make me blanch. On
the contrary, I desire above all things to be pitted against these two!
How I shall enjoy their disappointment and rage! Oh, it will be a rare
frolic!"

While Capitola was speaking she was also busily engaged doing. She went
softly to the door and turned the key in the lock, to prevent any one
from looking through the keyhole, murmuring as she did it:

"I wasn't brought up among the detective policemen for nothing!"

Then she began to take off her riding-habit. Quickly she dressed Clara,
superintending all the details of her disguise as carefully as though
she were the costumer of a new debutante. When Clara was dressed she
was so nearly of the same size and shape of Capitola that from behind
no one would have suspected her identity.

"There, Clara! tuck your light hair out of the way; pull your cap over
your eyes; gather your veil down close; draw up your figure; throw back
your head; walk with a little springy sway and swagger, as if you
didn't care a damson for anybody, and--there! I declare no one could
tell you from me!" exclaimed Capitola in delight, as she completed the
disguise and the instructions of Clara.

Then Capitola dressed herself in Clara's deep mourning robes. And then
the two girls sat down to compose themselves for a few minutes, while
Capitola gave new and particular directions for Clara's course and
conduct, so as to insure as far as human foresight could do it, the
safe termination of her perilous adventure. By the time they had ended
their talk the hall clock struck twelve.

"There! it is full time you should be off! Be calm, be cool, be firm,
and God bless you, Clara! Dear girl! if I were only a young man I would
deliver you by the strength of my own arms, without subjecting you to
inconvenience or danger!" said Cap, gallantly, as she led Clara to the
chamber door and carefully gathered her thick veil in close folds over
her face, so as entirely to conceal it.

"Oh, may the Lord in heaven bless and preserve and reward you, my
brave, my noble, my heroic Capitola!" said Clara, fervently, with the
tears rushing to her eyes.

"Bosh!" said Cap. "If you go doing the sentimental you won't look like
me a bit, and that will spoil all. There! keep your veil close, for
it's windy, you know; throw back your head and fling yourself along
with a swagger, as if you didn't care, ahem! for anybody, and--there
you are!" said Cap, pushing Clara out and shutting the door behind her.

Clara paused an instant to offer up one short, fervent prayer for her
success and Capitola's safety, and then following her instructions,
went on.

Nearly all girls are clever imitators, and Clara readily adopted
Capitola's light, springy, swaying walk, and met old Dorcas Knight in
the hall, without exciting the slightest suspicion of her identity.

"Humph!" said the woman; "so you are going! I advise you not to come
back again!"

Clara threw up her head with a swagger, and went on.

"Very well, you may scorn my words, but if you know your own good
you'll follow my advice!" said Dorcas Knight, harshly.

Clara flung up her head and passed out.

Before the door Wool was waiting with the horses. Keeping her face
closely muffled, Clara went to Capitola's pony. Wool came and helped
her into the saddle, saying:

"Yer does right, Miss Cap, to keep your face kivered; it's awful windy,
ain't it, though? I kin scarcely keep the har from blowing offen my
head."

With an impatient jerk after the manner of Capitola, Clara signified
that she did not wish to converse. Wool dropped obediently behind,
mounted his horse and followed at a respectful distance until Clara
turned her horse's head and took the bridle-path toward Tip Top. This
move filled poor Wool with dismay. Riding toward her, he exclaimed:

"'Deed, Miss Cap, yer mus' scuse me for speakin' now! Whar de muschief
is yer a-goin' to?"

For all answer Clara, feigning the temper of Capitola, suddenly wheeled
her horse, elevated her riding whip and galloped upon Wool in a
threatening manner.

Wool dodged and backed his horse with all possible expedition,
exclaiming in consternation:

"Dar! dar! Miss Cap, I won't go for to ax you any more
questions--no--not if yer rides straight to Old Nick or Black Donald!"

Whereupon, receiving this apology in good part, Clara again turned her
horse's head and rode on her way.

Wool followed, bemoaning the destiny that kept him between the two
fierce fires of his old master's despotism and his young mistress's
caprice, and muttering:

"I know old marse and dis young gal am goin' to be the death of me! I
knows it jes' as well as nuffin at all! I 'clare to man, if it ain't
nuff to make anybody go heave themselves right into a grist mill and be
ground up at once." Wool spoke no more until they got to Tip Top, when
Clara still closely veiled, rode up to the stage office just as the
coach, half filled with passengers, was about to start. Springing from
her horse, she went up to Wool and said:

"Here, man, take this horse back to Hurricane Hall! Tell Major Warfield
that Miss Black remains at the Hidden House in imminent danger! Ask him
to ride there and bring her home! Tell Miss Black when you see her that
I reached Tip Top safe and in time to take the coach. Tell her I will
never cease to be grateful! And now, here is a half eagle for your
trouble! Good-by, and God bless you!" And she put the piece in his hand
and took her place in the coach, which immediately started.

As for Wool! From the time that Clara had thrown aside her veil and
began to speak to him he had stood staring and staring--his
consternation growing and growing--until it had seemed to have turned
him into stone--from which state of petrefaction he did not recover
until he saw the stage coach roll rapidly away, carrying
off--whom?--Capitola, Clara or the evil one?--Wool could not have told
which! He presently astounded the people about the stage office by
leaving his horses and taking to his heels after the stage coach,
vociferating:

"Murder! murder! help! help! stop thief! stop thief! stop the coach!
stop the coach!"

"What is the matter, man?" said a constable, trying to head him.

But Wool incontinently ran over that officer, throwing him down and
keeping on his headlong course, hat off, coat-tail streaming and legs
and arms flying like the sails of a windmill, as he tried to overtake
the coach, crying:

"Help! murder! head the horses! Stop the coach! Old marse told me not
to lose sight of her! Oh, for hebben's sake, good people, stop the
coach!"

When he got to a gate, instead of taking time to open it, he rolled
himself somersault-like right over it! When he met man or woman,
instead of turning from his straight course, he knocked them over and
passed on, garments flying and legs and arms circulating with the
velocity of a wheel.

The people whom he had successively met and overthrown in his course,
picking themselves up and getting into the village, reported that there
was a furious madman broke loose, who attacked every one he met.

And soon every man and boy in the village who could mount a horse
started in pursuit. Only race horses would have beaten the speed with
which Wool ran, urged on by fear. It was nine miles on the turnpike
road from Tip Top that the horsemen overtook and surrounded Wool, who,
seeing himself hopelessly environed, fell down upon the ground and
rolled and kicked, swearing that he would not be taken alive to have
his eyelids cut off!

It was not until after a desperate resistance that he was finally
taken, bound, put in a wagon and carried back to the village, where he
was recognized as Major Warfield's man and a messenger was despatched
for his master.

And not until he had been repeatedly assured that no harm should befall
him did Wool gain composure enough to say, amid tears of cruel grief
and fear:

"Oh, marsers! my young missus, Miss Black, done been captured and
bewitched and turned into somebody else, right afore my own two looking
eyes and gone off in dat coach! 'deed she is! and ole marse kill
me!'deed he will, gemmen! He went and ordered me not to take my eyes
offen her, and no more I didn't! But what good that do, when she turned
to somebody else, and went off right afore my two looking eyes? But ole
marse won't listen to reason. He kill me, I know he will!" whimpered
Wool, refusing to be comforted.




CHAPTER X.

CAP IN CAPTIVITY.


     I lingered here and rescue planned
     For Clara and for me.

                             --SCOTT.


Meanwhile how fared it with Capitola in the Hidden House?

"I am in for it now!" said Cap, as she closed the door behind Clara; "I
am in for it now! This is a jolly imprudent adventure! What will Wool
do when he discovers that he has 'lost sight' of me? What will uncle
say when he finds out what I've done? Whe-ew! Uncle will explode! I
wonder if the walls at Hurricane Hall will be strong enough to stand
it! Wool will go mad! I doubt if he will ever do a bit more good in
this world!"

"But above all, I wonder what the Le Noirs, father and son, will say
when they find that the heiress is flown and a 'beggar,' as uncle
flatters me by calling me, will be here in her place! Whe-ew-ew-ew!
There will be a tornado! Cap, child, they'll murder you! That's just
what they'll do! They'll kill and eat you, Cap, without any salt! or
they may lock you up in the haunted room to live with the ghost, Cap,
and that would be worse!"

"Hush! here comes Dorcas Knight! Now I must make believe I'm Clara, and
do the sentimental up brown!" concluded Capitola, as she seated herself
near the door where she could be heard, and began to sob softly.

Dorcas rapped.

Cap sobbed in response.

"Are you coming to luncheon, Miss Day?" inquired the woman.

"Ee-hee! Ee-hee! Ee-hee! I do not want to eat," sobbed Cap, in a low
and smothered voice. Any one would have thought she was drowned in
tears.

"Very well; just as you like," said the woman harshly, as she went away.

"Well, I declare," laughed Cap, "I did that quite as well as an actress
could! But now what am I to do? How long can I keep this up? Heigh-ho
'let the world slide!' I'll not reveal myself until I'm driven to it,
for when I do-! Cap, child, you'll get chawed right up!"

A little later in the day Dorcas Knight came again and rapped at the
door.

"Ee-hee! Ee-hee! Ee-hee!" sobbed Cap.

"Miss Day, your cousin, Craven Le Noir, wishes to speak with you alone."

"Ee-hee! Ee-hee! Ee-hee! I cannot see him!" sobbed Cap, in a low and
suffocating voice.

The woman went away, and Cap suffered no other interruption until six
o'clock, when Dorcas Knight once more rapped saying:

"Miss Day, your uncle is at the front door with the carriage, and he
wishes to know if you are ready to obey him."

"Ee-hee! Ee-hee! Ee--hee!-te-te-tell him yes!" sobbed Cap, as if her
heart would break.

The woman went off with this answer, and Capitola hastily enveloped her
form in Clara's large, black shawl, put on Clara's black bonnet and
tied her thick mourning veil closely over her face.

"A pretty bridal dress, this; but, however, I suppose these men are no
more particular about my costume than they are about their own
conduct," said Cap.

She had just drawn on her gloves when she heard the footsteps of two
men approaching. They rapped at the door.

"Come in," she sobbed, in a low, broken voice, that might have belonged
to any girl in deep distress, and she put a white cambric handkerchief
up to her eyes and drew her thick veil closely over her face.

The two Le Noirs immediately entered the room. Craven approached her
and whispered, softly:

"You will forgive me this, my share in these proceedings after awhile,
sweet Clara! The Sabine women did not love the Roman youths the less
that they were forcibly made wives by them."

"Ee-hee! Ee-hee! Ee-hee!" sobbed Cap, entirely concealing her white
cambric handkerchief under her impenetrable veil.

"Come, come! we lose time!" said the elder Le Noir "Draw her arm within
yours, Craven, and lead her out."

The young man did as he was directed and led Cap from the room. It was
now quite dark--the long, dreary passage was only dimly lighted by a
hanging lamp, so that with the care she took there was scarcely a
possibility of Capitola's being discovered. They went on, Craven Le
Noir whispering hypocritical apologies and Cap replying only by low
sobs.

When they reached the outer door they found a close carriage drawn up
before the house.

To this Craven Le Noir led Capitola, placed her within and took the
seat by her side. Colonel Le Noir followed and placed himself in the
front seat opposite them. And the carriage was driven rapidly off.

An hour's ride brought the party to an obscure church in the depths of
the forest, which Capitola recognized by the cross on its top to be a
Roman Catholic chapel.

Here the carriage drew up and the two Le Noirs got out and assisted
Capitola to alight.

They then led her into the church, which was dimly illumined by a pair
of wax candles burning before the altar. A priest in his sacerdotal
robes was in attendance. A few country people were scattered thinly
about among the pews, at their private devotions.

Guarded by Craven Le Noir on the right and Colonel Le Noir on the left,
Capitola was marched up the aisle and placed before the altar.

Colonel Le Noir then went and spoke apart to the officiating priest,
saying, in a tone of dissatisfaction:

"I told you, sir, that as our bride was an orphan, recently bereaved,
and still in deep mourning, we wished the marriage ceremony to be
strictly private, and you gave me to understand, sir, that at this hour
the chapel was most likely to be vacant. Yet, here I find a half a
score of people! How is this?"

"Sir," replied the priest, "it is true that at this hour of the evening
the chapel is most likely to be vacant, but it is not therefore certain
to be so! nor did I promise as much! Our chapel is, as you know, open
at all hours of the day and night, that all who please may come and
pray. These people that you see are hard-working farm laborers, who
have no time to come in the day, and who are now here to offer up their
evening prayers, and also, some of them, to examine their consciences
preparatory to confession! They can certainly be no interruption to
this ceremony."

"Egad, I don't know that!" muttered Colonel Le Noir between his teeth.

As for Cap, the sight of other persons present in the chapel filled her
heart with joy and exultation, inasmuch as it insured her final safety.
And so she just abandoned herself to the spirit of frolic that
possessed her, and anticipated with the keenest relish the denouement
of her strange adventure.

"Well, what are we waiting for? Proceed, sir, proceed!" said Colonel Le
Noir as he took Cap by the shoulders and placed her on the left side of
his son, while he himself stood behind ready to "give the bride away."

The ceremony immediately commenced.

The prologue beginning, "Dearly beloved, we are gathered together
here," etc., etc., etc., was read.

The solemn exhortation to the contracting parties, commencing "I
require and charge ye both, as ye shall answer in the dreadful day of
judgment when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed, that if
either of you know any just cause or impediment why ye may not lawfully
be joined together," etc., etc., etc., followed.

Capitola listened to all this with the deepest attention, saying to
herself: "Well, I declare, this getting married is really awfully
interesting! If it were not for Herbert Greyson, I'd just let it go
right straight on to the end and see what would happen next!"

While Cap was making these mental comments the priest was asking the
bridegroom:

"Wilt thou have this woman to be thy wedded wife," etc., etc., etc.,
"so long as ye both shall live?"

To which Craven Le Noir, in a sonorous voice responded: "I will."

"Indeed you will? We'll see that presently!" said Cap to herself.

The priest then turning toward the bride, inquired:

"Wilt thou have this man to be thy wedded husband, etc., etc., etc., so
long as ye both shall live?"

To which the bride, throwing aside her veil, answered firmly:

"No! not if he were the last man and I the last woman on the face of
the earth and the human race was about to become extinct and the angel
of Gabriel came down from above to ask it of me as a personal favor."

The effect of this outburst, this revelation, this explosion, may be
imagined but can never be adequately described.

The priest dropped his book and stood with lifted hands and open mouth
and staring eyes as though he had raised a ghost!

The two Le Noirs simultaneously sprang forward, astonishment,
disappointment and rage contending in their blanched faces.

"Who are you, girl?" exclaimed Colonel Le Noir.

"Capitola Black, your honor's glory!" she replied, making a deep
curtsey.

"What the foul fiend is the meaning of all this?" in the same breath
inquired the father and son.

Cap put her thumb on the side of her nose, and, whirling her four
fingers, replied:

"It means, your worships' excellencies, that--you--can't come it! it's
no go!' this chicken won't fight It means that the fat's in the fire,
and the cat's out of the bag! It means confusion! distraction!
perdition! and a tearing off of our wigs! It means the game's up, the
play's over, villainy is about to be hanged and virtue about to be
married, and the curtain is going to drop and the principal
performer--that's I-is going to be called out amid the applause of the
audience!" Then, suddenly changing her mocking tone to one of great
severity, she said:

"It means that you have been outwitted by a girl! It means that your
purposed victim has fled, and is by this time in safety! It means that
you two, precious father and son, would be a pair of knaves if you had
sense enough; but, failing in that, you are only a pair of fools!"

By this time the attention of the few persons in the church was
aroused. They all arose to their feet to look and listen, and some of
them left their places and approached the altar. And to these latter
Capitola now suddenly turned and said aloud:

"Good people, I am Capitola Black, the niece and ward of Major Ira
Warfield, of Hurricane Hall, whom you all know, and now I claim your
protection while I shall tell you the meaning of my presence here!"

"Don't listen to her. She is a maniac!" cried Colonel Le Noir.

"Stop her mouth!" cried Craven, springing upon Capitola and holding her
tightly in the grasp of his right arm, while he covered her lips and
nostrils with his large left hand.

Capitola struggled so fiercely to free herself that Craven had enough
to do to hold her, and so was not aware of a ringing footstep coming up
the aisle, until a stunning blow dealt from a strong arm covered his
face with blood and stretched him out at Capitola's feet.

Cap flushed, breathless and confused, looked up and was caught to the
bosom of Herbert Greyson, who, pale with concentrated rage, held her
closely and inquired:

"Capitola! What violence is this which has been done you? Explain! who
is the aggresor?"

"Wai, wai, wait until I get my breath! There! that was good!  That
villain has all but strangled me to death? Oh, Herbert, I'm so
delighted you've come! How is it that you always drop right down at the
right time and on the right spot?" said Cap, while gasping for breath.

"I will tell you another time! Now I want an explanation."

"Yes, Herbert, I also wish to explain--not only to you but to these
gaping, good people!  Let me have a hearing!" said Cap.

"She is mad! absolutely mad!" cried Colonel Le Noir, who was assisting
his son to rise.

"Silence, sir!" thundered Herbert Greyson, advancing toward him with
uplifted and threatening hand.

"Gentlemen! gentlemen! pray remember that you are within the walls of a
church!" said the distressed priest.

"Craven, this is no place for us; let us go and pursue our fugitive
ward," whispered Colonel Le Noir to his son.

"We might as well; for it is clear that all is over here!" replied
Craven. And the two baffled villains turned to leave the place. But
Herbert Greyson, speaking up, said:

"Good people, prevent the escape of those men until we hear what this
young lady has to say! that we may judge whether to let them go or to
take them before a magistrate."

The people flew to the doors and windows and secured them, and then
surrounded the two Le Noirs, who found themselves prisoners.

"Now, Capitola, tell us how it is that you are here!" said Herbert
Greyson.

"Well, that elder man" said Cap, "is the guardian of a young heiress
who was betrothed to a worthy young man, one Doctor Traverse Rocke."

"My friend!" interrupted Herbert.

"Yes, Mr. Greyson, your friend! Their engagement was approved by the
young lady's father, who gave them his dying blessing. Nevertheless, in
the face of all this, this 'guardian' here, appointed by the Orphans'
Court to take charge of the heiress and her fortune, undertakes, for
his own ends, to compel the young lady to break her engagement and
marry his own son! To drive her to this measure, he does not hesitate
to use every species of cruelty. This night he was to have forced her
to this altar! But in the interval, to-day, I chanced to visit her at
the house where she was confined. Being informed by her of her
distressing situation, and having no time to help her in any better
way, I just changed clothes with her. She escaped unsuspected in my
dress. And those two heroes there, mistaking me for her, forced me into
a carriage and dragged me hither to be married against my will. And
instead of catching an heiress, they caught a Tartar, that's all! And
now, Herbert, let the two poor wretches go hide their mortification,
and do you take me home, for I am immensely tired of doing the
sentimental, making speeches and piling up the agonies!"

While Cap was delivering this long oration, the two Le Noirs had made
several essays to interrupt and contradict her, but were effectually
prevented by the people, whose sympathies were all with the speaker.
Now, at Herbert Greyson's command, they released the culprits, who,
threatening loudly took their departure.

Herbert then led Capitola out and placed her upon her own pony, Gyp,
which, to her unbounded astonishment, she found there in charge of
Wool, who was also mounted upon his own hack.

Herbert Greyson threw himself into the saddle of a third horse, and the
three took the road to Hurricane Hall.

"And now," said Capitola, as Herbert rode up to her side, "for mercy
sake tell me, before I go crazy with conjecture, how it happened that
you dropped down from the sky at the very moment and on the very spot
where you were needed? and where did you light upon Wool and the
horses?"

"It is very simple when you come to understand it," said Herbert,
smiling. "In the first place, you know, I graduated at the last
commencement."

"Yes."

"Well, I have just received a lieutenant's commission in a regiment
that is ordered to join General Scott in Mexico."

"Oh, Herbert, that is news, and I don't know whether to be in despair
or in ecstasy!" said Cap, ready to laugh or cry, as a feather's weight
might tip the scales in which she balanced Herbert's new honors with
his approaching perils.

"If there's any doubt about it, I decidedly recommend the latter
emotion," said Herbert, laughing.

"When do you go?" inquired Cap.

"Our regiment embarks from Baltimore on the first of next month.
Meanwhile I got leave of absence to come and spend a week with my
friends at home!"

"Oh, Herbert, I--I am in a quandary! But you haven't told me yet how
you happened to meet Wool and to come here just in the nick of time!"

"I am just going to do so. Well, you see Capitola, I came down in the
stage to Tip Top, which I reached about three o'clock. And there I
found Wool in the hands of the Philistines, suspected of being mad,
from the manner in which he raved about losing sight of you. Well, of
course, like a true knight, I delivered my lady's squire, comforted and
reassured him and made him mount his own horse and take charge of
yours. After which I mounted the best beast that I had hired to convey
me to Hurricane Hall, and we all set off thither. I confess that I was
excessively anxious upon your account, for I could make nothing
whatever of Wool's wild story of your supposed metamorphosis! I thought
it best to make a circuit and take the Hidden House in our course, to
make some inquiries there as to what had really happened. I had got a
little bewildered between the dark night and the strange road, and,
seeing the light in the church, I had just ridden up to inquire my way,
when to my astonishment I saw you within, before the altar, struggling
in the grasp of that ruffian. And you know the rest! And now let us
ride on quickly, for I have a strong presentiment that Major Warfield
is suffering the tortures of a lost soul through anxiety upon your
account," concluded Herbert Greyson.

"Please, Marse Herbert and Miss Cap, don't you tell ole marse nuffin
'tall 'bout my loosin' sight of you!" pleaded Wool.

"We shall tell you old master all about it, Wool, for I would not have
him miss the pleasure of hearing this adventure upon any account; but I
promise to bear you harmless through it," said Herbert, as they
galloped rapidly toward home.

They reached Hurricane Hall by eight o'clock, and in good time for
supper. They found Old Hurricane storming all over the house, and
ordering everybody off the premises in his fury of anxiety upon
Capitola's account. But when the party arrived, surprise at seeing them
in the company of Herbert Greyson quite revolutionized his mood, and,
forgetting to rage, he gave them all a hearty welcome.

And when after supper was over and they were all gathered around the
comfortable fireside, and Herbert related the adventures and feats of
Capitola at the Hidden House, and in the forest chapel, the old man
grasped the hand of his favorite and with his stormy old eyes full of
rain said:

"You deserve to have been a man, Cap! Indeed you do, my girl!"

That was his highest style of praise.

Then Herbert told his own little story of getting his commission and
being ordered to Mexico.

"God bless you, lad, and save you in the battle and bring you home with
victory!" was old Hurricane's comment.

Then seeing that the young people were quite worn out with fatigue, and
feeling not averse to his own comfortable couch, Old Hurricane broke up
the circle and they all retired to rest.




CHAPTER XI.

AN UNEXPECTED VISITOR AT MARAH'S COTTAGE.


    "Friend wilt thou give me shelter here?
     The stranger meekly saith
     My life is hunted! evil men
     Are following on my path."


Marah Rocke sat by her lonely fireside.

The cottage was not changed in any respect since the day upon which we
first of all found her there. There was the same bright, little wood
fire; the same clean hearth and the identical faded carpet on the
floor. There was the dresser with its glistening crockery ware on the
right, and the shelves with Traverse's old school books on the left of
the fireplace.

The widow herself had changed in nothing except that her clean black
dress was threadbare and rusty, and her patient face whiter and thinner
than before.

And now there was no eager restlessness: no frequent listening and
looking toward the door. Alas! she could not now expect to hear her
boy's light and springing step and cheerful voice as he hurried home at
eventide from his daily work. Traverse was far away at St. Louis
undergoing the cares and trials of a friendless young physician trying
to get into practice. Six months had passed since he took leave of her,
and there was as yet no hope of his returning even, to pay a visit.

So Marah sat very still and sad, bending over her needlework without
ever turning her head in the direction of the door. True, he wrote to
her every week. No Wednesday ever passed without bringing her a letter
written in a strong, buoyant and encouraging strain. Still she missed
Traverse very sadly. It was dreary to rise up in the empty house every
morning; dreary to sit down to her solitary meals, and drearier still
to go to bed in her lonely room without having received her boy's kiss
and heard his cheerful good-night. And it was her custom every night to
read over Traverse's last letter before retiring to bed.

It was getting on toward ten o'clock when she folded up her work and
put it away and drew her boy's latest epistle from her bosom to read.
It ran as follows:

                                 St. Louis, Dec. 1st, 184--.

My dearest Mother--I am very glad to hear that you continue in good
health, and that you do not work too hard, or miss me too sadly. It is
the greatest comfort of my life to hear good news of you, sweet mother.
I count the days from one letter to another, and read every last letter
over daily until I get a new one. You insist upon my telling you how I
am getting on, and whether I am out of money. I am doing quite well,
ma'am, and have some funds left! I have quite a considerable practice.
It is true that my professional services are in request only among the
very poor, who pay me with their thanks and good wishes. But I am very
glad to be able to pay off a small part of the great debt of gratitude
I owe to the benevolent of this world by doing all that I can in my
turn for the needy. And even if I had never myself been the object of a
good man's benevolence, I should still have desired to serve the
indigent; "for whoso giveth to the poor lendeth to the Lord," and I
"like the security." Therefore, sweet mother of mine, be at ease; for I
am getting on swimmingly--with one exception. Still I do not hear from
our Clara! Six months have now passed, during which, despite of her
seeming silence, I have written to her every week; but not one letter
or message have I received from her in return! And now you tell me also
that you have not received a single letter from her either! I know not
what to think. Anxiety upon her account is my one sole trouble! Not
that I wrong the dear girl by one instant's doubt of her constancy--no!
my soul upon her truth! if I could do that, I should be most unworthy
of her love! No, mother, you and I know that Clara is true! But ah, we
do not know to what sufferings she may be subjected by Le Noir, who I
firmly believe has intercepted all our letters. Mother, I am about to
ask a great, perhaps an unreasonable, favor of you! It is to go down
into the neighborhood of the Hidden House and make inquiries and try to
find out Clara's real condition. If it be possible, put yourself into
communication with her, and tell her that I judge her heart by my own,
and have the firmest faith in her constancy, even though I have written
to her every week for six months without ever having received an
answer. I feel that I am putting you to expense and trouble, but my
great anxiety about Clara, which I am sure you share, must be my
excuse. I kiss your dear and honored hands, and remain ever your loving
son and faithful servant.

                                              TRAVERSE ROCKE.

"I must try to go. It will be an awful expense, because I know no one
down there, and I shall have to board at the tavern at Tip Top while I
am making inquiries--for I dare not approach the dwelling of Gabriel Le
Noir!" said Marah Rocke, as she folded up her letter and replaced it in
her bosom.

Just at that moment she heard the sound of wheels approach and a
vehicle of some sort draw up to the gate and some one speaking without.

She went to the door, and, listening, heard a girlish voice say:

"A dollar? Yes, certainly here it is. There, you may go now."

She recognized the voice, and with a cry of joy jerked the door open
just as the carriage rolled away. And the next instant Clara Day was in
her arms.

"Oh, my darling! my darling! my darling! is this really you? Really,
really you, and no dream?" cried Marah Rocke, all in a flutter of
excitement, as she strained Clara to her bosom.

"Yes, it is I, sweet friend, come to stay with you a long time,
perhaps," said Clara, softly, returning her caresses.

"Oh, my lamb! my lamb! what a joyful surprise! I do think I shall go
crazy! Where did you come from, my pet? Who came with you? When did you
start? Did Le Noir consent to your coming? And how did it all happen?
But, dear child, how worn and weary you look! You must be very tired!
Have you had supper? Oh, my darling, come and lie down on this soft
lounge while I put away your things and get you some refreshment," said
Marah Rocke, in a delirium of joy, as she took off Clara's hat and sack
and laid her down to rest on the lounge, which she wheeled up near the
fire.

"Oh, my sweet, we have been so anxious about you! Traverse and myself!
Traverse is still at St. Louis, love, getting on slowly. He has written
to you every week, and so, indeed have I, but we neither of us have had
so much as one letter in reply. And yet neither of us ever doubted your
true heart, my child. We knew that the letters must have been lost,
miscarried or intercepted," said Marah, as she busied herself putting
on the tea-kettle.

"They must, indeed, since my experience in regard to letters exactly
corresponds with yours! I have written every week to both of you, yet
never received one line in reply from either," said Clara.

"We knew it! We said so! Oh, those Le Noirs! Those Le Noirs! But, my
darling, you are perfectly exhausted, and though I have asked you a
half an hundred questions you shall not reply to one of them, nor talk
a bit more until you have rested and had refreshment. Here, my love;
here is Traverse's last letter. It will amuse you to lie and read it
while I am getting tea," said Marah, taking the paper from her bosom
and handing it to Clara, and then placing the stand with the light near
the head of her couch that she might see to read it without rising.

And while Clara, well pleased perused and smiled over her lover's
letter, Marah Rocke laid the cloth and spread a delicate repast of tea,
milk toast and poached eggs, of which she tenderly pressed her visitor
to partake.

And when Clara was somewhat refreshed by food and rest, she said:

"Now, dear mamma, you will wish to hear how it happens that I am with
you to-night."

"Not unless you feel quite rested, dear girl."

"I am rested sufficiently for the purpose; besides, I am anxious to
tell you. And oh, dear mamma! I could just now sit in your lap and lay
my head upon your kind, soft bosom so willingly!"

"Come, then, Clara! Come, then, my darling." said Marah, tenderly,
holding out her arms.

"No, no, mamma; you are too little; it would be a sin!" said Clara,
smiling; "but I will sit by you and put my hand in yours and rest my
head against your shoulder while I tell you all about it."

"Come, then, my darling!" said Marah Rocke.

Clara took the offered seat, and when she was fixed to her liking she
commenced and related to her friend a full history of all that had
occurred to her at the Hidden House from the moment that she had first
crossed its threshold to the hour in which, through the courage and
address of Capitola, she was delivered from imminent peril.

"And now," said Clara, in conclusion, "I have come hither in order to
get Doctor Williams to make one more appeal for me to the Orphans'
Court. And when it is proved what a traitor my guardian has been to his
trust I have no doubt that the judge will appoint some one else in his
place, or at least see that my father's last wish in regard to my
residence is carried into effect."

"Heaven grant it, my child! Heaven grant it! Oh, those Le Noirs! those
Le Noirs! Were there ever in the world before such ruthless villains
and accomplished hypocrites?" said Marah Rocke, clasping her hands in
the strength of her emotions.

A long time yet they talked together, and then they retired to bed, and
still talked until they fell asleep in each other's arms.

The next morning the widow arose early, gazed a little while with
delight upon the sleeping daughter of her heart, pressed a kiss upon
her cheek so softly as not to disturb her rest, and then, leaving her
still in the deep, sweet sleep of wearied youth, she went down-stairs
to get a nice breakfast.

Luckily a farmer's cart was just passing the road before the cottage on
its way to market.

Marah took out her little purse from her pocket, hailed the driver and
expended half her little store in purchasing two young chickens, some
eggs and some dried peaches, saying to herself:

"Dear Clara always had a good appetite, and healthy young human nature
must live substantially in spite of all its little heart-aches."

While Marah was preparing the chicken for the gridiron the door at the
foot of the stairs opened and Clara came in, looking, after her night's
rest, as fresh as a rosebud.

"What! up with the sun, my darling?" said Marah, going to meet her.

"Yes, mamma! Oh! it is so good to be here with you in this nice, quiet
place, with no one to make me shudder! But you must let me help you,
mamma! See! I will set the table and make the toast!"

"Oh, Miss Clara--"

"Yes, I will! I have been ill used and made miserable, and now you must
pet me, mamma, and let me have my own way and help you to cook our
little meals and to make the house tidy and afterward to work those
buttonholes in the shirts you were spoiling your gentle eyes over last
night. Oh! if they will only let me stay here with you and be at peace,
we shall be very happy together, you and I!" said Clara, as she drew
out the little table and laid the cloth.

"My dear child, may the Lord make you as happy as your sweet affection
would make me!" said Marah.

"We can work for our living together," continued Clara, as she gaily
flitted about from the dresser to the table, placing the cups and
saucers and plates. "You can sew the seams and do the plain hemming,
and I can work the buttonholes and stitch the bosoms, collars and
wristbands! And 'if the worst comes to the worst,' we can hang out our
little shingle before the cottage gate, inscribed with:"

                      MRS. ROCKE AND DAUGHTER.

                          Shirt Makers.

             Orders executed with neatness and dispatch.

"We'd drive a thriving business, mamma, I assure you," said Clara, as
she sat down on a low stool at the hearth and began to toast the bread.

"I trust in heaven that it will never come to that with you, my dear!"

"Why? Why, mamma? Why should I not taste of toil and care as well as
others a thousand times better than myself? Why should not I work as
well as you and Traverse, mamma? I stand upon the broad platform of
human rights, and I say I have just as good a right to work as others!"
said Clara, with a pretty assumption of obstinacy, as she placed the
plate of toast upon the board.

"Doubtless, dear Clara, you may play at work just as much as you
please; but heaven forbid you should ever have to work at work!"
replied Mrs. Rocke as she placed the coffee pot and the dish of broiled
chicken on the table.

"Why, mamma, I do not think that is a good prayer at all! That is a
wicked, proud prayer, Mrs. Marah Rocke! Why shouldn't your daughter
really toil as well as other people's daughters, I'd like to be
informed?" said Clara, mockingly, as they both took their seats at the
table.

"I think, dear Clara, that you must have contracted some of your
eccentric little friend Capitola's ways, from putting on her habit! I
never before saw you in such gay spirits!" said Mrs. Rocke, as she
poured out the coffee.

"Oh, mamma; it is but the glad rebound of the freed bird! I am so glad
to have escaped from that dark prison of the Hidden House and to be
here with you. But tell me, mamma, is my old home occupied?"

"No, my dear; no tenant has been found for it. The property is in the
hands of an agent to let, but the house remains quite vacant and
deserted."

"Why is that?" asked Clara.

"Why, my love, for the strangest reason! The foolish country people say
that since the doctor's death the place has been haunted!"

"Haunted!"

"Yes, my dear, so the foolish people say, and they get wiser ones to
believe them."

"What exactly do they say? I hope--I hope they do not trifle with my
dear father's honored name and memory?"

"Oh, no, my darling! no! but they say that although the house is quite
empty and deserted by the living strange sights and sounds are heard
and seen by passers-by at night. Lights appear at the upper windows
from which pale faces look out."

"How very strange!" said Clara.

"Yes, my dear, and these stories have gained such credence that no one
can be found to take the house."

"So much the better, dear mamma, for if the new judge of the Orphans'
Court should give a decision in our favor, as he must, when he hears
the evidence, old and new, you and I can move right into it and need
not then enter the shirt-making line of business!"

"Heaven grant it, my dear! But now, Clara, my love, we must lose no
time in seeing Doctor Williams, lest your guardian should pursue you
here and give you fresh trouble."

Clara assented to this, and they immediately arose from the table,
cleared away the service, put the room in order and went up-stairs to
put on their bonnets, Mrs. Rocke lending Clara her own best bonnet and
shawl. When they were quite ready they locked up the house and set out
for the town.

It was a bright, frosty, invigorating winter's morning, and the two
friends walked rapidly until they reached Doctor Williams' house.

The kind old man was at home, and was much surprised and pleased to see
his visitors. He invited them into his parlor, and when he had heard
their story, he said: "This is a much more serious affair than the
other. We must employ counsel. Witnesses must be brought from the
neighborhood of the Hidden House. You are aware that the late judge of
the Orphans' Court has been appointed to a high office under the
government at Washington. The man that has taken his place is a person
of sound integrity, who will do his duty. It remains only for us to
prove the justice of our cause to his satisfaction, and all will be
well."

"Oh, I trust in heaven that it will be," said Marah, fervently.

"You two must stay in my house until the affair is decided. You might
possibly be safe from real injury; but you could not be free from
molestation in your unprotected condition at the cottage," said Doctor
Williams.

Clara warmly expressed her thanks.

"You had better go home now and pack up what you wish to bring, and put
out the fire and close up the house and come here immediately. In the
mean time I will see your dear father's solicitor and be ready with my
report by the time you get back," said Doctor Williams, promptly taking
his hat to go.

Mrs. Rocke and Clara set out for the cottage, which they soon reached.

Throwing off her bonnet and shawl, Clara said:

"Now, mamma, the very first thing I shall do will be to write to
Traverse, so that we can send the letter by to-day's mail and set his
mind at rest. I shall simply tell him that our mutual letters have
failed to reach their destination, but that I am now on a visit to you,
and that while I remain here nothing can interrupt our correspondence.
I shall not speak of the coming suit until we see how it will end."

Mrs. Rocke approved this plan, and placed writing materials on the
table. And while the matron employed herself in closing up the rooms,
packing up what was needful to take with them to the doctor's and
putting out the fire, Clara wrote and sealed her letter. They then put
on their bonnets, locked up the house, and set out. They called at the
post-office just in time to mail their letter, and they reached the
doctor's house just as he himself walked up to the door, accompanied by
the lawyer. The latter greeted the daughter of his old client and her
friend, and they all went into the house together.

In the doctor's study the whole subject of Clara's flight and its
occasion was talked over, and the lawyer agreed to commence proceedings
immediately.




CHAPTER XII.

CAP "RESTS ON HER LAURELS" AND "SPOILS FOR A FIGHT"


    'Tis hardly in a body's power,
     To keep at times frae being sour,
     To see how things are shared;
     How best o' chiels are whiles in want,
     While coofs on countless thousands rant,
     And ken na how to wear't.

                                  --BURNS.


Leaving Clara Day and Marah Rocke in a home of safety, plenty and
kindness, in the old doctor's house, we must run down to Hurricane Hall
to see what mischief Cap has been getting into since we left her! In
truth, none! Cap had had such a surfeit of adventures that she was fain
to lie by and rest upon her laurels. Besides, there seemed just now
nothing to do--no tyrants to take down, no robbers to capture, no
distressed damsels to deliver, and Cap was again in danger of "spoiling
for a fight." And then Herbert Greyson was at the Hall--Herbert Greyson
whom she vowed always did make a Miss Nancy of her! And so Cap had to
content herself for a week with quiet mornings of needlework at her
workstand, with Herbert to read to or talk with her; sober afternoon
rides, attended by Herbert and Old Hurricane; and humdrum evenings at
the chess board, with the same Herbert, while Major Warfield dozed in a
great "sleepy hollow" of an armchair.

One afternoon when they were out riding through the woods beyond the
Demon's Run, a Sheriff's officer rode up, and bowing to the party,
presented a suspicious-looking document to Capitola and a similar one
to Herbert Greyson. And while Old Hurricane stared his eyes half out,
the parties most interested opened the papers, which they found to be
rather pressing invitations to be present at a certain solemnity at
Staunton. In a word, they were subpoenaed to give testimony in the case
of Williams vs. Le Noir.

"Here's a diabolical dilemma!" said Old Hurricane to himself, as soon
as he learned the purport of these documents.

"Here I shall have to bring Cap into court face to face with that demon
to bear witness against him! Suppose losing one ward, he should lay
claim to another! Ah, but he can't, without foully criminating himself!
Well, well, we shall see!"

While Old Hurricane was cogitating Cap was exulting.

"Oh, won't I tell all I know! Yes, and more, too!" she exclaimed, in
triumph.

"'More, too!' Oh, hoity-toity! Never say more, too!" said Herbert
laughing.

"I will, for I'll tell all I suspect!" said Cap, galloping on ahead, in
her eagerness to get home and pack up for her journey.

The next day Old Hurricane, Herbert Greyson, Capitola, Pitapat and Wool
went by stage to Staunton. They put up at the Planters' and Farmers'
Hotel, whence Herbert Greyson and Capitola soon sallied forth to see
Clara and Mrs. Rocke. They soon found the doctor's house, and were
ushered into the parlor in the presence of their friends.

The meeting between Capitola and Clara and between Mrs. Rocke and
Herbert was very cordial. And then Herbert introduced Capitola to Mrs.
Rocke and Cap presented Herbert to Clara. And they all entered into
conversation upon the subject of the coming lawsuit, and the
circumstances that led to it. And Clara and Capitola related to each
other all that had happened to each after their exchanging clothes and
parting. And when they had laughed over their mutual adventures and
misadventures, Herbert and Capitola took leave and returned to their
hotel.

Herbert Greyson was the most serious of the whole family. Upon reaching
the hotel he went to his own room and fell into deep reflection. And
this was the course of his thought:

"Ira Warfield and Marah Rocke are here in the same town--brought hither
upon the same errand--to-morrow to meet in the same court-room! And yet
not either of them suspects the presence of the other! Mrs. Rocke does
not know that in Capitola's uncle she will behold Major Warfield! He
does not foresee that in Clara's matronly friend he will behold Marah
Rocke! And Le Noir, the cause of all their misery, will be present
also! What will be the effect of this unexpected meeting? Ought I not
to warn one or the other? Let me think--no! For were I to warn Major
Warfield he would absent himself. Should I drop a hint to Marah she
would shrink from the meeting! No, I will leave it all to
Providence--perhaps the sight of her sweet, pale face and soft,
appealing eyes, so full of constancy and truth, may touch that stern
old heart! Heaven grant it may!" concluded Herbert Greyson.

The next day the suit came on.

At an early hour Doctor Williams appeared, having in charge Clara Day,
who was attended by her friend Mrs. Rocke. They were accommodated with
seats immediately in front of the judge.

Very soon afterward Major Warfield, Herbert Greyson and Capitola
entered, and took their places on the witness's bench, at the right
side of the court-room.

Herbert watched Old Hurricane, whose eyes were spellbound to the bench
where sat Mrs. Rocke and Clara. Both were dressed in deep mourning,
with their veils down and their faces toward the judge. But Herbert
dreaded every instant that Marah Rocke should turn her head and meet
that fixed, wistful look of Old Hurricane. And he wondered what strange
instinct it could be that riveted the old man's regards to that
unrecognized woman.

At last, to Herbert's great uneasiness, Major Warfield turned and
commenced questioning him:

"Who is that woman in mourning?"

"Hem--m--that one with the flaxen curls under her bonnet is Miss Day."

"I don't mean the girl, I mean the woman sitting by her?"

"That is--hem--hem--that is Doctor Williams sitting--"

Old Hurricane turned abruptly around and favored his nephew with a
severe, scrutinizing gaze, demanding:

"Herbert, have you been drinking so early in the morning? Demmy, sir,
this is not the season for mint juleps before breakfast! Is that great,
stout, round-bodied, red-faced old Doctor Williams a little woman? I
see him sitting on the right of Miss Day. I didn't refer to him! I
referred to that still, quiet little woman sitting on her left, who has
never stirred hand or foot since she sat down there. Who is she?"

"That woman? Oh, she?--yes--ah, let me see--she is a--Miss Day's
companion!" faltered Herbert.

"To the demon with you! Who does not see that? But who is she? What is
her name?" abruptly demanded Old Hurricane.

"Her name is a--a--did you ever see her before, sir?"

"I don't know! That is what I am trying to remember; but, sir, will you
answer my question?"

"You seem very much interested in her."

"You seem very much determined not to let me know who she is! Hang it,
sir, will you or will you not tell me that woman's name?"

"Certainly," said Herbert. "Her name is"--He was about to say Marah
Rocke, but moral indignation overpowered him and he paused.

"Well, well, her name is what?" impatiently demanded Old Hurricane.

"Mrs. Warfield!" answered Herbert, doggedly.

And just at that unfortunate moment Marah turned her pale face and
beseeching eyes around and met the full gaze of her husband!

In an instant her face blanched to marble and her head sank upon the
railing before her bench. Old Hurricane was too dark to grow pale, but
his bronzed cheek turned as gray as his hair, which fairly lifted
itself on his head. Grasping his walking stick with both his hands, he
tottered to his feet, and, muttering:

"I'll murder you for this, Herbert!" he strode out of the court-room.

Marah's head rested for about a minute on the railing before her and
when she lifted it again her face was as calm and patient as before.

This little incident had passed without attracting attention from any
one except Capitola, who, sitting on the other side of Herbert Greyson,
had heard the little passage of words between him and her uncle, and
had seen the latter start up and go out, and who now, turning to her
companion, inquired:

"What is the meaning of all this, Herbert?"

"It means--Satan! And now attend to what is going on! Mr. Sauter has
stated the case, and now Stringfellow, the attorney for the other side,
is just telling the judge that he stands there in the place of his
client, Lieutenant-Colonel Le Noir, who, being ordered to join General
Taylor in Mexico, is upon the eve of setting out and cannot be here in
person!"

"And is that true? Won't he be here?"

"It seems not. I think he is ashamed to appear after what has happened,
and just takes advantage of a fair excuse to absent himself."

"And is he really going to Mexico?"

"Oh, yes! I saw it officially announced in this morning's papers. And,
by the bye, I am very much afraid he is to take command of our
regiment, and be my superior officer!"

"Oh, Herbert, I hope and pray not! I think there is wickedness enough
packed up in that man's body to sink a squadron or lose an army!"

"Well, Cap, such things will happen. Attention! There's Sauter, ready
to call his witnesses!" And, in truth, the next moment Capitola Black
was called to the stand.

Cap took her place and gave her evidence con amore, and with such vim
and such expressions of indignation, that Stringfellow reminded her she
was there to give testimony, and not to plead the cause.

Cap rejoined that she was perfectly willing to do both! And so she
continued not only to tell the acts, but to express her opinions as to
the motives of Le Noir, and give her judgment as to what should be the
decision of the court.

Stringfellow, the attorney for Colonel Le Noir, evidently thought that
in this rash, reckless, spirited witness he had a fine subject for
sarcastic cross-examination! But he reckoned "without his host." He did
not know Cap! He, too, "caught a Tartar." And before the
cross-examination was concluded, Capitola's apt and cutting replies had
overwhelmed him with ridicule and confusion, and done more for the
cause of her friend than all her partisans put together!

Other witnesses were called, to corroborate the testimony of Capitola,
and still others were examined to prove the last expressed wishes of
the late William Day, in regard to the disposal of his daughter's
person during the period of her minority.

There was no effective rebutting evidence, and after some hard arguing
by the attorneys on both sides, the case was closed, and the judge
deferred his decision until the third day thereafter.

The parties then left the court and returned to their several lodgings.

Old Hurricane gave no one a civil word that day. Wool was an atrocious
villain, an incendiary scoundrel, a cut-throat, and a black demon. Cap
was a beggar, a vagabond and a vixen. Herbert Greyson was another
beggar, besides being a knave, a fop and an impudent puppy. The
inn-keeper was a swindler, the waiters thieves, the whole world was
going to ruin, where it well deserved to go, and all mankind to the
demon--as he hoped and trusted they would!

And all this tornado of passion and invective arose just because he had
unexpectedly met in the court-room the purient face and beseeching eyes
of a woman, married and forsaken, loved and lost, long ago!

Was it strange that Herbert, who had so resented his treatment of Marah
Rocke, should bear all his fury, injustice and abuse of himself and
others with such compassionate forbearance? But he not only forbore to
resent his own affronts, but so besought Capitola to have patience with
the old man's temper and apologised to the host by saying that Major
Warfield had been very severely tried that day, and when calmer would
be the first to regret the violence of his own words.

Marah Rocke returned with Clara to the old doctor's house. She was more
patient, silent and quiet than before. Her face was a little paler, her
eyes softer, and her tones lower--that was the only visible effect of
the morning's unexpected encounter.

The next day but one all the parties concerned assembled at the
court-house to hear the decision of the judge. It was given, as had
been anticipated, in favor of Clara Day, who was permitted, in
accordance with her father's approved wishes, to reside in her
patrimonial home under the care of Mrs. Rocke. Colonel Le Noir was to
remain trustee of the property, with directions from the court
immediately to pay the legacies left by the late Doctor Day to Marah
Rocke and Traverse Rocke, and also to pay to Clara Day, in quarterly
instalments, from the revenue of her property, an annual sum of money
sufficient for her support.

This decision filled the hearts of Clara and her friends with joy.
Forgetting time, and place, she threw herself into the arms of Marah
Rocke and wept with delight. All concerned in the trial then sought
their lodgings.

Clara and Mrs. Rocke returned to the cottage to make preparations for
removing to Willow Heights.

Doctor Williams went to the agent of the property to require him to
give up the keys, which he did without hesitation.

Old Hurricane and his party packed up to be ready for the stage to take
them to Tip-Top the next day.

But that night a series of mysterious events were said to have taken
place at the deserted house at Willow Heights that filled the whole
community with superstitious wonder. It was reported by numbers of
gardeners and farmers, who passed that road, on their way to early
market, that a perfect witches' sabbath had been held in that empty
house all night; that lights had appeared, flitting from room to room;
that strange, weird faces had looked out from the windows; and wild
screams had pierced the air!

The next day when this report reached the ears of Clara, and she was
asked by Doctor Williams whether she would not be afraid to live there,
she laughed gaily and bade him try her.

Cap, who had come over to take leave of Clara, joined her in her
merriment, declared that she, for her part, doted on ghosts, and that
after Herbert Greyson's departure she should come and visit Clara and
help her to entertain the specters.

Clara replied that she should hold her to her promise. And so the
friends kissed and separated.

That same day saw several removals.

Clara and Mrs. Rocke took up their abode at Willow Heights and seized
an hour even of that busy time to write to Traverse and apprise him of
their good fortune.

Old Hurricane and his party set out for their home, where they arrived
before nightfall.

And the next day but one Herbert Greyson took leave of his friends and
departed to join his company on their road to glory.




CHAPTER XIII.

BLACK DONALD.


     Feared, shunned, belied ere youth had lost her force,
     He hated men too much to feel remorse,
     And thought the vice of wrath a sacred call,
     To pay the injuries of some on all.

     There was a laughing devil in his sneer,
     That caused emotions both of rage and fear:
     And where his frown of hatred darkly fell,
     Hope, withering fled and mercy sighed farewell!

                                            --BYRON.


Herbert Greyson had been correct in his conjecture concerning the cause
of Colonel Le Noir's conduct in absenting himself from the trial, or
appearing there only in the person of his attorney. A proud, vain,
conceited man, full of Joseph Surfacisms, he could better have borne to
be arraigned upon the charge of murder than to face the accusation of
baseness that was about to be proved upon him. Being reasonably certain
as to what was likely to be the decision of the Orphan's Court, he was
not disappointed in hearing that judgment had been rendered in favor of
his ward and her friends. His one great disappointment had been upon
discovering the flight of Clara. For when he had ascertained that she
had fled, he knew that all was lost--and lost through Capitola, the
hated girl for whose destruction he had now another and a stronger
motive--revenge!

In this mood of mind three days before his departure to join his
regiment he sought the retreat of the outlaw. He chose an early hour of
the evening as that in which he should be most likely to find Black
Donald.

It was about eight o'clock when he wrapped his large cloak around his
tall figure, pulled his hat low over his sinister brow and set out to
walk alone to the secret cavern in the side of the Demon's Punch Bowl.

The night was dark and the path dangerous; but his directions had been
careful, so that when he reached the brink of that awful abyss he knew
precisely where to begin his descent with the least danger of being
precipitated to the bottom.

And by taking a strong hold upon the stunted saplings of pine and cedar
that grew down through the clefts of the ravine, and placing his feet
firmly upon the points of projecting rocks, he contrived to descend the
inside of that horrible abyss, which from the top seemed to be fraught
with certain death to any one daring enough to make the attempt.

When about half-way down the precipice he reached the clump of cedar
bushes growing in the deep cleft, and concealing the hole that formed
the entrance to the cavern.

"Here he paused, and, looking through the entrance into a dark and
apparently fathomless cavern, he gave the peculiar signal whistle,
which was immediately answered from within by the well-known voice of
the outlaw chief, saying:"

"All right, my colonel! Give us your hand! Be careful, now, the floor
of this cavern is several feet below the opening."

Le Noir extended his hand into the darkness within and soon felt it
grasped by that of Black Donald, who, muttering; "Slowly, slowly, my
colonel!" succeeded in guiding him down the utter darkness of the
subterranean descent until they stood upon the firm bottom of the
cavern.

They were still in the midst of a blackness that might be felt, except
that from a small opening in the side of the rock a light gleamed.
Toward this second opening Black Donald conducted his patron.

And stooping and passing before him, led him into an inner cavern, well
lighted and rudely fitted up. Upon a large natural platform of rock,
occupying the center of the space, were some dozen bottles of brandy or
whisky, several loaves of bread and some dried venison. Around this
rude table, seated upon fragments of rock, lugged thither for the
purpose, were some eight or ten men of the band, in various stages of
intoxication. Along the walls were piles of bearskins, some of which
served as couches for six or seven men, who had thrown themselves down
upon them in a state of exhaustion or drunken stupor.

"Come, boys, we have not a boundless choice of apartments here, and I
want to talk to my colonel! Suppose you take your liquor and bread and
meat into the outer cavern and give us the use of this one for an
hour," said the outlaw.

The men sullenly obeyed and began to gather up the viands. Demon Dick
seized one of the lights to go after them.

"Put down the glim! Satan singe your skin for you! Do you want to bring
a hue and cry upon us? Don't you know a light in the outer cavern can
be seen from the outside?" roared Black Donald.

Dick sulkily set down the candle and followed his comrades.

"What are you glummering about, confound you! You can see to eat and
drink well enough and find your way to your mouth, in the dark, you
brute!" thundered the captain. But as there was no answer to this and
the men had retreated and left their chief with his visitor alone,
Black Donald turned to Colonel Le Noir and said:

"Well, my patron, what great matter is it that has caused you to leave
the company of fair Clara Day for our grim society?"

"Ah, then, it appears you are not aware that Clara Day has fled from
us--has made a successful appeal to the Orphans' Court, and been taken
out of our hands?" angrily replied Colonel Le Noir.

"Whe--ew! My colonel, I think I could have managed that matter better!
I think if I had had that girl in my power as you had, she should not
have escaped me!"

"Bah! bah! bah! Stop boasting, since it was through your
neglect--yours! yours! that I lost this girl!"

"Mine!" exclaimed Black Donald, in astonishment.

"Aye, yours! for if you had done your duty, performed your engagement,
kept your word, and delivered me from this fatal Capitola, I had not
lost my ward, nor my son his wealthy bride!" exclaimed Le Noir, angrily.

"Capitola! Capitola again! What on earth had she to do with the loss of
Clara Day?" cried Black Donald, in wonder.

"Everything to do with it, sir! By a cunning artifice she delivered
Clara from our power--actually set her free and covered her flight
until she was in security!"

"That girl again! Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha! Ho, ho, ho ho, ho!" laughed and
roared Black Donald, slapping his knees.

Le Noir ground and gnashed his teeth in rage, muttering hoarsely:

"Yes, you may laugh, confound you, since it is granted those who win to
do so! You may laugh; for you have done me out of five thousand
dollars, and what on earth have you performed to earn it?"

"Come, come, my colonel, fair and easy! I don't know which is
vulgarest, to betray loss of temper or love of money, and you are doing
both. However, it is between friends. But how the demon did that girl,
that capital Capitola, get Clara off from right under your eyes?"

"By changing clothes with her, confound you! I will tell you all about
it," replied Le Noir, who thereupon commenced and related the whole
stratagem by which Capitola freed Clara, including the manner in which
she accompanied them to the church and revealed herself at the altar.

Black Donald threw himself back and roared with laughter, vigorously
slapping his knees and crying:

"That girl! that capital Capitola! I would not sell my prospect of
possessing her for double your bribe."

"Your 'prospect!' Your prospect is about as deceptive as a fata
morgana! What have you been doing, I ask you again, toward realizing
this prospect and earning the money you have already received?"

"Fair and easy, my colonel! Don't let temper get the better of justice!
What have I been doing toward earning the money you have already paid
me? In the first place, I lost time and risked my liberty watching
around Hurricane Hall. Then, when I had identified the girl and the
room she slept in by seeing her at the window, I put three of my best
men in jeopardy to capture her. Then, when she, the witch, had captured
them, I sacrificed all my good looks, transmogrifying myself into a
frightful old field preacher, and went to the camp-meeting to watch,
among other things, for an opportunity of carrying her off. The
sorceress! she gave me no such opportunity. I succeeded in nothing
except in fooling the wiseacres and getting admitted to the prison of
my comrades, whom I furnished with instruments by which they made their
escape. Since that time we have had to lie low--yes, literally to lie
low--to keep out of sight, to burrow under ground; in a word, to live
in this cavern."

"And since which you have abandoned all intention of getting the girl
and earning the five thousand dollars," sneered Le Noir.

"Earning the remaining five thousand, you mean, colonel. The first five
thousand I consider I have already earned. It was the last five
thousand that I was to get when the girl should be disposed of."

"Well?"

"Well, I have not given up either the intention of earning the money or
the hope of getting the girl; in truth, I had rather lose the money
than the girl. I have been on the watch almost continually; but, though
I suppose she rides out frequently, I have not yet happened to hit upon
her in any of her excursions. At last, however, I have fixed upon a
plan for getting the witch into my power. I shall trust the execution
of my plan to no one but myself. But I must have time."

"Time! perdition, sir! delay in this matter is fraught with danger!
Listen, sir! How Warfield got possession of this girl or the knowledge
of her history I do not know, except that it was through the agency of
that accursed hag Nancy Grewell. But that he has her and that he knows
all about her is but too certain. That he has not at present legal
proof enough to establish her identity and her rights before a court of
justice I infer from the fact of his continuing inactive in the matter.
But who can foresee how soon he may obtain all the proof that is
necessary to establish Capitola's claims and wrest the whole of this
property from me? Who can tell whether he is not now secretly engaged
in seeking and collecting such proof? Therefore, I repeat that the girl
must immediately be got rid of! Donald, rid me of that creature and the
day that you prove to me her death I will double your fee!"

"Agreed, my colonel, agreed! I have no objection to your doubling, or
even quadrupling, my fee. You shall find me in that, as in all other
matters, perfectly amenable to reason. Only I must have time. Haste
would ruin us. I repeat that I have a plan by which I am certain to get
the girl into my possession--a plan the execution of which I will
entrust to no other hands but my own. But I conclude as I began--I must
have time."

"And how much time?" exclaimed Le Noir, again losing his patience.

"Easy, my patron. That I cannot tell you. It is imprudent to make
promises, especially to you, who will take nothing into consideration
when they cannot be kept," replied Black Donald, coolly.

"But, sir, do you not know that I am ordered to Mexico, and must leave
within three days? I would see the end of this before I go," angrily
exclaimed Le Noir.

"Softly, softly, my child the colonel! 'Slow and sure!' 'Fair and easy
goes far in a day!'"

"In a word, will you do this business for me and do it promptly?"

"Surely, surely, my patron! But I insist upon time."

"But I go to Mexico in three days."

"All honor go with you, my colonel. Who would keep his friend from the
path of glory?"

"Perdition, sir, you trifle with me."

"Perdition, certainly, colonel; there I perfectly agree with you. But
the rest of your sentence is wrong; I don't trifle with you."

"What in the fiend's name do you mean?"

"Nothing in the name of any absent friend of ours. I mean simply that
you may go to--Mexico!"

"And--my business--"

"--Can be done just as well, perhaps better, without you. Recollect, if
you please, my colonel, that when you were absent with Harrison in the
West your great business was done here without you! And done better for
that very reason! No one even suspected your agency in that matter. The
person most benefited by the death of Eugene Le Noir was far enough
from the scene of his murder."

"Hush! Perdition seize you! Why do you speak of things so long past?"
exclaimed Le Noir, growing white to his very lips.

"To jog your worship's memory and suggest that your honor is the last
man who ought to complain of this delay, since it will be very well for
you to be in a distant land serving your country at the time that your
brother's heiress, whose property you illegally hold, is got out of
your way."

"There is something in that," mused Le Noir.

"There is all in that!"

"You have a good brain, Donald."

"What did I tell you? I ought to have been in the cabinet--and mean to
be, too! But, colonel, as I mean to conclude my part of the engagement,
I should like, for fear of accidents, that you conclude yours--and
settle with me before you go."

"What do you mean?"

"That you should fork over to me the remaining five thousand."

"I'll see you at the demon first," passionately exclaimed Le Noir.

"No, you won't, for in that case you'd have to make way with the girl
yourself, or see Old Hurricane make way with all your fortune."

"Wretch that you are!"

"Come, come, colonel, don't let's quarrel. The Kingdom of Satan divided
against itself cannot stand. Do not let us lose time by falling out. I
will get rid of the girl. You, before you go, must hand over the tin,
lest you should fall in battle and your heirs dispute the debt! Shell
out, my colonel! Shell out and never fear! Capitola shall be a wife and
Black Donald a widower before many weeks shall pass."

"I'll do it! I have no time for disputation, as you know, and you
profit by the knowledge. I'll do it, though under protest," muttered Le
Noir, grinding his teeth.

"That's my brave and generous patron!" said Black Donald, as he arose
to attend Le Noir from the cavern; "that's my magnificent colonel of
cavalry! The man who runs such risks for you should be very handsomely
remunerated!"




CHAPTER XIV.

GLORY.


    "What Alexander sighed for,
     What Caesar's soul possessed,
     What heroes, saints have died for,
                         Glory!"


Within three days after his settlement with Black Donald, Colonel Le
Noir left home to join his regiment, ordered to Mexico.

He was accompanied by his son Craven Le Noir as far as Baltimore, from
which port the reinforcements were to sail for New Orleans, en route
for the seat of war.

Here, at the last moment, when the vessel was about to weigh anchor,
Craven Le Noir took leave of his father and set out for the Hidden
House.

And here Colonel Le Noir's regiment was joined by the company of new
recruits in which Herbert Greyson held a commission as lieutenant, and
thus the young man's worst forebodings were realized in having for a
traveling companion and superior officer the man of whom he had been
destined to make a mortal enemy, Colonel Le Noir. However, Herbert soon
marked out his course of conduct, which was to avoid Le Noir as much as
was consistent with his own official duty, and, when compelled to meet
him, to deport himself with the cold ceremony of a subordinate to a
superior officer.

Le Noir, on his part, treated Herbert with an arrogant scorn amounting
to insult, and used every opportunity afforded him by his position to
wound and humiliate the young lieutenant.

After a quick and prosperous voyage they reached New Orleans, where
they expected to be farther reinforced by a company of volunteers who
had come down the Mississippi river from St. Louis. These volunteers
were now being daily drilled at their quarters in the city, and were
only waiting the arrival of the vessel to be enrolled in the regiment.

One morning, a few days after the ship reached harbor, Herbert Greyson
went on shore to the military rendezvous to see the new recruits
exercised. While he stood within the enclosure watching their
evolutions under the orders of an officer, his attention became
concentrated upon the form of a young man of the rank and file who was
marching in a line with many others having their backs turned toward
him. That form and gait seemed familiar--the circumstances in which he
saw them again--painfully familiar. And yet he could not identify the
man. While he gazed, the recruits, at the word of command, suddenly
wheeled and faced about. And Herbert could scarcely repress an
exclamation of astonishment and regret.

That young man in the dress of a private soldier was Clara Day's
betrothed, the widow's only son, Traverse Rocke! While Herbert
continued to gaze in surprise and grief, the young recruit raised his
eyes, recognized his friend, flushed up to his very temples and cast
his eyes down again. The rapid evolutions soon wheeled them around, and
the next order sent them into their quarters.

Herbert's time was also up, and he returned to his duty.

The next day Herbert went to the quarters of the new recruits and
sought out his young friend, whom he found loitering about the grounds.
Again Traverse blushed deeply as the young lieutenant approached. But
Herbert Greyson, letting none of his regret appear, since now it would
be worse than useless in only serving to give pain to the young
private, went up to him cordially and shook his hands, saying:

"Going to serve your country, eh, Traverse? Well, I am heartily glad to
see you, at any rate."

"But heartily sorry to see me here, enlisted as a private in a company
of raw recruits, looking not unlike Falstaff's ragged regiment?"

"Nay; I did not say that, Traverse. Many a private in the ranks has
risen to be a general officer," replied Herbert, encouragingly.

Traverse laughed good humoredly, saying:

"It does not look much like that in my case. This dress," he said,
looking down at his coarse, ill-fitting uniform, cowhide shoes, etc.;
"this dress, this drilling, these close quarters, coarse food and mixed
company are enough to take the military ardor out of any one!"

"Traverse, you talk like a petit maitre, which is not at all your
character. Effeminacy is not your vice."

"Nor any other species of weakness, do you mean? Ah, Herbert, your
aspiring hopeful, confident old friend is considerably taken down in
his ideas of himself, his success and life in general! I went to the
West with high hopes. Six months of struggling against indifference,
neglect and accumulated debts lowered them down! I carried out letters
and made friends, but their friendship began and ended in wishing me
well. While trying to get into profitable practice I got into debt.
Meanwhile I could not hear from my betrothed in all those months. An
occasional letter from her might have prevented this step. But troubles
gathered around me, debts increased and--"

"--Creditors were cruel. It is the old story; my poor boy!"

"No; my only creditors were my landlady and my laundress, two poor
widows who never willingly distressed me, but who occasionally asked
for 'that little amount' so piteously that my heart bled to lack it to
give them. And as victuals and clean shirts were absolute necessaries
of life, every week my debts increased. I could have faced a prosperous
male creditor, and might, perhaps, have been provoked to bully such an
one, had he been inclined to be cruel; but I could not face poor women
who, after all, I believe, are generally the best friends a struggling
young man can have; and so, not to bore a smart young lieutenant with a
poor private's antecedents--"

"Oh, Traverse--"

"--I will even make an end of my story. 'At last there came a weary day
when hope and faith beneath the weight gave way.' And, hearing that a
company of volunteers was being raised to go to Mexico, I enlisted,
sold my citizen's wardrobe and my little medical library, paid my
debts, made my two friends, the poor widows, some acceptable presents,
sent the small remnant of the money to my mother, telling her that I
was going farther south to try my fortune, and--here I am."

"You did not tell her that you had enlisted?"

"No."

"Oh, Traverse, how long ago was it that you left St. Louis?"

"Just two weeks."

"Ah! if you had only had patience for a few days longer!" burst unaware
from Herbert's bosom. In an instant he was sorry for having spoken
thus, for Traverse, with all his soul in his eyes, asked eagerly:

"Why--why, Herbert? What do you mean?"

"Why, you should know that I did not come direct from West Point, but
from the neighborhood of Staunton and Hurricane Hall."

"Did you? Oh, did you? Then you may be able to give me news of Clara
and my dear mother," exclaimed Traverse, eagerly.

"Yes, I am--pleasant news," said Herbert, hesitating in a manner which
no one ever hesitated before in communicating good tidings.

"Thank heaven! oh, thank heaven! What is it, Herbert? How is my dear
mother getting on? Where is my best Clara?"

"They are both living together at Willow Heights, according to the
wishes of the late Doctor Day. A second appeal to the Orphans' Court
made in behalf of Clara by her next friend, Doctor Williams, about a
month ago, proved more successful. And if you had waited a few days
longer before enlisting and leaving St. Louis, you would have received
a letter from Clara to the same effect, and one from Doctor Williams
apprizing you that your mother had received her legacy, and that the
thousand dollars left you by Doctor Day had been paid into the
Agricultural Bank, subject to your orders."

"Oh, heaven! had I but waited three days longer!" exclaimed Traverse,
in such acute distress that Herbert hastened to console him by saying:

"Do not repine, Traverse; these things go by fate. It was your
destiny--let us hope it will prove a glorious one."

"It was my impatience!" exclaimed Traverse. "It was my impatience!
Doctor Day always faithfully warned me against it; always told me that
most of the errors, sins and miseries of this world arose from simple
impatience, which is want of faith. And now I know it! and now I know
it! What had I, who had an honorable profession, to do with becoming a
private soldier?"

"Well, well, it is honorable at least to serve your country," said
Herbert, soothingly.

"If a foreign foe invaded her shores, yes; but what had I to do with
invading another's country?--enlisting for a war of the rights and
wrongs of which I know no more than anybody else does? Growing
impatient because fortune did not at once empty her cornucopia upon my
head! Oh, fool!"

"You blame yourself too severely, Traverse. Your act was natural enough
and justifiable enough, much as it is to be regretted," said Herbert,
cheerfully.

"Come, come, sit on this plank bench beside me--if you are not ashamed
to be seen with a private who is also a donkey--and tell me all about
it. Show me the full measure of the happiness I have so recklessly
squandered away," exclaimed Traverse, desperately.

"I will sit beside you and tell you everything you wish to know, on
condition that you stop berating yourself in a manner that fills me
with indignation," replied Herbert, as they went to a distant part of
the dusty enclosure and took their seats upon a rude bench.

"Oh, Herbert, bear with me; I could dash my wild, impatient head
against a stone wall!"

"That would not be likely to clear or strengthen your brains," said
Herbert, who thereupon commenced and told Traverse the whole history of
the persecution of Clara Day at the Hidden House; the interception of
her letters; the attempt made to force her into a marriage with Craven
Le Noir; her deliverance from her enemies by the address and courage of
Capitola; her flight to Staunton and refuge with Mrs. Rocke; her appeal
to the court, and finally her success and her settlement under the
charge of her matronly friend at Willow Heights.

Traverse had not listened patiently to this account. He heard it with
many bursts of irrepressible indignation and many involuntary starts of
wild passion. Toward the last he sprang up and walked up and down,
chafing like an angry lion in his cage.

"And this man," he exclaimed, as Herbert concluded; "this demon! this
beast! is now our commanding officer--the colonel of our regiment."

"Yes," replied Herbert, "but as such you must not call him names;
military rules are despotic; and this man, who knows your person and
knows you to be the betrothed of Clara Day, whose hand and fortune he
covets for his son? will leave no power with which his command invests
him untried to ruin and destroy you! Traverse, I say these things to
you that being 'forewarned' you may be 'forearmed.' I trust that you
will remember your mother and your betrothed, and for their dear sakes
practise every sort of self-control, patience and forbearance under the
provocations you may receive from our colonel. And in advising you to
do this I only counsel that which I shall myself practise. I, too, am
under the ban of Le Noir for the part I played in the church in
succoring Capitola, as well as for happening to be 'the nephew of my
uncle,' Major Warfield, who is his mortal enemy."

"I? Will I not be patient, after the lesson I have just learned upon
the evils of the opposite? Be easy on my account, dear old friend, I
will be as patient as Job, meek as Moses and long-suffering as--my own
sweet mother!" said Traverse, earnestly.

The drum was now heard beating to quarters, and Traverse, wringing his
friend's hand, left him.

Herbert returned to his ship full of one scheme, of which he had not
spoken to Traverse lest it should prove unsuccessful. This scheme was
to procure his free discharge before they should set sail for the Rio
Grande. He had many influential friends among the officers of his
regiment, and he was resolved to tell them as much as was delicate,
proper and useful for them to know of the young recruit's private
history, in order to get their cooperation.

Herbert spent every hour of this day and the next, when off duty, in
this service of his friend. He found his brother officers easily
interested, sympathetic and propitious. They united their efforts with
his own to procure the discharge of the young recruit, but in vain; the
power of Colonel Le Noir was opposed to their influence and the
application was peremptorily refused.

Herbert Greyson did not sit down quietly under this disappointment, but
wrote an application embodying all the facts of the case to the
Secretary of War, got it signed by all the officers of the regiment and
despatched it by the first mail.

Simultaneously he took another important step for the interest of his
friend. Without hinting any particular motive, he had begged Traverse
to let him have his photograph taken, and the latter, with a laugh at
the lover-like proposal, had consented. When the likeness was finished
Herbert sent it by express to Major Warfield, accompanied by a letter
describing the excellent character and unfortunate condition of
Traverse, praying the major's interest in his behalf and concluding by
saying:

"You cannot look upon the accompanying photograph of my friend and any
longer disclaim your own express image in your son."

How this affected the action of Old Hurricane will be seen hereafter.

Traverse, knowing nothing of the efforts that had been and were still
being made for his discharge, suffered neither disappointment for
failure of the first nor anxiety for the issue of the last.

He wrote to his mother and Clara, congratulating them on their good
fortune; telling them that he, in common with many young men of St.
Louis, had volunteered for the Mexican War; that he was then in New
Orleans, en route for the Rio Grande, and that they would be pleased to
know that their mutual friend, Herbert Greyson, was an officer in the
same regiment of which he himself was at present a private, but with
strong hopes of soon winning his epaulettes. He endorsed an order for
his mother to draw the thousand dollars left him by Doctor Day, and he
advised her to re-deposit the sum in her own name for her own use in
case of need. Praying God's blessing upon them all, and begging their
prayers for himself, Traverse concluded his letter, which he mailed the
same evening.

And the next morning the company was ordered on board and the whole
expedition set sail for the Rio Grande.

Now, we might just as easily as not accompany our troops to Mexico and
relate the feats of arms there performed with the minuteness and
fidelity of an eye-witness, since we have sat at dinner-tables where
the heroes of that war have been honored guests, and where we have
heard them fight their battles o'er till "thrice the foe was slain and
thrice the field was won."

We might follow the rising star of our young lieutenant, as by his own
merits and others' mishaps he ascended from rank to rank, through all
the grades of military promotion, but need not because the feats of
Lieutenant--Captain--Major and Colonel Greyson, are they not written in
the chronicles of the Mexican War?

We prefer to look after our little domestic heroine, our brave little
Cap, who, when women have their rights, shall be a lieutenant-colonel
herself. Shall she not, gentlemen?

       *       *       *       *       *       *       *

In one fortnight from this time, while Mrs. Rocke and Clara were still
living comfortably at Willow Heights and waiting anxiously to hear from
Traverse, whom they still supposed to be practising his profession at
St Louis, they received his last letter written on the eve of his
departure for the seat of war. At first the news overwhelmed them with
grief, but then they sought relief in faith, answered his letter
cheerfully and commended him to the infinite mercy of God.




CHAPTER XV.

CAP CAPTIVATES A CRAVEN.


    "He knew himself a villain, but he deemed
     The rest no better than the thing he seemed;
     And scorned the best as hypocrites who hid
     Those deeds the bolder spirits plainly did.
     He knew himself detested, but he knew
     The hearts that loathed him crouched and--dreaded, too."


The unregenerate human heart is, perhaps, the most inconsistent thing
in all nature; and in nothing is it more capricious than in the
manifestations of its passions; and in no passion is it so fantastic as
in that which it miscalls love, but which is really often only appetite.

From the earliest days of manhood Craven Le Noir had been the votary of
vice, which he called pleasure. Before reaching the age of twenty-five
he had run the full course of dissipation, and found himself ruined in
health, degraded in character and disgusted with life.

Yet in all this experience his heart had not been once agitated with a
single emotion that deserved the name of passion. It was colder than
the coldest.

He had not loved Clara, though, for the sake of her money, he had
courted her so assiduously. Indeed, for the doctor's orphan girl he had
from the first conceived a strong antipathy. His evil spirit had shrunk
from her pure soul with the loathing a fiend might feel for an angel.
He had found it repugnant and difficult, almost to the extent of
impossibility, for him to pursue the courtship to which he was only
reconciled by a sense of duty to--his pocket.

It was reserved for his meeting with Capitola at the altar of the
Forest Chapel to fire his clammy heart, stagnant blood and sated senses
with the very first passion that he had ever known. Her image, as she
stood there at the altar with flashing eyes and flaming cheeks and
scathing tongue defying him, was ever before his mind's eye. There was
something about that girl so spirited, so piquant and original that she
impressed even his apathetic nature as no other woman had ever been
able to do. But what most of all attracted him to Capitola was her
diablerie. He longed to catch that little savage to his bosom and have
her at his mercy. The aversion she had exhibited toward him only
stimulated his passion.

Craven Le Noir, among his other graces, was gifted with inordinate
vanity. He did not in the least degree despair of over-coming all
Capitola's dislike to his person and inspiring her with a passion equal
to his own.

He knew well that he dared not present himself at Hurricane Hall, but
he resolved to waylay her in her rides and there to press his suit. To
this he was urged by another motive almost as strong as love--namely,
avarice.

He had gathered thus much from his father, that Capitola Black was
supposed to be Capitola Le Noir, the rightful heiress of all that vast
property in land, houses, iron and coal mines, foundries and furnaces,
railway shares, etc., and bank stocks, from which his father drew the
princely revenue that supported them both in their lavish extravagance
of living.

As the heiress--or, rather, the rightful owner--of all this vast
fortune. Capitola was a much greater "catch" than poor Clara, with her
modest estate, had been. And Mr. Craven Le Noir was quite willing to
turn the tables on his father by running off with the great heiress,
and step from his irksome position of dependent upon Colonel Le Noir's
often ungracious bounty to that of the husband of the heiress and the
master of the property. Added to that was another favorable
circumstance--namely, whereas he had had a strong personal antipathy to
Clara he had as strong an attraction to Capitola, which would make his
course of courtship all the pleasanter.

In one word, he resolved to woo, win and elope with, or forcibly
abduct, Capitola Le Noir, marry her and then turn upon his father and
claim the fortune in right of his wife. The absence of Colonel Le Noir
in Mexico favored his projects, as he could not fear interruption.

Meanwhile our little madcap remained quite unconscious of the honors
designed her. She had cried every day of the first week of Herbert's
absence; every alternate day of the second; twice in the third; once in
the fourth; not at all in the fifth, and the sixth week she was quite
herself again, as full of fun and frolic and as ready for any mischief
or deviltry that might turn up.

She resumed her rides, no longer followed by Wool, because Old
Hurricane, partly upon account of his misadventure in having had the
misfortune inadvertently "to lose sight of" his mistress upon that
memorable occasion of the metamorphosis of Cap into Clara and partly
because of the distant absence of Le Noir, did not consider his
favorite in danger.

He little knew that a subtle and unscrupulous agent had been left sworn
to her destruction, and that another individual, almost equally
dangerous, had registered a secret vow to run off with her.

Neither did poor Cap when, rejoicing to be free from the dogging
attendance of Wool, imagine the perils to which she was exposed; nor is
it even likely that if she had she would have cared for them in any
other manner than as promising piquant adventures. From childhood she
had been inured to danger, and had never suffered harm; therefore, Cap,
like the Chevalier Bayard, was "without fear and without reproach."

Craven Le Noir proceeded cautiously with his plans, knowing that there
was time enough and that all might be lost by haste. He did not wish to
alarm Capitola.

The first time he took occasion to meet her in her rides he merely
bowed deeply, even to the flaps of his saddle and, with a melancholy
smile, passed on.

"Miserable wretch! He is a mean fellow to want to marry a girl against
her will, no matter how much he might have been in love with her, and I
am very glad I balked him. Still, he looks so ill and unhappy that I
can't help pitying him," said Cap, looking compassionately at his white
cheeks and languishing eyes, and little knowing that the illness was
the effect of dissipation and that the melancholy was assumed for the
occasion.

A few days after this Cap again met Craven Le Noir, who again, with a
deep bow and sad smile, passed her.

"Poor fellow! he richly deserves to suffer, and I hope it may make him
better, for I am right-down sorry for him; it must be so dreadful to
lose one we love; but it was too base in him to let his father try to
compel her to have him. Suppose, now, Herbert Greyson was to take a
fancy to another girl, would I let uncle go to him and put a pistol to
his head and say, 'Cap is fond of you, you varlet! and demmy, sir, you
shall marry none but her, or receive an ounce of lead in your stupid
brains'? No, I'd scorn it; I'd forward the other wedding; I'd make the
cake and dress the bride and--then maybe I'd break--no, I'm blamed if I
would! I'd not break my heart for anybody. Set them up with it, indeed!
Neither would my dear, darling, sweet, precious Herbert treat me so,
and I'm a wretch to think of it!" said Cap, with a rich, inimitable
unction as, rejoicing in her own happy love, she cheered Gyp and rode
on.

Now, Craven Le Noir had been conscious of the relenting and
compassionate looks of Capitola, but he did not know that they were
only the pitying regards of a noble and victorious nature over a
vanquished and suffering wrong-doer. However, he still determined to be
cautious, and not ruin his prospects by precipitate action, but to
"hasten slowly."

So the next time he met Capitola he raised his eyes with one deep, sad,
appealing gaze to hers, and then, bowing profoundly, passed on.

"Poor man," said Cap to herself, "he bears no malice toward me for
depriving him of his sweetheart; that's certain. And, badly as he
behaved, I suppose it was all for love, for I don't know how any one
could live in the same house with Clara and not be in love with her. I
should have been so myself if I'd been a man, I know!"

The next time Cap met Craven and saw again that deep, sorrowful,
appealing gaze as he bowed and passed her, she glanced after him,
saying to herself:

"Poor soul, I wonder what he means by looking at me in that piteous
manner? I can do nothing to relieve him. I'm sure if I could I would.
But 'the way of the transgressor is hard,' Mr. Le Noir, and he who sins
must suffer."

For about three weeks their seemingly accidental meetings continued in
this silent manner, so slowly did Craven make his advances. Then,
feeling more confidence, he made a considerably long step forward.

One day, when he guessed that Capitola would be out, instead of meeting
her as heretofore, he put himself in her road and, riding slowly toward
a five-barred gate, allowed her to overtake him.

He opened the gate and, bowing, held it open until she had passed.

She bowed her thanks and rode on; but presently, without the least
appearance of intruding, since she had overtaken him, he was at her
side and, speaking with downcast eyes and deferential manner, he said:

"I have long desired an opportunity to express the deep sorrow and
mortification I feel for having been hurried into rudeness toward an
estimable young lady at the Forest Chapel. Miss Black, will you permit
me now to assure you of my profound repentance of that act and to
implore your pardon?"

"Oh, I have nothing against you, Mr. Le Noir. It was not I whom you
were intending to marry against my will; and as for what you said and
did to me, ha! ha! I had provoked it, you know, and I also afterwards
paid it in kind. It was a fair fight, in which I was the victor, and
victors should never be vindictive," said Cap, laughing, for, though
knowing him to have been violent and unjust, she did not suspect him of
being treacherous and deceitful, or imagine the base designs concealed
beneath his plausible manner. Her brave, honest nature could understand
a brute or a despot, but not a traitor.

"Then, like frank enemies who have fought their fight out, yet bear no
malice toward each other, we may shake hands and be friends, I hope,"
said Craven, replying in the same spirit in which she had spoken.

"Well, I don't know about that, Mr. Le Noir. Friendship is a very
sacred thing, and its name should not be lightly taken on our tongues.
I hope you will excuse me if I decline your proffer," said Cap, who had
a well of deep, true, earnest feeling beneath her effervescent surface.

"What! you will not even grant a repentant man your friendship, Miss
Black?" asked Craven, with a sorrowful smile.

"I wish you well, Mr. Le Noir. I wish you a good and, therefore, a
happy life; but I cannot give you friendship, for that means a great
deal."

"Oh, I see how it is! You cannot give your friendship where you cannot
give your esteem. Is it not so?"

"Yes," said Capitola; "that is it; yet I wish you so well that I wish
you might grow worthy of higher esteem than mine."

"You are thinking of my--yes, I will not shrink from characterizing
that conduct as it deserves--my unpardonable violence toward Clara.
Miss Black, I have mourned that sin from the day that I was hurried
into it until this. I have bewailed it from the very bottom of my
heart," said Craven, earnestly, fixing his eyes with an expression of
perfect truthfulness upon those of Capitola.

"I am glad to hear you say so," said Cap.

"Miss Black, please hear this in palliation--I would not presume to say
in defense--of my conduct: I was driven to frenzy by a passion of
contending love and jealousy as violent and maddening as it was unreal
and transient. But that delusive passion has subsided, and among the
unmerited mercies for which I have to be thankful is that, in my
frantic pursuit of Clara Day, I was not cursed with success! For all
the violence into which that frenzy hurried me I have deeply repented.
I can never forgive myself, but--cannot you forgive me?"

"Mr. Le Noir, I have nothing for which to forgive you. I am glad that
you have repented toward Clara and I wish you well, and that is really
all that I can say."

"I have deserved this and I accept it," said Craven, in a tone so
mournful that Capitola, in spite of all her instincts, could not choose
but pity him.

He rode on, with his pale face, downcast eyes and melancholy
expression, until they reached a point at the back of Hurricane Hall,
where their paths diverged.

Here Craven, lifting his hat and bowing profoundly, said, in a sad tone:

"Good evening, Miss Black," and, turning his horse's head, took the
path leading down into the Hidden Hollow.

"Poor young fellow! he must be very unhappy down in that miserable
place; but I can't help it. I wish he would go to Mexico with the
rest," said Cap, as she pursued her way homeward.

Not to excite her suspicion, Craven Le Noir avoided meeting Capitola
for a few days, and then threw himself in her road and, as before,
allowed her to overtake him.

Very subtly he entered into conversation with her, and, guarding every
word and look, took care to interest without alarming her. He said no
more of friendship, but a great deal of regret for wasted years and
wasted talents in the past and good resolutions for the future.

And Cap listened good humoredly. Capitola, being of a brave, hard, firm
nature, had not the sensitive perceptions, fine intuitions and true
insight into character that distinguished the more refined nature of
Clara Day--or, at least, she had not these delicate faculties in the
same perfection. Thus, her undefined suspicions of Craven's sincerity
were overborne by a sort of noble benevolence which determined her to
think the best of him which circumstances would permit.

Craven, on his part, having had more experience, was much wiser in the
pursuit of his object. He also had the advantage of being in earnest.
His passion for Capitola was sincere, and not, as it had been in the
case of Clara, simulated. He believed, therefore, that, when the time
should be ripe for the declaration of his love, he would have a much
better prospect of success, especially as Capitola, in her ignorance of
her own great fortune, must consider his proposal the very climax of
disinterestedness.

After three more weeks of riding and conversing with Capitola he had,
in his own estimation, advanced so far in her good opinion as to make
it perfectly safe to risk a declaration. And this he determined to do
upon the very first opportunity.

Chance favored him.

One afternoon Capitola, riding through the pleasant woods skirting the
back of the mountain range that sheltered Hurricane Hall, got a fall,
for which she was afterwards inclined to cuff Wool.

It happened in this way: She had come to a steep rise in the road and
urged her pony into a hard gallop, intending as she said to herself, to
"storm the height," when suddenly, under the violent strain, the girth,
ill-fastened, flew apart and Miss Cap was on the ground, buried under
the fallen saddle.

With many a blessing upon the carelessness of grooms, Cap picked
herself up, put the saddle on the horse, and was engaged in drawing
under the girth when Craven Le Noir rode up, sprang from his horse and,
with anxiety depicted on his countenance, ran to the spot inquiring:

"What is the matter? No serious accident, I hope and trust, Miss Black?"

"No; those wretches in uncle's stables did not half buckle the girth,
and, as I was going in a hard gallop up the steep, it flew apart and
gave me a tumble; that's all," said Cap, desisting a moment from her
occupation to take breath.

"You were not hurt?" inquired Craven, with deep interest in his tone.

"Oh, no; there is no harm done, except to my riding skirt, which has
been torn and muddied by the fall," said Cap, laughing and resuming her
efforts to tighter the girth.

"Pray permit me," said Craven, gently taking the end of the strap from
her hand; "this is no work for a lady, and, besides, is beyond your
strength."

Capitola, thanking him, withdrew to the side of the road, and, seating
herself upon the trunk of a fallen tree, began to brush the dirt from
her habit.

Craven adjusted and secured the saddle with great care, patted and
soothed the pony and then, approaching Capitola in the most deferential
manner, stood before her and said: "Miss Black, you will pardon me, I
hope, if I tell you that the peril I had imagined you to be in has so
agitated my mind as to make it impossible for me longer to withhold a
declaration of my sentiments--" Here his voice, that had trembled
throughout this disclosure, now really and utterly failed him.

Capitola looked up with surprise and interest; she had never in her
life before heard an explicit declaration of love from anybody. She and
Herbert somehow had always understood each other very well, without
ever a word of technical love-making passing between them; so Capitola
did not exactly know what was coming next.

Craven recovered his voice, and encouraged by the favorable manner in
which she appeared to listen to him, actually threw himself at her feet
and, seizing one of her hands, with much ardor and earnestness and much
more eloquence than any one would have credited him with, poured forth
the history of his passion and his hopes.

"Well, I declare!" said Cap, when he had finished his speech and was
waiting in breathless impatience for her answer; "this is what is
called a declaration of love and a proposal of marriage, is it? It is
downright sentimental, I suppose, if I had only sense enough to
appreciate it! It is as good as a play; pity it is lost upon me!"

"Cruel girl! how you mock me!" cried Craven, rising from his knees and
sitting beside her.

"No, I don't; I'm in solemn earnest. I say it is first rate. Do it
again; I like it!"

"Sarcastic and merciless one, you glory in the pain you give! But if
you wish again to hear me say I love you, I will say it a dozen--yes, a
hundred--times over if you will only admit that you could love me a
little in return."

"Don't; that would be tiresome; two or three times is quite enough.
Besides, what earthly good could my saying 'I love you' do?"

"It might persuade you to become the wife of one who will adore you to
the last hour of his life."

"Meaning you?"

"Meaning me; the most devoted of your admirers."

"That isn't saying much, since I haven't got any but you."

"Thank fortune for it! Then I am to understand, charming Capitola, that
at least your hand and your affections are free," cried Craven,
joyfully.

"Well, now, I don't know about that! Really, I can't positively say;
but it strikes me, if I were to get married to anybody else, there's
somebody would feel queerish!"

"No doubt there are many whose secret hopes would be blasted, for so
charming a girl could not have passed through this world without having
won many hearts who would keenly feel the loss of hope in her marriage.
But what if they do, my enchanting Capitola? You are not responsible
for any one having formed such hopes."

"Fudge!" said Cap, "I'm no belle; never was; never can be; have neither
wealth, beauty nor coquetry enough to make me one. I have no lovers nor
admirers to break their hearts about me, one way or another; but there
is one honest fellow--hem! never mind; I feel as if I belonged to
somebody else; that's all. I am very much obliged to you, Mr. Le Noir,
for your preference, and even for the beautiful way in which you have
expressed it, but--I belong to somebody else."

"Miss Black," said Craven, somewhat abashed but not discouraged. "I
think I understand you. I presume that you refer to the young man who
was your gallant champion in the Forest Chapel."

"The one that made your nose bleed," said the incorrigible Cap.

"Well, Miss Black, from your words it appears that this is by no means
an acknowledged but only an understood engagement, which cannot be
binding upon either party. Now, a young lady of your acknowledged good
sense--"

"I never had any more good sense than I have had admirers," interrupted
Cap.

Craven smiled.

"I would not hear your enemy say that," he replied; then, resuming his
argument, he said:

"You will readily understand, Miss Black, that the vague engagement of
which you speak, where there is want of fortune on both sides, is no
more prudent than it is binding. On the contrary, the position which it
is my pride to offer you is considered an enviable one; even apart from
the devoted love that goes with it. You are aware that I am the sole
heir of the Hidden House estate, which, with all its dependencies, is
considered the largest property, as my wife would be the most important
lady, in the county."

Cap's lip curled a little; looking askance at him she answered:

"I am really very much obliged to you Mr. Le Noir, for the
distinguished honor that you designed for me. I should highly
appreciate the magnanimity of a young gentleman, the heir of the
wealthiest estate in the neighborhood who deigns to propose marriage to
the little beggar that I acknowledge myself to be. I regret to be
obliged to refuse such dignities, but--I belong to another," said
Capitola, rising and advancing toward her horse.

Craven would not risk his success by pushing his suit further at this
sitting.

Very respectfully lending his assistance to put Capitola into her
saddle, he said he hoped at some future and more propitious time to
resume the subject. And then, with a deep bow, he left her, mounted his
horse and rode on his way.

He did not believe that Capitola was more than half in earnest, or that
any girl in Capitola's circumstances would do such a mad thing as to
refuse the position he offered her.

He did not throw himself in her way often enough to excite her
suspicion that their meetings were preconcerted on his part, and even
when he did overtake her or suffer her to overtake him, he avoided
giving her offense by pressing his suit until another good opportunity
should offer. This was not long in coming.

One afternoon he overtook her and rode by her side for a short distance
when, finding her in unusually good spirits and temper, he again
renewed his declaration of love and offer of marriage.

Cap turned around in her saddle and looked at him with astonishment for
a full minute before she exclaimed: "Why, Mr. Le Noir, I gave you an
answer more than a week ago. Didn't I tell you 'No'? What on earth do
you mean by repeating the question?"

"I mean, bewitching Capitola, not to let such a treasure slip out of my
grasp if I can help it."

"I never was in your grasp, that I know of," said Cap, whipping up her
horse and leaving him far behind.

Days passed before Craven thought it prudent again to renew and press
his suit. He did so upon a fine September morning, when he overtook her
riding along the banks of the river. He joined her and in the most
deprecating manner besought her to listen to him once more. Then he
commenced in a strain of the most impassioned eloquence and urged his
love and his proposal.

Capitola stopped her horse, wheeled around and faced him, looking him
full in the eyes while she said:

"Upon my word, Mr. Le Noir, you remind me of an anecdote told of young
Sheridan. When his father advised him to take a wife and settle, he
replied by asking whose wife he should take. Will nobody serve your
purpose but somebody else's sweetheart? I have told you that I belong
to a brave young soldier who is fighting his country's battles in a
foreign land, while you are lazing here at home, trying to undermine
him. I am ashamed of you, sir, and ashamed of myself for talking with
you so many times! Never do you presume to accost me on the highway or
anywhere else again! Craven by name and Craven by nature, you have once
already felt the weight of Herbert's arm! Do not provoke its second
descent upon you! You are warned!" and with that Capitola, with her
lips curled, her eyes flashing and her cheeks burning, put whip to her
pony and galloped away.

Craven Le Noir's thin, white face grew perfectly livid with passion.

"I will have her yet! I have sworn it, and by fair means or by foul I
will have her yet!" he exclaimed, as he relaxed his hold upon his
bridle and let his horse go on slowly, while he sat with his brows
gathered over his thin nose, his long chin buried in his neckcloth and
his nails between his teeth, gnawing like a wild beast, as was his
custom when deeply cogitating.

Presently he conceived a plan so diabolical that none but Satan himself
could have inspired it! This was to take advantage of his acquaintance
and casual meetings with Capitola so to malign her character as to make
it unlikely that any honest man would risk his honor by taking her to
wife; that thus the way might be left clear for himself; and he
resolved, if possible, to effect this in such a manner--namely, by
jests, innuendos and sneers--that it should never be directly traced to
a positive assertion on his part. And in the mean time he determined to
so govern himself in his deportment toward Capitola as to arouse no
suspicion, give no offense and, if possible, win back her confidence.

It is true that even Craven Le Noir, base as he was, shrank from the
idea of smirching the reputation of the woman whom he wished to make a
wife; but then he said to himself that in that remote neighborhood the
scandal would be of little consequence to him, who, as soon as he
should be married, would claim the estate of the Hidden House in right
of his wife, put it in charge of an overseer and then, with his bride,
start for Paris, the paradise of the epicurean, where he designed to
fix their principal residence.

Craven Le Noir was so pleased with his plan that he immediately set
about putting it in execution. Our next chapter will show how he
succeeded.




CHAPTER XVI.

CAP'S RAGE


     Is he not approved to the height of a villain, who hath
     slandered, scorned, dishonored thy kinswoman. Oh! that I
     were a man for his sake, or had a friend who would be
     one for mine!

                                          --SHAKESPEARE.


Autumn brought the usual city visitors to Hurricane Hall to spend the
sporting season and shoot over Major Warfield's grounds. Old Hurricane
was in his glory, giving dinners and projecting hunts.

Capitola also enjoyed herself rarely, enacting with much satisfaction
to herself and guests her new role of hostess, and not unfrequently
joining her uncle and his friends in their field sports.

Among the guests there were two who deserve particular attention, not
only because they had been for many years annual visitors of Hurricane
Hall, but more especially because there had grown up between them and
our little madcap heroine, a strong mutual confidence and friendship.
Yet no three persons could possibly be more unlike than Capitola and
the two cousins of her soul, as she called these two friends. They were
both distant relatives of Major Warfield, and in right of this
relationship invariably addressed Capitola as "Cousin Cap."

John Stone, the elder of the two, was a very tall, stout, squarely
built young man, with a broad, good-humored face, fair skin, blue eyes
and light hair. In temperament he was rather phlegmatic, quiet and
lazy. In character he was honest, prudent and good-tempered. In
circumstances he was a safe banker, with a notable wife and two healthy
children. The one thing that was able to excite his quiet nerves was
the chase, of which he was as fond as he could possibly be of any
amusement. The one person who agreeably stirred his rather still
spirits was our little Cap, and that was the secret of his friendship
for her.

Edwin Percy, the other, was a young West Indian, tall and delicately
formed, with a clear olive complexion, languishing dark hazel eyes and
dark, bright chestnut hair and beard. In temperament he was ardent as
his clime. In character, indolent, careless and self-indulgent. In
condition he was the bachelor heir of a sugar plantation of a thousand
acres. He loved not the chase, nor any other amusement requiring
exertion. He doted upon swansdown sofas with springs, French plays,
cigars and chocolate. He came to the country to find repose, good air
and an appetite. He was the victim of constitutional ennui that yielded
to nothing but the exhilaration of Capitola's company; that was the
mystery of his love for her, and doubtless the young Creole would have
proposed for Cap, had he not thought it too much trouble to get
married, and dreaded the bustle of a bridal. Certainly Edwin Percy was
as opposite in character to John Stone, as they both were to Capitola,
yet great was the relative attraction among the three. Cap impartially
divided her kind offices as hostess between them.

John Stone joined Old Hurricane in many a hard day's hunt, and Capitola
was often of the party.

Edwin Percy spent many hours on the luxurious lounge in the parlor,
where Cap was careful to place a stand with chocolate, cigars, wax
matches and his favorite books.

One day Cap had had what she called "a row with the governor," that is
to say, a slight misunderstanding with Major Warfield; a very uncommon
occurrence, as the reader knows, in which that temperate old gentleman
had so freely bestowed upon his niece the names of "beggar, foundling,
brat, vagabond and vagrant," that Capitola, in just indignation,
refused to join the birding party, and taking her game bag, powder
flask, shot-horn and fowling piece, and calling her favorite pointer,
walked off, as she termed it, "to shoot herself." But if Capitola's by
no means sweet temper had been tried that morning, it was destined to
be still more severely tested before the day was over.

Her second provocation came in this way: John Stone, another deserter
of the birding party had that day betaken himself to Tip-top upon some
private business of his own. He dined at the Antlers in company with
some sporting gentlemen of the neighborhood, and when the conversation
naturally turned upon field sports, Mr. John Stone spoke of the fine
shooting that was to be had around Hurricane Hall, when one of the
gentlemen, looking straight across the table to Mr. Stone, said:

"Ahem! That pretty little huntress of Hurricane Hall--that niece or
ward, or mysterious daughter of Old Hurricane, who engages with so much
enthusiasm in your field sports over there, is a girl of very free and
easy manners I understand--a Diana in nothing but her love of the
chase!"

"Sir, it is a base calumny! And the man who endorses it is a shameless
slanderer! There is my card! I may be found at my present residence,
Hurricane Hall," said John Stone, throwing his pasteboard across the
table, and rising to leave it.

"Nay, nay," said the stranger, laughing and pushing the card away. "I
do not endorse the statement--I know nothing about it! I wash my hands
of it," said the young man. And then upon Mr. Stone's demanding the
author of the calumny, he gave the name of Mr. Craven Le Noir, who, he
said, had "talked in his cups," at a dinner party recently given by one
of his friends.

"I pronounce--publicly, in the presence of all these witnesses, as I
shall presently to Craven Le Noir himself--that he is a shameless
miscreant, who has basely slandered a noble girl! You, sir, have
declined to endorse those words; henceforth decline to repeat them! For
after this I shall call to a severe account any man who ventures, by
word, gesture or glance to hint this slander, or in any other way deal
lightly with the honorable name and fame of the lady in question.
Gentlemen, I am to be found at Hurricane Hall, and I have the honor of
wishing you a more improving subject of conversation, and--a very good
afternoon," said John Stone, bowing and leaving the room.

He immediately called for his horse and rode home.

In crossing the thicket of woods between the river and the rising
ground in front of Hurricane Hall, he overtook Capitola, who, as we
have said, had been out alone with her gun and dog, and was now
returning home with her game bag well laden.

Now, as John Stone looked at Capitola, with her reckless, free and
joyous air, he thought she was just the sort of girl, unconsciously, to
get herself and friends into trouble. And he thought it best to give
her a hint to put an abrupt period to her acquaintance, if she had even
he slightest, with the heir apparent of the Hidden House.

While still hesitating how to begin the conversation, he came up with
the young girl, dismounted, and, leading his horse, walked by her side,
asking carelessly:

"What have you bagged, Cap?"

"Some partridges! Oh, you should have been out with me and Sweetlips!
We've had such sport! But, anyhow, you shall enjoy your share of the
spoils! Come home and you shall have some of these partridges broiled
for supper, with currant sauce--a dish of my own invention for uncle's
sake, you know! He's such a gourmand!"

"Thank you, yes--I am on my way home now. Hem--m! Capitola, I counsel
you to cut the acquaintance of our neighbor, Craven Le Noir."

"I have already done so; but--what in the world is the matter that you
should advise me thus?" inquired Capitola, fixing her eyes steadily
upon the face of John Stone, who avoided her gaze as he answered:

"The man is not a proper associate for a young woman."

"I know that, and have cut him accordingly; but, Cousin John, there is
some reason for your words, that you have not expressed; and as they
concern me, now I insist upon knowing what they are!"

"Tut! it is nothing!" said the other evasively.

"John Stone, I know better! And the more you look down and whip your
boot the surer I am that there is something I ought to know, and I will
know!"

"Well, you termagant! Have your way! He has been speaking lightly of
you--that's all! Nobody minds him--his tongue is no scandal."

"John Stone--what has he said?" asked Capitola, drawing her breath
hardly between her closed teeth.

"Oh, now, why should you ask? It is nothing--it is not proper that I
should tell you," replied that gentleman, in embarrassment.

"'It is nothing,' and yet 'it is not proper that you should tell me!'
How do you make that out? John Stone, leave off lashing the harmless
bushes and listen to me! I have to live in the same neighborhood with
this man, after you have gone away, and I insist upon knowing the whole
length and breadth of his baseness and malignity, that I may know how
to judge and punish him!" said Capitola, with such grimness of
resolution that Mr. Stone, provoked at her perversity, answered:

"Well, you wilful girl, listen!" And commencing, he mercilessly told
her all that had passed at the table.

To have seen our Cap then! Face, neck and bosom were flushed with the
crimson tide of indignation!

"You are sure of what you tell me, Cousin John?"

"The man vouches for it!"

"He shall bite the dust!"

"What?"

"The slanderer shall bite the dust!"

Without more ado, down was thrown gun, game bag, powder flask and
shot-horn, and, bounding from point to point over all the intervening
space, Capitola rushed into Hurricane Hall, and without an instant's
delay ran straight into the parlor, where her epicurean friend, the
young Creole, lay slumbering upon the lounge.

With her face now livid with concentrated rage, and her eyes glittering
with that suppressed light peculiar to intense passion, she stood
before him and said:

"Edwin! Craven Le Noir has defamed your cousin! Get up and challenge
him!"

"What did you say, Cap?" said Mr. Percy, slightly yawning.

"Must I repeat it? Craven Le Noir has defamed my character--challenge
him!"

"That would be against the law, coz; they would indict me sure!"

"You--you--you lie there and answer me in that way! Oh that I were a
man!"

"Compose, yourself, sweet coz, and tell me what all this is about!
Yaw-ooo!--really I was asleep when you first spoke to me!"

"Asleep! Had you been dead and in your grave, the words that I spoke
should have roused you like the trump of the archangel!" exclaimed
Capitola, with the blood rushing back to her cheeks.

"Your entrance was sufficiently startling, coz, but tell me over
again--what was the occasion?"

"That caitiff, Craven Le Noir, has slandered me! Oh, the villain! He is
a base slanderer! Percy, get up this moment and challenge Le Noir! I
cannot breathe freely until it is done!" exclaimed Capitola,
impetuously.

"Cousin Cap, duelling is obsolete; scenes are passe; law settles
everything; and here there is scarcely ground for action for libel. But
be comforted, coz, for if this comes to Uncle Hurricane's ears, he'll
make mince-meat of him in no time, It is all in his line; he'll chaw
him right up!"

"Percy, do you mean to say that you will not call out that man?" asked
Capitola, drawing her breath hardly.

"Yes, coz."

"You won't fight him?"

"No, coz."

"You won't?"

"No."

"Edwin Percy, look me straight in the face!" said Cap, between her
closed teeth.

"Well, I am looking you straight in the face--straight in the two
blazing gray eyes, you little tempest in a teapot--what then?"

"Do I look as though I should be in earnest in what I am about to
speak?"

"I should judge so."

"Then listen, and don't take your eyes off mine until I am done
speaking!"

"Very well, don't be long, though, for it rather agitates me."

"I will not! Hear me, then! You say that you decline to challenge Le
Noir. Very good! I, on my part, here renounce all acquaintance with
you! I will never sit down at the same table--enter the same room, or
breathe the same air with you--never speak to you--listen to you, or
recognize you in any manner, until my deep wrongs are avenged in the
punishment of my slanderer, so help me--"

"Hush--sh! don't swear, Cap--it's profane and unwomanly; and nothing on
earth but broken oaths would be the result!"

But Cap was off! In an instant she was down in the yard, where her
groom was holding her horse, ready in case she wished to take her usual
ride.

"Where is Mr. John Stone?" she asked.

"Down at the kennels, miss," answered the boy.

She jumped into her saddle, put whip to her horse and flew over the
ground between the mansion house and the kennels.

She pulled up before the door of the main building, sprang from her
saddle, threw the bridle to a man in attendance, and rushed into the
house and into the presence of Mr. John Stone, who was busy in
prescribing for an indisposed pointer.

He looked up in astonishment, exclaiming: "Hilloe! All the witches!
Here's Cap! Why, where on earth did you shoot from? What's up now? You
look as if you were in a state of spontaneous combustion and couldn't
stand it another minute."

"And I can't--and I won't! John Stone, you must call that man out!"

"What man, Cap--what the deuce do you mean?"

"You know well enough--you do this to provoke me! I mean the man of
whom you cautioned me this afternoon--the wretch who slandered me--the
niece of your host!"

"Whe--ew!"

"Will you do it?"

"Where's Percy?"

"On the lounge with an ice in one hand and a novel in the other! I
suppose it is no use mincing the matter, John--he is a--mere
epicure--there is no fight in him! It is you who must vindicate your
cousin's honor!"

"My cousin's honor cannot need vindication! It is unquestioned and
unquestionable!"

"No smooth words, if you please, cousin John! Will you, or will you not
fight that man?"

"Tut, Cap, no one really questions your honor--that man will get
himself knocked into a cocked hat if he goes around talking of an
honest girl!"

"A likely thing, when her own cousins and guests take it so quietly."

"What would you have them do, Cap? The longer an affair of this sort is
agitated, the more offensive it becomes! Besides, chivalry is out of
date! The knights-errant are all dead."

"The men are all dead! If any ever really lived!" cried Cap, in a fury.
"Heaven knows I am inclined to believe them to have been a fabulous
race like that of the mastodon or the centaur! I certainly never saw a
creature that deserved the name of man! The very first of your race was
the meanest fellow that ever was heard of--ate the stolen apple and
when found out laid one half of the blame on his wife and the other on
his Maker--'The woman whom thou gavest me' did so and so--pah! I don't
wonder the Lord took a dislike to the race and sent a flood to sweep
them all off the face of the earth! I will give you one more chance to
retrieve your honor--in one word, now--will you fight that man?"

"My dear little cousin, I would do anything in reason to vindicate the
assailed manhood of my whole sex, but really, now--"

"Will you fight that man? One word--yes or no?"

"Tut, Cap! you are a very reckless young woman! You--it's your
nature--you are an incorrigible madcap! You bewitch a poor wretch until
he doesn't know his head from his heels--puts his feet into his hat and
covers his scalp with his boots! You are a will-o'-the-wisp who lures a
poor fellow on through woods, bogs and briars, until you land him in
the quicksands! You whirl him around and around until he grows dizzy
and delirious, and talks at random, and then you'd have him called out,
you blood-thirsty little vixen! I tell you, Cousin Cap, if I were to
take up all the quarrels your hoydenism might lead me into, I should
have nothing else to do!"

"Then you won't fight!"

"Can't, little cousin! I have a wife and family, which are powerful
checks upon a man's duelling impulses!"

"Silence! You are no cousin of mine--no drop of your sluggish blood
stagnates in my veins--no spark of the liquid fire of my life's current
burns in your torpid arteries, else at this insult would it set you in
a flame! Never dare to call me cousin again." And so saying, she flung
herself out of the building and into her saddle, put whip to her horse
and galloped away home.

Now, Mr. Stone had privately resolved to thrash Craven Le Noir; but he
did not deem it expedient to take Cap into his confidence. As Capitola
reached the horse block, her own groom came to take the bridle.

"Jem," she said, as she jumped from her saddle, "put Gyp up and then
come to my room, I have a message to send by you."

And then, with burning cheeks and flashing eyes, she went to her own
sanctum, and after taking off her habit, did the most astounding thing
that ever a woman of the nineteenth or any former century
attempted--she wrote a challenge to Craven Le Noir--charging him with
falsehood in having maligned her honor--demanding from him "the
satisfaction of a gentleman," and requesting him as the challenged
party to name the time, place and weapons with which he would meet her.

By the time she had written, sealed and directed this warlike defiance,
her young groom made his appearance.

"Jem," she asked, "do you know the way to the Hidden House?"

"Yes, miss, sure."

"Then take this note thither, ask for Mr. Le Noir, put it into his
hands, and say that you are directed to wait an answer. And listen! You
need not mention to any one in this house where you are going--nor when
you return, where you have been; but bring the answer you may get
directly to this room, where you will find me."

"Yes, miss," said the boy, who was off like a flying Mercury.

Capitola threw herself into her chair to spend the slow hours until the
boy's return as well as her fierce impatience and forced inaction would
permit.

At tea time she was summoned; but excused herself from going below upon
the plea of indisposition.

"Which is perfectly true," she said to herself, "since I am utterly
indisposed to go. And besides, I have sworn never again to sit at the
same table with my cousins, until for the wrongs done me I have
received ample satisfaction."




CHAPTER XVII.

CAPITOLA CAPS THE CLIMAX.


     Oh! when she's angry, she is keen and shrewd
     She was a vixen when she went to school;
     And though she is but little she is fierce.

                                     --SHAKESPEARE


It was quite late in the evening when Jem, her messenger, returned.

"Have you an answer?" she impetuously demanded, rising to meet him as
he entered.

"Yes, miss, here it is," replied the boy, handing a neatly folded,
highly perfumed little note.

"Go," said Cap, curtly, as she received it.

And when the boy had bowed and withdrawn, she threw herself into a
chair, and with little respect for the pretty device of the pierced
heart with which the note was sealed, she tore it open and devoured its
contents.

Why did Capitola's cheeks and lips blanch white as death? Why did her
eyes contract and glitter like stilettoes? Why was her breath drawn
hard and laboriously through clenched teeth and livid lips?

That note was couched in the most insulting terms.

Capitola's first impulse was to rend the paper to atoms and grind those
atoms to powder beneath her heel. But a second inspiration changed her
purpose.

"No--no--no! I will not destroy you, precious little note! No legal
document involving the ownership of the largest estate, no cherished
love letter filled with vows of undying affection, shall be more
carefully guarded! Next to my heart shall you lie. My shield and
buckler shall you be! My sure defense and justification! I know what to
do with you, my precious little jewel! You are the warrant for the
punishment of that man, signed by his own hand." And so saying Capitola
carefully deposited the note in her bosom.

Then she lighted her chamber lamp, and, taking it with her, went
down-stairs to her uncle's bedroom.

Taking advantage of the time when she knew he would be absorbed in a
game of chess with John Stone, and she would be safe from interruption
for several hours if she wished, she went to Major Warfield's little
armory in the closet adjoining his room, opened his pistol case and
took from it a pair of revolvers, closed and locked the case, and
withdrew and hid the key that they might not chance to be missed until
she should have time to replace them.

Then she hurried back into her own chamber, locked the pistols up in
her own drawer, and, wearied out with so much excitement, prepared to
go to rest. Here a grave and unexpected obstacle met her; she had
always been accustomed to kneel and offer up to heaven her evening's
tribute of praise and thanksgiving for the mercies of the day, and
prayers for protection and blessing through the night.

Now she knelt as usual, but thanksgiving and prayer seemed frozen on
her lips! How could she praise or pray with such a purpose as she had
in her heart?

For the first time Capitola doubted the perfect righteousness of that
purpose which was of a character to arrest her prayers upon her lips.

With a start of impatience and a heavy sigh, she sprang up and hurried
into bed.

She did not sleep, but lay tossing from side to side in feverish
excitement the whole night--having, in fact, a terrible battle between
her own fierce passions and her newly awakened conscience.

Nevertheless, she arose by daybreak in the morning, dressed herself,
went and unlocked her drawer, took out the pistols, carefully loaded
them, and laid them down for service.

Then she went down-stairs, where the servants were only just beginning
to stir, and sent for her groom, Jem, whom she ordered to saddle her
pony, and also to get a horse for himself, to attend her in a morning
ride.

After which she returned up-stairs, put on her riding habit, and
buckled around her waist a morocco belt, into which she stuck the two
revolvers. She then threw around her shoulders a short circular cape
that concealed the weapons, and put on her hat and gloves and went
below.

She found her little groom already at the door with the horses. She
sprang into her saddle, and, bidding Jem follow her, took the road
toward Tip-Top.

She knew that Mr. Le Noir was in the habit of riding to the village
every morning, and she determined to meet him. She knew, from the early
hour of the day, that he could not possibly be ahead of her, and she
rode on slowly to give him an opportunity to overtake her.

Probably Craven Le Noir was later that morning than usual, for Capitola
had reached the entrance of the village before she heard the sound of
his horse's feet approaching behind her.

She did not wish that their encounter should be in the streets of the
village, so she instantly wheeled her horse and galloped back to meet
him.

As both were riding at full speed, they soon met.

She first drew rein, and, standing in his way, accosted him with:

"Mr. Le Noir!"

"Your most obedient, Miss Black!" he said, with a deep bow.

"I happen to be without father or brother to protect me from affront,
sir, and my uncle is an invalid veteran whom I will not trouble! I am,
therefore, under the novel necessity of fighting my own battles!
Yesterday, sir, I sent you a note demanding satisfaction for a heinous
slander you circulated against me! You replied by an insulting note.
You do not escape punishment so! Here are two pistols; both are loaded;
take either one of them; for, sir, we have met, and now we do not part
until one of us falls from the horse!"

And so saying, she rode up to him and offered him the choice of the
pistols.

He laughed--partly in surprise and partly in admiration, as he said,
with seeming good humor:

"Miss Black, you are a very charming young woman, and delightfully
original and piquant in all your ideas; but you outrage all the laws
that govern the duello. You know that, as the challenged party, I have
the right to the choice of time, place and arms. I made that choice
yesterday. I renew it to-day. When you accede to the terms of the
meeting I shall endeavor to give you all the satisfaction you demand!
Good-morning, miss."

And with a deep bow, even to the flaps of his saddle, he rode past her.

"That base insult again!" cried Capitola, with the blood rushing to her
face.

Then lifting her voice, she again accosted him: "Mr. Le Noir!"

He turned, with a smile.

She threw one of the pistols on the ground near him, saying: "Take that
up and defend yourself."

He waved his hand in negation, bowed, smiled, and rode on.

"Mr. Le Noir!" she called, in a peremptory tone.

Once more he turned.

She raised her pistol, took deliberate aim at his white forehead, and
fired--

Bang! bang! bang! bang! bang! bang!

Six times without an instant's intermission, until her revolver was
spent.

When the smoke cleared away, a terrible vision met her eyes!

It was Craven Le Noir with his face covered with blood, reeling in his
saddle, from which he soon dropped to the ground.

In falling his foot remained in the hanging stirrup. The well-trained
cavalry horse stood perfectly still, though trembling in a panic of
terror, from which he might at any moment start to run, dragging the
helpless body after him.

Capitola saw this danger, and not being cruel, she tempered justice
with mercy, threw down her spent pistol, dismounted from her horse,
went up to the fallen man, disengaged his foot from the stirrup, and,
taking hold of his shoulders, tried with all her might to drag the
still breathing form from the dusty road where it lay in danger of
being run over by wagons, to the green bank, where it might lie in
comparative safety.

But that heavy form was too much for her single strength. And, calling
her terrified groom to assist her, they removed the body.

Capitola then remounted her horse and galloped rapidly into the
village, and up to the "ladies' entrance" of the hotel, where, after
sending for the proprietor she said:

"I have just been shooting Craven Le Noir for slandering me; he lies by
the roadside at the entrance of the village; you had better send
somebody to pick him up."

"Miss!" cried the astonished inn-keeper.

Capitola distinctly repeated her words and then, leaving the
inn-keeper, transfixed with consternation, she crossed the street and
entered a magistrate's office, where a little, old gentleman, with a
pair of green spectacles resting on his hooked nose, sat at a
writing-table, giving some directions to a constable, who was standing
hat in hand before him.

Capitola waited until this functionary had his orders and a written
paper, and had left the office, and the magistrate was alone, before
she walked up to the desk and stood before him.

"Well, well, young woman! Well, well, what do you want?" inquired the
old gentleman, impatiently looking up from folding his papers.

"I have come to give myself up for shooting Craven Le Noir, who
slandered me," answered Capitola, quietly.

The old man let fall his hands full of papers, raised his head and
stared at her over the tops of his green spectacles.

"What did you say, young woman?" he asked, in the tone of one who
doubted his own ears.

"I say that I have forestalled an arrest by coming here to give myself
up for the shooting of a dastard who slandered, insulted and refused to
give me satisfaction," answered Capitola, very distinctly.

"Am I awake? Do I hear aright? Do you mean to say that you have killed
a man?" asked the dismayed magistrate.

"Oh, I can't say as to the killing! I shot him off his horse and then
sent Mr. Merry and his men to pick him up, while I came here to answer
for myself!"

"Unfortunate girl! And how can you answer for such a dreadful deed?"
exclaimed the utterly confounded magistrate.

"Oh, as to the dreadfulness of the deed, that depends on
circumstances," said Cap, "and I can answer for it very well! He made
addresses to me. I refused him. He slandered me. I challenged him. He
insulted me. I shot him!"

"Miserable young woman, if this be proved true, I shall have to commit
you!"

"Just as you please," said Cap, "but bless your soul, that won't help
Craven Le Noir a single bit!"

As she spoke several persons entered the office in a state of high
excitement--all talking at once, saying:

"That is the girl!"

"Yes, that is her!"

"She is Miss Black, old Warfield's niece."

"Yes, he said she was," etc., etc., etc.

"What is all this, neighbors, what is all this?" inquired the troubled
magistrate, rising in his place.

"Why, sir, there's been a gentleman, Mr. Craven Le Noir, shot. He has
been taken to the Antlers, where he lies in articulus mortis, and we
wish him to be confronted with Miss Capitola Black, the young woman
here present, that he may identify her, whom he accuses of having shot
six charges into him, before his death. She needn't deny it, because he
is ready to swear to her!" said Mr. Merry, who constituted himself
spokesman.

"She accuses herself," said the magistrate, in dismay.

"Then, sir, had she not better be taken at once to the presence of Mr.
Le Noir, who may not have many minutes to live?"

"Yes, come along," said Cap. "I only gave myself up to wait for this;
and as he is already at hand, let's go and have it all over, for I have
been riding about in this frosty morning air for three hours, and I
have got a good appetite, and I want to go home to breakfast."

"I am afraid, young woman, you will scarcely get home to breakfast this
morning," said Mr. Merry.

"We'll see that presently," answered Cap, composedly, as they all left
the office, and crossed the street to the Antlers.

They were conducted by the landlord to a chamber on the first floor,
where upon a bed lay stretched, almost without breath or motion, the
form of Craven Le Noir. His face was still covered with blood, that the
bystanders had scrupulously refused to wash off until the arrival of
the magistrate. His complexion, as far as it could be seen, was very
pale. He was thoroughly prostrated, if not actually dying.

Around his bed were gathered the village doctor, the landlady and
several maid-servants.

"The squire has come, sir; are you able to speak to him?" asked the
landlord, approaching the bed.

"Yes, let him swear me," feebly replied the wounded man, "and then send
for a clergyman."

The landlady immediately left to send for Mr. Goodwin, and the
magistrate approached the head of the bed, and, speaking solemnly,
exhorted the wounded man, as he expected soon to give an account of the
works done in his body, to speak the truth, the whole truth, and
nothing but the truth, without reserve, malice or exaggeration, both as
to the deed and its provocation.

"I will I will--for I have sent for a minister and I intend to try to
make my peace with heaven," replied Le Noir.

The magistrate then directed Capitola to come and take her stand at the
foot of the bed, where the wounded man, who was lying on his back,
could see her without turning.

Cap came as she was commanded and stood there with some irrepressible
and incomprehensible mischief gleaming out from under her long
eye-lashes and from the corners of her dimpled lips.

The magistrate then administered the oath to Craven Le Noir, and bade
him look upon Capitola and give his evidence.

He did so, and under the terrors of a guilty conscience and of expected
death, his evidence partook more of the nature of a confession than an
accusation. He testified that he had addressed Capitola, and had been
rejected by her; then, under the influence of evil motives, he had
circulated insinuations against her honor, which were utterly
unjustifiable by fact; she, seeming to have heard of them, took the
strange course of challenging him--just as if she had been a man. He
could not, of course, meet a lady in a duel, but he had taken advantage
of the technical phraseology of the challenged party, as to time, place
and weapons, to offer her a deep insult; then she had waylaid him on
the highway, offered him his choice of a pair of revolvers, and told
him that, having met, they should not part until one or the other fell
from the horse; he had again laughingly refused the encounter except
upon the insulting terms he had before proposed. She had then thrown
him one of the pistols, bidding him defend himself. He had laughingly
passed her when she called him by name, he had turned and she
fired--six times in succession, and he fell. He knew no more until he
was brought to his present room. He said in conclusion he did not wish
that the girl should be prosecuted, as she had only avenged her own
honor; and that he hoped his death would be taken by her and her
friends as a sufficient expiation of his offenses against her; and,
lastly he requested that he might be left alone with the minister.

"Bring that unhappy young woman over to my office, Ketchum," said the
magistrate, addressing himself to a constable. Then turning to the
landlord, he said:

"Sir, it would be a charity in you to put a messenger on horseback and
send him to Hurricane Hall for Major Warfield, who will have to enter
into a recognizance for Miss Black's appearance at court."

"Stop," said Cap, "don't be too certain of that! 'Be always sure you're
right--then go ahead!' Is not any one here cool enough to reflect that
if I had fired six bullets at that man's forehead and every one had
struck, I should have blown his head to the sky? Will not somebody at
once wash his face and see how deep the wounds are?"

The doctor who had been restrained by others now took a sponge and
water and cleaned the face of Le Noir, which was found to be well
peppered with split peas!

Cap looked around, and seeing the astonished looks of the good people,
bust into an irrepressible fit of laughter, saying, as soon as she had
got breath enough:

"Upon my word, neighbors, you look more shocked, if not actually more
disappointed, to find that, after all he is not killed, and there'll be
no spectacle, than you did at first when you thought murder had been
done."

"Will you be good enough to explain this, young woman?" said the
magistrate, severely.

"Certainly, for your worship seems as much disappointed as others!"
said Cap. Then turning toward the group around the bed, she said:

"You have heard Mr. Le Noir's 'last dying speech and confession,' as he
supposed it to be; and you know the maddening provocations that
inflamed my temper against him. Last night, after having received his
insulting answer to my challenge, there was evil in my heart, I do
assure you! I possessed myself of my uncle's revolvers and resolved to
waylay him this morning and force him to give me satisfaction, or if he
refused--well, no matter! I tell you, there was danger in me! But,
before retiring to bed at night, it is my habit to say my prayers; now
the practice of prayer and the purpose of 'red-handed violence' cannot
exist in the same person at the same time! I wouldn't sleep without
praying, and I couldn't pray without giving up my thoughts of fatal
vengeance upon Craven Le Noir. So at last I made up my mind to spare
his life, and teach him a lesson. The next morning I drew the charges
of the revolvers and reloaded them with poor powder and dried peas!
Everything else has happened just as he has told you! He has received
no harm, except in being terribly frightened, and in having his beauty
spoiled! And as for that, didn't I offer him one of the pistols, and
expose my own face to similar damage? For I'd scorn to take advantage
of any one!" said Cap, laughing.

Craven Le Noir had now raised himself up in a sitting posture, and was
looking around with an expression of countenance which was a strange
blending of relief at this unexpected respite from the grave, and
intense mortification at finding himself in the ridiculous position
which the address of Capitola and his own weak nerves, cowardice and
credulity had placed him.

Cap went up to him and said, in a consoling voice:

"Come, thank heaven that you are not going to die this bout! I'm glad
you repented and told the truth; and I hope you may live long enough to
offer heaven a truer repentance than that which is the mere effect of
fright! For I tell you plainly that if it had not been for the grace of
the Lord, acting upon my heart last night, your soul might have been in
Hades now!"

Craven Le Noir shut his eyes, groaned and fell back overpowered by the
reflection.

"Now, please your worship, may I go home?" asked Cap, demurely, popping
down a mock courtesy to the magistrate.

"Yes--go! go! go! go! go!" said that officer, with an expression as
though he considered our Cap an individual of the animal kingdom whom
neither Buffon nor any other natural philosopher had ever classified,
and who, as a creature of unknown habits, might sometimes be dangerous.

Cap immediately availed herself of the permission, and went out to look
for her servant and horses.

But Jem, the first moment he had found himself unwatched, had put out
as fast as he could fly to Hurricane Hall, to inform Major Warfield of
what had occurred.

And Capitola, after losing a great deal of time in looking for him,
mounted her horse and was just about to start, when who should ride up
in hot haste but Old Hurricane, attended by Wool.

"Stop there!" he shouted, as he saw Cap.

She obeyed, and he sprang from his horse with the agility of youth, and
helped her to descend from hers.

Then drawing her arm within his own, he led her into the parlor, and,
putting an unusual restraint upon himself, he ordered her to tell him
all about the affair.

Cap sat down and gave him the whole history from beginning to end.

Old Hurricane could not sit still to hear. He strode up and down the
room, striking his stick upon the floor, and uttering inarticulate
sounds of rage and defiance.

When Cap had finished her story he suddenly stopped before her, brought
down the point of his stick with a resounding thump upon the floor and
exclaimed:

"Demmy, you New York newsboy! Will you never be a woman? Why the demon
didn't you tell me, sirrah? I would have called the fellow out and
chastised him to your heart's content! Hang it, miss, answer me and
say!"

"Because you are on the invalid list and I am in sound condition and
capable of taking my own part!" said Cap.

"Then, answer me this, while you were taking your own part, why the
foul fiend didn't you pepper him with something sharper than dried
peas?"

"I think he is quite as severely punished in suffering from extreme
terror and intense mortification and public ridicule," said Cap.

"And now, uncle, I have not eaten a single blessed mouthful this
morning, and I am hungry enough to eat up Gyp, or to satisfy Patty."

Old Hurricane, permitting his excitement to subside in a few expiring
grunts, rang the bell and gave orders for breakfast to be served.

And after that meal was over he set out with his niece for Hurricane
Hall.

And upon arriving at home he addressed a letter to Mr. Le Noir, to the
effect that as soon as the latter should have recovered from the effect
of his fright and mortification, he, Major Warfield, should demand and
expect satisfaction.




CHAPTER XVIII.

BLACK DONALD'S LAST ATTEMPT.


     Who can express the horror of that night,
     When darkness lent his robes to monster fear?
     And heaven's black mantle, banishing the light,
     Made everything in fearful form appear.

                                   --BRANDON.


Let it not be supposed that Black Donald had forgotten his promise to
Colonel Le Noir, or was indifferent to its performance.

But many perilous failures had taught him caution.

He had watched and waylaid Capitola in her rides. But the girl seemed
to bear a charmed safety; for never once had he caught sight of her
except in company with her groom and with Craven Le Noir. And very soon
by eavesdropping on these occasions, he learned the secret design of
the son to forestall the father, and run off with the heiress.

And as Black Donald did not foresee what success Craven Le Noir might
have with Capitola, he felt the more urgent necessity for prompt action
on his own part.

He might, indeed, have brought his men and attacked and overcome
Capitola's attendants, in open day; but the enterprise must needs have
been attended with great bloodshed and loss of life, which would have
made a sensation in the neighborhood that Black Donald, in the present
state of his fortunes, was by no means ambitious of daring.

In a word, had such an act of unparalleled violence been attempted, the
better it succeeded the greater would have been the indignation of the
people, and the whole country would probably have risen and armed
themselves and hunted the outlaws, as so many wild beasts, with horses
and hounds.

Therefore, Black Donald preferred quietly to abduct his victim, so as
to leave no trace of her "taking off," but to allow it to be supposed
that she had eloped.

He resolved to undertake this adventure alone, though to himself
personally this plan was even more dangerous than the other.

He determined to gain access to her chamber, secrete himself anywhere
in the room (except under the bed, where his instincts informed him
that Capitola every night looked), and when the household should be
buried in repose, steal out upon her, overpower, gag and carry her off,
in the silence of the night, leaving no trace of his own presence
behind.

By means of one of his men, who went about unsuspected among the
negroes, buying up mats and baskets, that the latter were in the habit
of making for sale, he learned that Capitola occupied the same remote
chamber, in the oldest part of the house; but that a guest slept in the
room next, and another in the one opposite hers. And that the house was
besides full of visitors from the city, who had come down to spend the
sporting season, and that they were hunting all day and carousing all
night from one week's end to another.

On hearing this, Black Donald quickly comprehended that it was no time
to attempt the abduction of the maiden, with the least probability of
success. All would be risked and most probably lost in the endeavor.

He resolved, therefore, to wait until the house should be clear of
company, and the household fallen into their accustomed carelessness
and monotony.

He had to wait much longer than he had reckoned upon--through October
and through November, when he first heard of and laughed over Cap's
"duel" with Craven Le Noir, and congratulated himself upon the fact
that that rival was no longer to be feared. He had also to wait through
two-thirds of the month of December, because a party had come down to
enjoy a short season of fox-hunting. They went away just before
Christmas.

And then at last came Black Donald's opportunity! And a fine
opportunity it was! Had Satan himself engaged to furnish him with one
to order, it could not have been better!

The reader must know that throughout Virginia the Christmas week, from
the day after Christmas until the day after New-year, is the negroes'
saturnalia! There are usually eight days of incessant dancing, feasting
and frolicking from quarter to quarter, and from barn to barn. Then the
banjo, the fiddle and the "bones" are heard from morning until night,
and from night until morning.

And nowhere was this annual octave of festivity held more sacred than
at Hurricane Hall. It was the will of Major Warfield that they should
have their full satisfaction out of their seven days' carnival. He
usually gave a dinner party on Christmas day, after which his people
were free until the third of January.

"Demmy, mum!" he would say to Mrs. Condiment, "they wait on us
fifty-one weeks in the year, and it's hard if we can't wait on
ourselves the fifty-second!"

Small thanks to Old Hurricane for his self-denial! He did nothing for
himself or others, and Mrs. Condiment and Capitola had a hot time of it
in serving him. Mrs. Condiment had to do all the cooking and housework.
And Cap had to perform most of the duties of Major Warfield's valet.
And that was the way in which Old Hurricane waited on himself.

It happened, therefore, that about the middle of the Christmas week,
being Wednesday, the twenty-eighth of December, all the house-servants
and farm laborers from Hurricane. Hall went off in a body to a banjo
break-down given at a farm five miles across the country.

And Major Warfield, Mrs. Condiment and Capitola were the only living
beings left in the old house that night.

Black Donald, who had been prowling about the premises evening after
evening, watching his opportunity to effect his nefarious object, soon
discovered the outward bound stampede of the negroes, and the
unprotected state in which the old house, for that night only, would be
left. And he determined to take advantage of the circumstance to
consummate his wicked purpose.

In its then defenceless condition he could easily have mustered his
force and carried off his prize without immediate personal risk. But,
as we said before, he eschewed violence, as being likely to provoke
after effects of a too fatal character.

He resolved rather at once to risk his own personal safety in the
quieter plan of abduction which he had formed.

He determined that as soon as it should be dark he would watch his
opportunity to enter the house, steal to Cap's chamber, secrete himself
in a closet, and when all should be quiet, "in the dead waste and
middle of the night," he would come out, master her, stop her mouth and
carry her off.

When it became quite dark he approached the house, and hid himself
under the steps beneath the back door leading from the hall into the
garden, to watch his opportunity of entering. He soon found that his
enterprise required great patience as well as courage. He had to wait
more than two hours before he heard the door unlocked and opened.

He then peered out from his hiding-place and saw old Hurricane taking
his way out towards the garden.

Now was his time to slip unperceived into the house. He stealthily came
out from his hiding-place, crept up the portico stairs to the back
door, noiselessly turned the latch, entered and closed it behind him.
He had just time to open a side door on his right hand and conceal
himself in a wood closet under the stairs, when he heard the footsteps
of Old Hurricane returning.

The old man came in and Black Donald laughed to himself to hear with
what caution he locked, bolted and barred the doors to keep out
house-breakers!

"Ah, old fellow, you are fastening the stable after the horse has been
stolen!" said Black Donald to himself.

As soon as old Hurricane had passed by the closet in which the outlaw
was concealed, and had gone into the parlor, Black Donald determined to
risk the ascent into Capitola's chamber. From the description given by
his men, who had once succeeded in finding their way thither, he knew
very well where to go.

Noiselessly, therefore, he left his place of concealment and crept out
to reconnoitre the hall, which he found deserted.

Old Hurricane's shawl, hat and walking stick were deposited in one
corner. In case of being met on the way, he put the hat on his head,
wrapped the shawl around his shoulders, and took the stick in his hand.

His forethought proved to be serviceable. He went through the hall and
up the first flight of stairs without interruption; but on going along
the hall of the second story he met Mrs. Condiment coming out of Old
Hurricane's room.

"Your slippers are on the hearth, your gown is at the fire and the
kettle is boiling to make your punch, Major Warfield," said the old
lady in passing.

"Umph! umph! umph!" grunted Black Donald in reply.

The housekeeper then bade him good-night, saying that she was going at
once to her room.

"Umph!" assented Black Donald. And so they parted and this peril was
passed.

Black Donald went up the second flight of stairs and then down a back
passage and a narrow staircase and along a corridor and through several
untenanted rooms, and into another passage, and finally through a side
door leading into Capitola's chamber.

Here he looked around for a safe hiding-place--there was a high
bedstead curtained; two deep windows also curtained; two closets, a
dressing bureau, workstand, washstand and two arm chairs. The
forethought of little Pitapat had caused her to kindle a fire on the
hearth and place a waiter of refreshments on the workstand, so as to
make all comfortable before she had left with the other negroes to go
to the banjo breakdown.

Among the edibles Pitapat had been careful to leave a small bottle of
brandy, a pitcher of cream, a few eggs and some spice, saying to
herself, "Long as it was Christmas time Miss Caterpillar might want a
sup of egg nog quiet to herself, jes' as much as old marse did his
whiskey punch"--and never fancying that her young mistress would
require a more delicate lunch than her old master.

Black Donald laughed as he saw this outlay, and remarking that the
young occupant of the chamber must have an appetite of her own, he put
the neck of the brandy bottle to his lips and took what he called "a
heavy swig."

Then vowing that old Hurricane knew what good liquor was, he replaced
the bottle and looked around to find the best place for his concealment.

He soon determined to hide himself behind the thick folds of the window
curtain, nearest the door, so that immediately after the entrance of
Capitola he could glide to the door, lock it, withdraw the key and have
the girl at once in his power.

He took a second "swig" at the brandy bottle and then went into his
place of concealment to wait events.

That same hour Capitola was her uncle's partner in a prolonged game of
chess. It was near eleven o'clock before Cap, heartily tired of the
battle, permitted herself to be beaten in order to get to bed.

With a satisfied chuckle, Old Hurricane arose from his seat, lighted
two bed-chamber lamps, gave one to Capitola, took the other himself,
and started off for his room, followed by Cap as far as the head of the
first flight of stairs, where she bade him good night.

She waited until she saw him enter his room, heard him lock his door on
the inside and throw himself down heavily into his arm chair, and then
she went on her own way.

She hurried up the second flight of stairs and along the narrow
passages, empty rooms, and steep steps and dreary halls, until she
reached the door of her own dormitory.

She turned the latch and entered the room.

The first thing that met her sight was the waiter of provisions upon
the stand. And at this fresh instance of her little maid's forethought,
she burst into a uncontrollable fit of laughter.

She did not see a dark figure glide from behind the window curtains,
steal to the door, turn the lock and withdraw the key!

But still retaining her prejudice against the presence of food in her
bed-chamber, she lifted up the waiter in both hands to cany it out into
the passage, turned and stood face to face with--Black Donald!




CHAPTER XIX.

THE AWFUL PERIL OF CAPITOLA.


     Out of this nettle, danger,
     I'll pluck the flower, safety!

                      --SHAKESPEARE.


Capitola's blood seemed turned to ice, and her form to stone by the
sight! Her first impulse was to scream and let fall the waiter! She
controlled herself and repressed the scream though she was very near
dropping the waiter.

Black Donald looked at her and laughed aloud at her consternation,
saying with a chuckle:

"You did not expect to see me here to-night, did you now, my dear?"

She gazed at him in a silent panic for a moment.

Then her faculties, that had been suddenly dispersed by the shock, as
suddenly rallied to her rescue.

In one moment she understood her real position.

Black Donald had locked her in with himself and held the key--so she
could not hope to get out.

The loudest scream that she might utter would never reach the distant
chamber of Major Warfield, or the still more remote apartment of Mrs.
Condiment; so she could not hope to bring any one to her assistance.

She was, therefore, entirely in the power of Black Donald. She fully
comprehended this, and said to herself:

"Now, my dear Cap, if you don't look sharp your hour is come! Nothing
on earth will save you, Cap, but your own wits! For if ever I saw
mischief in any one's face, it is in that fellow's that is eating you
up with his great eyes at the same time that he is laughing at you with
his big mouth! Now, Cap, my little man, be a woman! Don't you stick at
trifles! Think of Jael and Sisera! Think of Judith and Holofernes! And
the devil and Doctor Faust, if necessary, and don't you blanch! All
stratagems are fair in love and war--especially in war, and most
especially in such a war as this is likely to be--a contest in close
quarters for dear life!"

All this passed through her mind in one moment, and in the next her
plan was formed.

Setting her waiter down upon the table and throwing herself into one of
the armchairs, she said:

"Well, upon my word! I think a gentleman might let a lady know when he
means to pay her a domiciliary visit at midnight!"

"Upon my word, I think you are very cool!" replied Black Donald,
throwing himself into the second armchair on the other side of the
stand of refreshments.

"People are likely to be cool on a December night, with the thermometer
at zero, and the ground three feet under the snow," said Cap, nothing
daunted.

"Capitola, I admire you! You are a cucumber! That's what you are, a
cucumber!"

"A pickled one?" asked Cap.

"Yes, and as pickled cucumbers are good to give one an appetite, I
think I shall fall to and eat."

"Do so," said Cap, "for heaven forbid that I should fail in
hospitality!"

"Why, really, this looks as though you had expected a visitor--doesn't
it?" asked Black Donald, helping himself to a huge slice of ham, and
stretching his feet out toward the fire.

"Well, yes, rather; though, to say the truth, it was not your reverence
I expected," said Cap.

"Ah! somebody else's reverence, eh? Well, let them come! I'll be ready
for them!" said the outlaw, pouring out and quaffing a large glass of
brandy. He drank it, set down the glass, and turning to our little
heroine, inquired:

"Capitola did you ever have Craven Le Noir here to supper with you?"

"You insult me! I scorn to reply!" said Cap.

"Whe--ew! What long whiskers our Grimalkin's got! You scorn to reply!
Then you really are not afraid of me?" asked the robber, rolling a
great piece of cheese in his mouth.

"Afraid of you? No, I guess not!" replied Cap, with a toss of her head.

"Yet, I might do you some harm."

"But, you won't!"

"Why won't I?"

"Because it won't pay!"

"Why wouldn't it?"

"Because you couldn't do me any harm, unless you were to kill me, and
you would gain nothing by my death, except a few trinkets that you may
have without."

"Then, you are really not afraid of me?" he asked, taking another deep
draught of brandy.

"Not a bit of it--I rather like you!"

"Come, now, you're running a rig upon a fellow," said the outlaw,
winking and depositing a huge chunk of bread in his capacious jaws.

"No, indeed! I liked you, long before I ever saw you! I always did like
people that make other people's hair stand on end! Don't you remember
when you first came here disguised as a peddler, though I did not know
who you were, when we were talking of Black Donald, and everybody was
abusing him, except myself? I took his part and said that for my part I
liked Black Donald and wanted to see him."

"Sure enough, my jewel, so you did! And didn't I bravely risk my life
by throwing off my disguise to gratify your laudable wish?"

"So you did, my hero!"

"Ah, but well as you liked me, the moment you thought me in your power
didn't you leap upon my shoulders like a catamount and cling there,
shouting to all the world to come and help you, for you had caught
Black Donald and would die before you would give him up? Ah! you little
vampire, how you thirsted for my blood! And you pretended to like me!"
said Black Donald, eying her from head to foot, with a sly leer.

Cap returned the look with interest. Dropping her head on one side, she
glanced upward from the corner of her eye, with an expression of
"infinite" mischief and roguery, saying:

"Lor, didn't you know why I did that?"

"Because you wanted me captured, I suppose."

"No, indeed, but, because--"

"Well, what?"

"Because I wanted you to carry me off!"

"Well, I declare! I never thought of that!" said the outlaw, dropping
his bread and cheese, and staring at the young girl.

"Well, you might have thought of it then! I was tired of hum-drum life,
and I wanted to see adventures!" said Cap.

Black Donald looked at the mad girl from head to foot and then said,
coolly:

"Miss Black, I am afraid you are not good."

"Yes I am--before folks!" said Cap.

"And so you really wished me to carry you off?"

"I should think so! Didn't I stick to you until you dropped me?"

"Certainly! And now if you really like me as well as you say you do,
come give me a kiss."

"I won't!" said Cap, "until you have done your supper and washed your
face! Your beard is full of crumbs!"

"Very well, I can wait awhile! Meantime just brew me a bowl of egg-nog,
by way of a night-cap, will you?" said the outlaw, drawing off his
boots and stretching his feet to the fire.

"Agreed, but it takes two to make egg-nog; you'll have to whisk up the
whites of the eggs into a froth, while I beat the yellows, and mix the
other ingredients," said Cap.

"Just so," assented the outlaw, standing up and taking off his coat and
flinging it upon the floor.

Cap shuddered, but went on calmly with her preparations. There were two
little white bowls setting one within the other upon the table. Cap
took them apart and set them side by side and began to break the eggs,
letting the whites slip into one bowl and dropping the yellows into the
other.

Black Donald sat down in his shirt sleeves, took one of the bowls from
Capitola and began to whisk up the whites with all his might and main.

Capitola beat up the yellows, gradually mixing the sugar with it. In
the course of her work she complained that the heat of the fire
scorched her face, and she drew her chair farther to-wards the corner
of the chimney, and pulled the stand after her.

"Oh, you are trying to get away from me," said Black Donald, hitching
his own chair in the same direction, close to the stand, so that he sat
immediately in front of the fireplace.

Cap smiled and went on beating her eggs and sugar together. Then she
stirred in the brandy and poured in the milk and took the bowl from
Black Donald and laid on the foam. Finally, she filled a goblet with
the rich compound and handed it to her uncanny guest.

Black Donald untied his neck cloth, threw it upon the floor and sipped
his egg-nog, all the while looking over the top of the glass at
Capitola.

"Miss Black," he said, "it must be past twelve o'clock."

"I suppose it is," said Cap.

"Then it must be long past your usual hour of retiring."

"Of course it is," said Cap.

"Then what are you waiting for?"

"For my company to go home," replied Cap.

"Meaning me?"

"Meaning you."

"Oh, don't mind me, my dear."

"Very well," said Cap, "I shall not trouble myself about you," and her
tones were steady, though her heart seemed turned into a ball of ice,
through terror.

Black Donald went on slowly sipping his egg-nog, filling up his goblet
when it was empty, and looking at Capitola over the top of his glass.
At last he said:

"I have been watching you, Miss Black."

"Little need to tell me that," said Cap.

"And I have been reading you."

"Well, I hope the page was entertaining."

"Well, yes, my dear, it was, rather so. But why don't you proceed?"

"Proceed--with what?"

"With what you are thinking of, my darling."

"I don't understand you!"

"Why don't you offer to go down-stairs and bring up some lemons?"

"Oh, I'll go in a moment," said Cap, "if you wish."

"Ha--ha--ha--ha--ha! Of course you will, my darling! And you'd deliver
me into the hands of the Philistines, just as you did my poor men when
you fooled them about the victuals! I know your tricks and all your
acting has no other effect on me than to make me admire your wonderful
coolness and courage; so, my dear, stop puzzling your little head with
schemes to baffle me! You are like the caged starling! You
can't--get--out!" chuckled Black Donald, hitching his chair nearer to
hers. He was now right upon the center of the rug.

Capitola turned very pale, but not with fear, though Black Donald
thought she did, and roared with laughter.

"Have you done your supper?" she asked, with a sort of awful calmness.

"Yes my duck," replied the outlaw, pouring the last of the egg-nog into
his goblet, drinking it at a draught and chuckling as he set down the
glass.

Capitola then lifted the stand with the refreshments to remove it to
its usual place.

"What are you going to do, my dear?" asked Black Donald.

"Clear away the things and set the room in order," said Capitola, in
the same awfully calm tone.

"A nice little housewife you'll make, my duck!" said Black Donald.

Capitola set the stand in its corner and then removed her own armchair
to its place before the dressing bureau.

Nothing now remained upon the rug except Black Donald seated in the
armchair!

Capitola paused; her blood seemed freezing in her veins; her heart beat
thickly; her throat was choked; her head full nearly to bursting, and
her eyes were veiled by a blinding film.

"Come--come--my duck--make haste; it is late; haven't you done setting
the room in order yet?" said Black Donald, impatiently.

"In one moment," said Capitola, coming behind his chair and leaning
upon the back of it.

"Donald," she said, with dreadful calmness, "I will not now call you
Black Donald! I will call you as your poor mother did, when your young
soul was as white as your skin, before she ever dreamed her boy would
grow black with crime! I will call you simply Donald, and entreat you
to hear me for a few minutes."

"Talk on, then, but talk fast, and leave my mother alone! Let the dead
rest!" exclaimed the outlaw, with a violent convulsion of his bearded
chin and lip that did not escape the notice of Capitola, who hoped some
good of this betrayal of feeling.

"Donald," she said, "men call you a man of blood; they say that your
hand is red and your soul black with crime!"

"They may say what they like--I care not!" laughed the outlaw.

"But I do not believe all this of you! I believe that there is good in
all, and much good in you; that there is hope for all, and strong hope
for you!"

"Bosh! Stop talking poetry! 'Tain't in my line, nor yours either!"
laughed Black Donald.

"But truth is in all our lines. Donald, I repeat it, men call you a man
of blood! They say that your hands are red and your soul black with
sin. Black Donald, they call you! But, Donald, you have never yet
stained your soul with a crime as black as that which you think of
perpetrating to-night!"

"It must be one o'clock, and I'm tired," replied the outlaw, with a
yawn.

"All your former acts," continued Capitola, in the same voice of awful
calmness, "have been those of a bold, bad man. This act would be that
of a base one!"

"Take care, girl--no bad names! You are in my power--at my mercy!"

"I know my position, but I must continue. Hitherto you have robbed mail
coaches and broken into rich men's houses. In doing thus you have
always boldly risked your life, often at such fearful odds that men
have trembled at their firesides to hear of it. And even women, while
deploring your crimes, have admired your courage."

"I thank 'em kindly for it! Women always like men with a spice of the
devil in them!" laughed the outlaw.

"No, they do not!" said Capitola, gravely. "They like men of strength,
courage and spirit--but those qualities do not come from the Evil One,
but from the Lord, who is the giver of all good. Your Creator, Donald,
gave you the strength, courage and spirit that all men and women so
much admire; but He did not give you these great powers that you might
use them in the service of his enemy, the devil!"

"I declare there is really something in that! I never thought of that
before."

"Nor ever thought, perhaps, that however misguided you may have been,
there is really something great and good in yourself that might yet be
used for the good of man and the glory of God!" said Capitola, solemnly.

"Ha, ha, ha! Oh, you flatterer! Come, have you done? I tell you it is
after one o'clock, and I am tired to death!"

"Donald, in all your former acts of lawlessness your antagonists were
strong men; and as you boldly risked your life in your depredations,
your acts, though bad, were not base! But now your antagonist is a
feeble girl, who has been unfortunate from her very birth; to destroy
her would be an act of baseness to which you never yet descended."

"Bosh! Who talks of destruction? I am tired of all this nonsense! I
mean to carry you off and there's an end of it!" said the outlaw,
doggedly, rising from his seat.

"Stop!" said Capitola, turning ashen pale. "Stop--sit down and hear me
for just five minutes--I will not tax your patience longer."

The robber, with a loud laugh, sank again into his chair, saying:

"Very well, talk on for just five minutes, and not a single second
longer; but if you think in that time to persuade me to leave this room
to-night without you, you are widely out of your reckoning, my duck,
that's all."

"Donald, do not sink your soul to perdition by a crime that heaven
cannot pardon! Listen to me! I have jewels here worth several thousand
dollars! If you will consent to go I will give them all to you and let
you quietly out of the front door and never say one word to mortal of
what has passed here to-night."

"Ha, ha, ha! Why, my dear, how green you must think me! What hinders me
from possessing myself of your jewels, as well as of yourself!" said
Black Donald, impatiently rising.

"Sit still! The five minutes' grace are not half out yet," said
Capitola, in a breathless voice.

"So they are not! I will keep my promise," replied Black Donald,
laughing, and again dropping into his seat.

"Donald, Uncle pays me a quarterly sum for pocket money, which is at
least five times as much as I can spend in this quiet country place. It
has been accumulating for years until now. I have several thousand
dollars all of my own. You shall have it if you will only go quietly
away and leave me in peace!" prayed Capitola.

"My dear, I intend to take that anyhow--take it as your bridal dower,
you know! For I'm going to carry you off and make an honest wife of
you!"

"Donald, give up this heinous purpose!" cried Capitola, in an agony of
supplication, as she leaned over the back of the outlaw's chair.

"Yes, you know I will--ha--ha--ha!" laughed the robber.

"Man, for your own sake give it up!"

"Ha, ha, ha! for my sake!"

"Yes, for yours! Black Donald, have you ever reflected on death?" asked
Capitola, in a low and terrible voice.

"I have risked it often enough; but as to reflecting upon it--it will
be time enough to do that when it comes! I am a powerful man, in the
prime and pride of life," said the athlete, stretching himself
exultingly.

"Yet it might come--death might come with sudden overwhelming power,
and hurl you to destruction! What a terrible thing for this magnificent
frame of yours, this glorious handiwork of the Creator, to be hurled to
swift destruction, and for the soul that animates it to be cast into
hell!"

"Bosh again! That is a subject for the pulpit, not for a pretty girl's
room. If you really think me such a handsome man, why don't you go with
me at once and say no more about it," roared the outlaw laughing.

"Black Donald--will you leave my room?" cried Capitola, in an agony of
prayer.

"No!" answered the outlaw, mocking her tone.

"Is there no inducement that I can hold out to you to leave me?"

"None!"

Capitola raised herself from her leaning posture, took a step backward,
so that she stood entirely free from the trap-door, then slipping her
foot under the rug, she placed it lightly on the spring-bolt, which she
was careful not to press; the ample fall of her dress concealed the
position of her foot.

Capitola was now paler than a corpse, for hers was the pallor of a
living horror! Her heart beat violently, her head throbbed, her voice
was broken as she said:

"Man, I will give you one more chance! Oh, man, pity yourself as I pity
you, and consent to leave me!"

"Ha, ha, ha! It is quite likely that I will! Isn't it, now? No, my
duck, I haven't watched and planned for this chance for this long time
past to give it up, now that you are in my power! A likely story
indeed! And now the five minutes' grace are quite up!"

"Stop! Don't move yet! Before you stir, say: 'Lord, have mercy on me!"
said Capitola, solemnly.

"Ha, ha, ha! That's a pretty idea! Why should I say that?"

"Say it to please me! Only say it, Black Donald!"

"But why to please you?"

"Because I wish not to kill both your body and soul--because I would
not send you prayerless into the presence of your Creator! For, Black
Donald, within a few seconds your body will be hurled to swift
destruction, and your soul will stand before the bar of God!" said
Capitola, with her foot upon the spring of the concealed trap.

She had scarcely ceased speaking before he bounded to his feet, whirled
around and confronted her, like a lion at bay, roaring forth:

"You have a revolver there, girl--move a finger and I shall throw
myself upon you like an avalanche?"

"I have no revolver--watch my hands as I take them forth, and see!"
said Capitola, stretching her arms out toward him.

"What do you mean, then, by your talk of sudden destruction?" inquired
Black Donald, in a voice of thunder.

"I mean that it hangs over you--that it is imminent! That it is not to
be escaped! Oh, man, call on God, for you have not a minute to live!"

The outlaw gazed on her in astonishment.

Well he might, for there she stood paler than marble--sterner than
fate--with no look of human feeling about her, but the gleaming light
of her terrible eyes, and the beading sweat upon her death-like brow.

For an instant the outlaw gazed on her in consternation, and then,
recovering himself he burst into a loud laugh, exclaiming:

"Ha, ha, ha! Well, I suppose this is what people would call a piece of
splendid acting! Do you expect to frighten me, my dear, as you did
Craven Le Noir, with the peas!"

"Say 'Lord have mercy on my soul'--say it. Black Donald--say it. I
beseech you!" she prayed.

"Ha, ha, ha, my dear! You may say it for me! And to reward you, I will
give you, such a kiss! It will put life into those marble cheeks of
yours!" he laughed.

"I will say it for you! May the Lord pity and save Black Donald's soul,
if that be yet possible, for the Saviour's sake!" prayed Capitola, in a
broken voice, with her foot upon the concealed and fatal spring.

He laughed aloud, stretched forth his arms and rushed to clasp her.

She pressed the spring.

The drop fell with a tremendous crash!

The outlaw shot downwards--there was an instant's vision of a white and
panic-stricken face, and wild, uplifted hands as he disappeared, and
then a square, black opening, was all that remained where the terrible
intruder had sat.

No sight or sound came up from that horrible pit, to hint of the
secrets of the prison house.

One shuddering glance at the awful void and then Capitola turned and
threw herself, face downward, upon the bed, not daring to rejoice in
the safety that had been purchased by such a dreadful deed, feeling
that it was an awful, though a complete victory!




CHAPTER XX.

THE NEXT MORNING.


     Oh, such a day!
     So fought, so followed and so fairly won
     Came not till now to dignify the times.
     Since Caesar's fortunes.

                               --SHAKESPEARE.


Capitola lay upon the bed, with her face buried in the pillow, the
greater portion of the time from two o'clock until day. An
uncontrollable horror prevented her from turning lest she should see
the yawning mystery in the middle of the floor, or hear some awful
sound from its unknown depths. The very shadows on the walls thrown up
wildly by the expiring firelight were objects of grotesque terror.
Never--never--in her whole youth of strange vicissitude, had the nerves
of this brave girl been so tremendously shaken and prostrated.

It was late in the morning when at last nature succumbed, and she sank
into a deep sleep. She had not slept long when she was aroused from a
profound state of insensibility by a loud, impatient knocking at her
door.

She started up wildly and gazed around her. For a minute she could not
remember what were the circumstances under which she had laid down, or
what was that vague feeling of horror and alarm that possessed her.
Then the yawning trapdoor, the remnants of the supper, and Black
Donald's coat, hat and boots upon the floor, drove in upon her reeling
brain the memory of the night of terror!

The knocking continued more loudly and impatiently, accompanied by the
voice of Mrs. Condiment, crying:

"Miss Capitola--Miss Capitola--why, what can be the matter with her?
Miss Capitola!"

"Eh? What? Yes!" answered Capitola, pressing her hands to her feverish
forehead, and putting back her dishevelled hair.

"Why, how soundly you sleep, my dear! I've been calling and rapping
here for a quarter of an hour! Good gracious, child what made you
oversleep yourself so?"

"I--did not get to bed till very late," said Capitola, confusedly.

"Well, well, my dear, make haste now, your uncle is none of the
patientest, and he has been waiting breakfast for some time! Come, open
the door and I will help you to dress, so that you may be ready sooner."

Capitola rose from the side of the bed, where she had been sitting, and
went cautiously around that gaping trap door to her chamber door, when
she missed the key, and suddenly remembered that it had been in Black
Donald's pocket when he fell. A shudder thrilled her frame at the
thought of that horrible fall.

"Well--well--Miss Capitola, why don't you open the door?" cried the old
lady, impatiently.

"Mrs. Condiment, I have lost the key--dropped it down the trap-door.
Please ask uncle to send for some one to take the lock off--and don't
wait breakfast for me."

"Well, I do think that was very careless, my dear; but I'll go at
once," said the old lady, moving away.

She had not been gone more than ten minutes, when Old Hurricane was
heard, coming blustering along the hall and calling:

"What now, you imp of Satan? What mischief have you been at now?
Opening the trap-door, you mischievous monkey! I wish from the bottom
of my soul you had fallen into it, and I should have got rid of one
trial! Losing your key, you careless baggage! I've a great mind to
leave you locked up there forever."

Thus scolding, Old Hurricane reached the spot and began to ply
screw-drivers and chisels until at length the strong lock yielded, and
he opened the door.

There a vision met his eyes that arrested his steps upon the very
threshold; the remains of a bacchanalian supper; a man's coat and hat
and boots upon the floor; in the midst of the room the great, square,
black opening; and beyond it standing upon the hearth, the form of
Capitola, with disordered dress, dishevelled hair and wild aspect!

"Oh, uncle, see what I have been obliged to do!" she exclaimed,
extending both her arms down toward the opening with a look of blended
horror and inspiration, such as might have sat upon the countenance of
some sacrificial priestess of the olden time.

"What--what--what!" cried the old man, nearly dumb with amazement.

"Black Donald was in my room last night. He stole from his concealment
and locked the door on the inside and withdrew the key, thus locking me
in with himself, and--" She ceased and struck both hands to her face,
shuddering from head to foot.

"Go on, girl!" thundered Old Hurricane, in an agony of anxiety.

"I escaped harmless--oh, I did, sir--but at what a fearful price!"

"Explain! Explain!" cried Old Hurricane, in breathless agitation.

"I drew him to sit upon the chair on the rug, and"--again she shuddered
from head to foot, "and I sprang the trap and precipitated him to--oh,
heaven of heavens!--where? I know not!"

"But you--you were unharmed?"

"Yes--yes!"

"Oh, Cap! Oh, my dear Cap! Thank heaven for that!"

"But, uncle, where--oh, where did he go?" inquired Capitola, almost
wildly.

"Who the demon cares? To perdition. I hope and trust, with all my heart
and soul!" cried Old Hurricane, with emphasis, as he approached and
looked down the opening.

"Uncle, what is below there?" asked Capitola anxiously, pointing down
the abyss.

"An old cellar, as I have told you long ago, and Black Donald, as you
have just told me. Hilloe there! Are you killed, as you deserve to be,
you atrocious villain?" roared Old Hurricane, stooping down into the
opening.

A feeble distant moan answered him.

"Oh, heaven! He is living! He is living! I have not killed him!" cried
Capitola, clasping her hands.

"Why, I do believe you are glad of it!" exclaimed Old Hurricane, in
astonishment.

"Oh, yes, yes, yes! For it was a fearful thought that I had been
compelled to take a sacred life! to send an immortal soul unprepared to
its account!"

"Well! his neck isn't broken, it appears, or he couldn't groan; but I
hope and trust every other bone in his body is! Mrs. Condiment, mum!
I'll trouble you to put on your bonnet and walk to Ezy's and tell him
to come here directly! I must send for the constable," said Old
Hurricane, going to the door and speaking to his housekeeper, who, with
an appalled countenance had been a silent spectator of all that had
passed.

As soon as the old woman had gone to do her errand he turned again, and
stooping down the hole, exclaimed:

"I say, you scoundrel down there! What do you think of yourself now?
Are you much hurt, you knave? Is everyone of your bones broken, as they
deserve to be, you villain? Answer me, you varlet!"

A low, deep moan was the only response.

"If that means yes, I'm glad to hear it, you wretch. You'll go to the
camp-meeting with us again, won't you, you knave? You'll preach against
evil passions and profane swearing, looking right straight at me all
the time, until you bring the eyes of the whole congregation upon me as
a sinner above all sinners, you scoundrel? You'll turn me out of my own
bed and away from my own board, won't you, you villain? Won't you,
precious Father Grey? Oh, we'll Father Grey you! Demmy, the next time a
trap-door falls under you, you rascal, there shall be a rope around
your neck to keep you from the ground, precious Father Grey!"

"Uncle! Uncle! that is cowardly!" exclaimed Capitola.

"What is cowardly, Miss Impertinence?"

"To insult and abuse a fallen man who is in your power! The poor man is
badly hurt, may be dying, for aught you know, and you stand over him
and berate him when he cannot even answer you!"

"Umph, umph, umph; Demmy, you're--umph, well, he is fallen, fallen
pretty badly, eh? and if he should come round after this, the next fall
he gets will be likely to break his neck, eh?--I say, you gentleman
below there--Mr. Black Donald--precious Father Grey--you'll keep quiet,
won't you, while we go and get our breakfast? do, now! Come, Cap, come
down and pour out my coffee, and by the time we get through, Old Ezy
will be here."

Capitola complied, and they left the room together.

The overseer came in while they were at breakfast, and with his hair
standing on end, listened to the account of the capture of the outlaw
by our heroine.

"And now saddle Fleetfoot and ride for your life to Tip-Top and bring a
pair of constables," were the last orders of Old Hurricane.

While Mr. Ezy was gone on his errand, Major Warfield, Capitola and Mrs.
Condiment remained below stairs.

It was several hours before the messenger returned with the constables,
and with several neighbors whom interest and curiosity had instigated
to join the party.

As soon as they arrived, a long ladder was procured and carried up into
Capitola's chamber, and let down through the trap-door. Fortunately it
was long enough, for when the foot of the ladder found the floor of the
cellar, the head rested securely against the edge of the opening.

In a moment the two constables began singly to descend, the foremost
one carrying a lighted candle in his hand.

The remaining members of the party, consisting of Major Warfield,
Capitola, Mrs. Condiment, and some half dozen neighbors, remained
gathered around the open trap-door, waiting, watching, and listening
for what might next happen.

Presently one of the constables called out:

"Major Warfield, sir!"

"Well!" replied Old Hurricane.

"He's a-breathing still, sir; but seems badly hurt, and may be a-dying,
seeing as he's unsensible and unspeakable. What shall we do long of
him?"

"Bring him up! let's have a look at the fellow, at any rate!" exclaimed
Old Hurricane, peremptorily.

"Just so, sir! but some of the gem-men up there'll have to come down on
the ladder and give a lift. He's a dead weight now, I tell your honor!"

Several of the neighbors immediately volunteered for the service, and
two of the strongest descended the ladder to lend their aid.

On attempting to move the injured man he uttered a cry of pain, and
fainted, and then it took the united strength and skill of four strong
men to raise the huge insensible form of the athlete, and get him up
the ladder. No doubt the motion greatly inflamed his inward wounds, but
that could not be helped. They got him up at last, and laid out upon
the floor a ghastly, bleeding, insensible form, around which every one
gathered to gaze. While they were all looking upon him as upon a
slaughtered wild beast, Capitola alone felt compassion.

"Uncle, he is quite crushed by his fall. Make the men lay him upon the
bed. Never think of me; I shall never occupy this room again; its
associations are too full of horrors. There, uncle, make them at once
lay him upon the bed."

"I think the young lady is right, unless we mean to let the fellow
die," said one of the neighbors.

"Very well! I have particular reasons of my own for wishing that the
man's life should be spared until he could be brought to trial and
induced to give up his accomplices," said Old Hurricane. Then, turning
to his ward, he said:

"Come along, Capitola. Mrs. Condiment will see that your effects are
transferred to another apartment."

"And you, friends," he continued, addressing the men present, "be so
good, so soon as we have gone, to undress that fellow and put him to
bed, and examine his injuries while I send off for a physician; for I
consider it very important his life should be spared sufficiently long
to enable him to give up his accomplices." And so saying, Old Hurricane
drew the arm of Capitola within his own and left the room.

It was noon before the physician arrived. When he had examined the
patient he pronounced him utterly unfit to be removed, as besides other
serious contusions and bruises, his legs were broken and several of his
ribs fractured.

In a word. It was several weeks before the strong constitution of the
outlaw prevailed over his many injuries, and he was pronounced well
enough to be taken before a magistrate and committed to prison to await
his trial. Alas! his life, it was said, was forfeit by a hundred
crimes, and there could be no doubt as to his fate. He maintained a
self-possessed good-humored and laughingly defiant manner, and when
asked to give up his accomplices, he answered gaily:

That treachery was a legal virtue which outlaws could not be expected
to know anything about.

Capitola was everywhere lauded for her brave part in the capture of the
famous desperado. But Cap was too sincerely sorry for Black Donald to
care for the applause.




CHAPTER XXI.

A FATAL HATRED.


     "Oh, heaven and all its hosts, he shall not die!"

     "By Satan and his fiends, he shall not live!
      This is no transient flash of fugitive passion,
      His death has been my life for years of misery,
      Which, else I had not lived,
      Upon that thought, and not on food, I fed,
      Upon that thought, and not on sleep, I rested,
      I came to do the deed that must be done,
      Nor thou, nor the sheltering angels could prevent me."

                                     --MATURIN.


The United States army, under General Scott, invested the city of
Mexico.

A succession of splendid victories had marked every stage of their
advance, from the seacoast to the capital. Vera Cruz had fallen;
Cerro-Gordo had been stormed and passed: Xalapa taken; the glorious
triumph of Churubusco had been achieved. The names of Scott, Worth,
Wool, Quitman, Pillow and others were crowned with honor. Others again,
whose humble names and unnoticed heroism have never been recorded,
endured as nobly, suffered as patiently, and fought as bravely. Our own
young hero, Herbert Greyson, had covered himself with honor.

The war with Mexico witnessed, perhaps, the most rapid promotions of
any other in the whole history of military affairs.

The rapid ascent of our young officer was a striking instance of this.
In two years from the time he had entered the service, with a
lieutenant's commission, he held the rank of major, in the--Regiment of
Infantry.

Fortune had not smiled upon our other young friend, Traverse
Rocke--partly because, being entirely out of his vocation, he had no
right to expect success; but mostly because he had a powerful enemy in
the Colonel of his regiment--an unsleeping enemy, whose constant
vigilance was directed to prevent the advancement and insure the
degradation and ruin of one whom he contemptuously termed the
"gentleman private."

Now, it is known that by the rules of military etiquette, a wide social
gulf lies between the Colonel of the regiment and the private in the
ranks.

Yet, Colonel Le Noir continually went out of his way to insult Private
Rocke, hoping to provoke him to some act of fatal insubordination.

And very heavy was this trial to a high spirited young man like
Traverse Rocke, and very fortunate was it for him that he had early
been imbued with that most important truth, that "He who ruleth his own
spirit is greater than he who taketh a city."

But, if Colonel Le Noir crossed the gulf of military etiquette to
harass the poor young soldier, Major Greyson did the same thing for the
more honorable purpose of soothing and encouraging him.

And both Herbert and Traverse hoped that the designs of their Colonel
would be still frustrated by the self-command and patience of the young
private.

Alas! they did not know the great power of evil! They did not know that
nothing less than Divine Providence could meet and overcome it.

They fondly believed that the malignity of Le Noir had resulted in no
other practical evil than in preventing the young soldier's
well-merited advancement, and in keeping him in the humble position of
a private in the ranks.

They were not aware that the discharge of Traverse Rocke had long ago
arrived, but that it had been suppressed through the diabolical cunning
of Le Noir. That letters, messages and packets, sent by his friends to
the young soldier, had found their way into his Colonel's possession
and no further.

And so, believing the hatred of that bad man to have been fruitless of
serious, practical evil, Herbert encouraged his friend to be patient
for a short time longer, when they should see the end of the campaign,
if not of the war.

It was now that period of suspense and of false truce between the
glorious 20th of August and the equally glorious 8th of September,
1847--between the two most brilliant actions of the war, the battle of
Churubusco and the storming of Chapultepec.

The General-in-Chief of the United States forces in Mexico was at his
headquarters in the Archiepiscopal palace of Tacubaya, on the suburbs,
or in the full sight of the city of the Montezumas, awaiting the issue
of the conference between the commissioners of the hostile governments,
met to arrange the terms of a treaty of peace--that every day grew more
hopeless.

General Scott, who had had misgivings as to the good faith of the
Mexicans, had now his suspicions confirmed by several breaches on the
part of the enemy of the terms of the armistice.

Early in September he despatched a letter to General Santa Anna,
complaining of these infractions of the truce, and warning him that if
some satisfactory explanations were not made within forty-eight hours
he should consider the armistice at an end, and renew hostilities.

And not to lose time, he began on the same night a series of
reconnaisances, the object of which was to ascertain their best
approach to the city of Mexico, which, in the event of the renewal of
the war, he purposed to carry by assault.

It is not my intention to pretend to describe the siege and capture of
the capital, which has been so often and eloquently described by grave
and wise historians, but rather to follow the fortunes of an humble
private in the ranks, and relate the events of a certain court-martial,
as I learned them from the after-dinner talk of a gallant officer who
had officiated on the occasion.

It was during these early days in September, while the illustrious
General-in-Chief was meditating concluding the war by the assault of
the city of Mexico, that Colonel Le Noir also resolved to bring his own
private feud to an end, and ruin his enemy by a coup-de-diable.

He had an efficient tool for his purpose in the Captain of the company
to which Traverse Rocke belonged. This man, Captain Zuten, was a vulgar
upstart thrown into his command by the turbulence of war, as the scum
is cast up to the surface by the boiling of the cauldron.

He hated Traverse Rocke, for no conceivable reason, unless it was that
the young private was a perfect contrast to himself, in the possession
of a handsome person, a well cultivated mind, and a gentlemanly
deportment--cause sufficient for the antagonism of a mean and vulgar
nature.

Colonel Le Noir was not slow to see and to take advantage of this
hatred.

And Captain Zuten became the willing coadjutor and instrument of his
vengeance. Between them they concocted a plot to bring the unfortunate
young man to an ignominious death.

One morning, about the first of September, Major Greyson, in going his
rounds, came upon Traverse, standing sentry near one of the outposts.
The aspect of the young private was so pale, haggard and despairing
that his friend immediately stopped and exclaimed:

"Why Traverse, how ill you look! More fitted for the sick list than the
sentry's duties. What the deuce is the matter?"

The young soldier touched his hat to his superior and answered sadly,
"I am ill, ill in body and mind, sir."

"Pooh!--leave off etiquette when we are alone, Traverse, and call me
Herbert, as usual. Heaven knows, I shall be glad when all this is over
and we fall back into our relative civil positions towards each other.
But what is the matter now, Traverse? Some of Le Noir's villainy again,
of course."

"Of course. But I did not mean to complain, Herbert; that were
childish. I mus' endure this slavery, these insults and persecutions
patiently since I have brought them upon myself."

"Take comfort, Traverse. The war is drawing to a close. Either this
armistice will end in a permanent peace, or when hostilities are
renewed our General will carry the city of Mexico by storm, and dictate
the terms of a treaty from the grand square of the capital. In either
event the war will soon be over, the troops disbanded, and the
volunteers free to go about their business, and Doctor Traverse Rocke
at liberty to pursue his legitimate profession," said Herbert,
cheerfully.

"It may be so; I do not know. Oh, Herbert, whether it be from want of
sleep and excessive fatigue--for I have been on duty for three days and
nights--or whether it be from incipient illness, or all these causes
put together, I cannot tell, but my spirits are dreadfully depressed!
There seems to be hanging over me a cloud of fate I cannot dispel.
Every hour seems descending lower and blacker over my head, until it
feels like some heavy weight about to suffocate or crush me," said
Traverse, sadly.

"Pooh, pooh! hypochondria! cheer up! Remember that in a month we shall
probably be disbanded, and in a year--think of it, Traverse
Rocke--Clara Day will be twenty-one, and at liberty to give you her
hand. Cheer up!"

"Ah, Herbert, all that seems now to be more unsubstantial than the
fabric of a dream. I cannot think of Clara or of my mother without
despair. For oh, Herbert, between me and them there seems to yawn a
dishonored grave! Herbert, they talk, you know, of an attack upon the
Molino-del-Rey, and I almost hope to fall in that charge!"

"Why?" inquired Major Greyson, in dismay.

"To escape being forced into a dishonored grave! Herbert, that man has
sworn my ruin, and he will accomplish it!" said Traverse, solemnly.

"For Heaven's sake, explain yourself!" said Herbert.

"I will. Listen! I will tell you the history of the last three days,"
said Traverse; but before he could add another word the sentry that was
to relieve his guard approached and said:

"Captain Zuten orders you to come to his tent instantly."

With a glance of significance, Traverse bowed to Herbert and walked
off, while the sentinel took his place.

Herbert saw no more of Traverse that day. At night he went to inquire
for him, but learned that he had been sent with a reconnoitering party
to the Molino-del-Rey.

The next day, on seeking Traverse, he understood that the young private
had been despatched on a foraging expedition. That night, upon again
inquiring for him, he was told that he had been sent in attendance upon
the officers who had borne secret despatches to General Quitman, at his
quarters on the Acapulco road.

"Traverse is right. They mean to ruin him. I see how it is, exactly.
When I saw Traverse on guard, two days ago, he looked like a man
exhausted and crazed for want of sleep, and since that time he has been
night and day engaged in harassing duty. That demon, Le Noir, with
Zuten to help him, has determined to keep Traverse from sleep, until
nature is thoroughly exhausted, and then set him upon guard, that he
may be found sleeping on his post. That was what the boy meant when he
talked of the cloud that was hanging over him, and of being forced into
a dishonored grave, and when he hoped, poor fellow, to fall in the
approaching assault upon the Molino-del-Rey! I see it all now. They
have decided upon the destruction of Traverse. He can do nothing. A
soldier's whole duty is comprised in one word--obedience, even if, as
in this instance, he is ordered to commit suicide. Let them hatch their
diabolical plots. We will see if the Lord does not still reign, and the
devil is not a fool. It shall go hard, but that they are 'hoist with
their own petard!'" said Herbert, indignantly.

Early the next morning he went to the tent of Captain Zuten and
requested to see Private Traverse Rocke, in whom, he said, he felt a
warm interest.

The answer of Colonel Le Noir's tool confirmed Herbert's worse
suspicions.

Touching his cap with an air of exaggerated deference, he said:

"As you think so much of the young fellow, Major, I am very sorry to
inform you, sir, that he is under arrest."

"Upon what charge?" inquired Herbert, calmly, concealing the suspicion
and indignation of his bosom.

"Upon a rather bad one, Major--sleeping on his post," replied the
officer, masking his exultation with a show of respect.

"Rather bad! The penalty is death," said Herbert, dryly.

"Yes, sir--martial law is rather severe."

"Who charges him?" asked Herbert, curtly.

"The Colonel of our regiment, sir," replied the man, scarcely able to
conceal his triumph.

"An accusation from a high quarter. Is his charge supported by other
testimony?"

"Beg pardon, Major, but is that necessary?"

"You have answered my question by asking another one, sir. I will
trouble you for a direct reply," said Herbert with dignity.

"Then, Major, I must reply--yes."

"What testimony? I would know the circumstances?"

"Well, sir, I will tell you about it," said the officer, with
ill-concealed triumph. "Private Traverse Rocke had the early morning
watch--"

"After his return from the night ride to Acapulco?"

"Yes, sir. Well, Colonel Le Noir and myself in going our rounds this
morning, just before sunrise, came full upon the young fellow, fast
asleep on his post. In fact, sir, it required a hearty shake to awaken
him."

"After ninety-six hours' loss of sleep, I should not wonder."

"I know nothing about that, sir. I only know that Colonel Le Noir and
myself found him fast asleep on his post. He was immediately arrested."

"Where is he now?" inquired Herbert.

"In one of the Colonel's extra tents, under guard," replied the officer.

Herbert immediately went to the tent in question, where he found two
sentinels, with loaded muskets, on duty before the door. They grounded
arms on the approach of their superior officer.

"Is Private Traverse Rocke confined within there?" he inquired.

"Yes, sir,"

"I must pass in to see him."

"I beg your pardon, sir, but our orders are strict, not even to admit
an officer, without a written order from our Colonel," said the
sentinel.

"Where is the Colonel?"

"In his tent, sir."

Herbert immediately went on to the fine marquee occupied by Colonel Le
Noir.

The sentinel on duty there at once admitted him, and he passed on into
the presence of the Colonel.

He saluted his superior officer with cold military etiquette, and said:

"I have come, sir, to ask of you an order to see Private Traverse
Rocke, confined under the charge of sleeping on his post."

"I regret to say, Major Greyson, that it cannot be done," replied Le
Noir, with ironical politeness.

"Will you have the kindness to inform me, sir, upon what pretext my
reasonable request is refused?" asked Herbert, coldly.

"I deem it quite unnecessary to do so, sir," answered the Colonel,
haughtily.

"Then I have no more to do here," replied Herbert, leaving the tent.

He immediately threw himself into his saddle and rode off to the
Archiepiscopal palace of Tacubaya, where the General-in-Chief had fixed
his headquarters.

Here he had to wait some little time before he was admitted to the
presence of the gallant commander, who received him with all the
stately courtesy for which that renowned officer is distinguished.

Herbert mentioned the business that had brought him to the general's
presence, the request of a written order to see a prisoner in strict
confinement for sleeping on his post.

The commander whose kind heart was interested in the welfare of all his
soldiers, made some inquiries into the affair, of which Herbert
proceeded to give him a short history, without, however, venturing, as
yet, directly to charge the Captain or the Colonel with intentional
foul play; indeed to have attempted to criminate the superior officers
of the accused man would then have been most unwise, useless and
hurtful.

The General immediately wrote the desired order and passed it to the
young officer.

Herbert bowed and was about to retire from the room, when he was called
back by the General, who placed a packet of letters in his hand, saying
that they had arrived among his despatches, and were for the prisoner,
to whom Major Greyson might as well take them at once.

Herbert received them with avidity, and on his way back to the
Colonel's tent he examined their superscription.

There were three letters--all directed to Traverse Rocke. On two of
them, he recognized the familiar handwriting of Marah Rocke, on the
other he saw the delicate Italian style of a young lady's hand, which
he readily believed to be that of Clara.

In the midst of his anxiety on his friend's account rejoiced to have
this one little ray of comfort to carry him. He knew that many months
had elapsed since the young soldier had heard from his friends at
home--in fact, Travers never received a letter unless it happened to
come under cover to Herbert Greyson. And well they both knew the reason.

"How very fortunate," said Herbert, as he rode on, "that I happened to
be at the General's quarters to receive these letters just when I did;
for if they had been sent to Colonel Le Noir's quarters or to Captain
Z.'s, poor traverse would never have heard of them. However, I shall no
distract Traverse's attention by showing him these letters until he has
told me the full history of his arrest, for I wish him to give me a
cool account of the whole thing, so that I may know if I can possible
server him. Ah, it is very unlikely that nay power of mine will be ale
to save him if indeed, and in truth, he did sleep upon his post,"
ruminated Herbert, as he rode up to the tent where the prisoner was
confined.

Another pair of sentinels were on duty in place of those who had
refused him admittance.

He alighted from his horse, was challenged, showed his order, and
passed into the tent.

There a sight met him that caused the tears to rush to his eyes--for
the bravest is always the tenderest heart.

Thrown down on the mat at the back of the tent lay Traverse Rocke,
pale, haggard and sunken in the deep, deep sleep of utter exhaustion.
Even in that state of perfect abandonment, prostration and
insensibility, the expression of great mental anguish remained upon his
deathly countenance; a mortal pallor overspread his face; his thick,
black curls, matted with perspiration, clung to his hollow temples and
cheeks; great drops of sweat beaded upon his corrugated brow; a quiver
convulsed his mouth and chin; every circumstance betrayed how severely,
even in that swoonlike state, he suffered.

Herbert drew a camp-stool and sat down beside his mat, resolving not to
break that greatly needed rest, but to wait patiently until the sleeper
should awake.

Again, I say that I know nothing about mesmerism, but I have seen
strange effects produced quite unconsciously by the presence of one
person upon another. And in a few minutes after Herbert took his seat
beside Traverse, it was noticeable that the face of the sleeper lost
its look of pain, and his rest grew deep and calm.

Herbert sat watching that pale, calm, intellectual face, thanking
heaven that his mother, in her distant home, knew nothing of her boy's
deadly peril and praying heaven that its justice might be vindicated in
the deliverance of this victim from the snares of those who sought his
life.

For more than an hour longer Traverse slept the deep sleep of
exhaustion, and then calmly awoke. On seeing Herbert sitting beside
him, he smiled sadly, saying:

"You here, Herbert? How kind of you to come. Well, Herbert, you see
they have succeeded, as I knew they would. That was what I wished to
tell you about when I was abruptly ordered away. I do believe it was
done on purpose to prevent my telling you. I really think I have been
surrounded by spies to report and distort every word and look and
gesture. If our company had only watched die enemy with half the
vigilance with which they watched me, that party of emigrants would not
have been cut off on the plains."

"Traverse," said Herbert solemnly taking the hand of his friend, "were
you caught sleeping on your post?"

"Ah, sleeping like death, Herbert."

Herbert dropped the hand of his friend, covered his face with his own,
and groaned aloud, "He could not help it!"

"I told you that they had resolved upon my death, Herbert. I told you
that I should be pushed into a shameful grave!"

"Oh, no, no, the Lord forbid! But tell me all about it, Traverse, that
I may understand and know how to proceed," said Herbert, in a broken
voice.

"Well, I need not tell you how I have been insulted, oppressed and
persecuted by those two men, for you know that already."

"Yes, yes!"

"It really soon became apparent to me that they were resolved, if
possible, to exasperate to desert, to retort, or to commit some other
fatal act of insubordination or violence. Yet, for the sake of my dear
mother and of Clara, I did violence only to my own natural manhood, and
bore it all with the servility of a slave."

"With the submission of a saint, dear Traverse; and in doing so you
followed the divine precept and example of Our Saviour, who, when
accused, railed upon and buffeted, 'opened not his mouth.' And in His
forbearance, dear Traverse, there was as much of God-like dignity as
there was of saintly patience. Great self-respect is as often
manifested in forbearance as in resentment," said Herbert, soothingly.

"But you see it availed me nothing. Here I am, under a charge to which
I plead guilty, and the penalty of which is--death!" replied Traverse
in despair.

"Tell me how it was, Traverse. Your persecutions and your patience I
knew before, but what are the circumstances that led to your present
position? That your misfortune is the result of a concerted plan on the
part of Le Noir and his tool, I partly see, but I wish you to put me in
possession of all the facts, that I may see in what manner I may be
able to assist you."

"Ah, Herbert, I thank you, most faithful of friends, but I doubt
whether you can assist me in any other manner than in being kind to my
poor mother and my dear Clara when I am gone--for ah, old playmate, the
act can be too surely proved upon me, and the penalty is certain--and
it is death!" said the poor boy, deeply sighing.

Herbert groaned, and said:

"But tell me, at least, the history of the four days preceding your
arrest."

"I will. Let me see--this is Friday. Well, until this morning's fatal
sleep, I had not slept since Sunday night. Monday was passed in the
usual routine of military duty. Monday evening I was sent on a
reconnoitering expedition to the old castellated Spanish fort of the
Casa de Mata, that occupied the whole night. On Tuesday morning I was
selected to attend the messenger who went with the flag of truce into
the city to carry our General's letter of expostulation to Santa Anna,
which employed the whole day. On Tuesday night, without having had an
hour's rest in the interval, I was put on guard. Wednesday morning I
was sent with a party to escort an emigrant caravan across the marsh to
the village of Churubusco. Wednesday afternoon you saw me on guard and
I told you that I had not slept one hour for three days and nights."

"Yes, you looked ill enough to be ordered on the sick list."

"Yet, listen. Thoroughly exhausted as I was, on Wednesday night I was
ordered to join a party to go on a secret reconnoitering expedition to
the Molina-del-Rey. On Thursday morning I was sent out with another
party on a foraging tour. On Thursday night I was sent in attendance
upon the officer who carried despatches to General Quitman. On Friday
morning I was set on guard between the hours of four and eight!"

"Oh, heaven, what an infamous abuse of military authority!" exclaimed
Herbert, indignantly.

"Herbert, in my life I have sometimes suffered with hunger, cold and
pain, and have some idea of what starving, freezing and torture may be,
but among all the ills to which flesh is heir, I doubt if there is one
so trying to the nerves and brain of man as enforced and long-continued
vigilance, when all his failing nature sinks for want of sleep.
Insanity and death must soon be the result."

"Humph! Go on. Tell me about the manner of their finding you," said
Herbert, scarcely able to repress his indignation.

"Well, when after--let me see--eighty-four--ninety--ninety six hours of
incessant watching, riding and walking, I was set on guard to keep the
morning watch between four o'clock and eight, 'my whole head was sick
and my whole heart faint'; my frame was sinking; my soul could scarcely
hold my body upright. In addition to this physical suffering was the
mental anguish of feeling that these men had resolved upon my death,
and thinking of my dear mother and Clara, whose hearts would be broken
by my fall. Oh! the thought of them at this moment quite unmans me. I
must not reflect. Well, I endeavored with all the faculties of my mind
and body to keep awake. I kept steadily pacing to and fro, though I
could scarcely drag one limb after the other, or even stand upright;
sleep would arrest me while in motion, and I would drop my musket and
wake up in a panic, with the impression of some awful, overhanging ruin
appalling my soul. Herbert, will you think me a miserably weak wretch
if I tell you that that night was a night of mental and physical
horrors? Brain and nerves seemed in a state of disorganization; thought
and emotion were chaos; the relations of soul and body broken up. I had
but one strong, clear idea, namely, that I must keep awake at all
costs, or bring shameful death upon myself and disgrace upon my family.
And even In the very midst of thinking this I would fall asleep."

"No power within yourself could have prevented it; indeed, you had to
drop into sleep or death!"

"I pinched myself, I cut my flesh, I burned my skin, but all in vain.
Nothing could withstand the overwhelming power of sleep that finally
conquered me, about five o'clock this morning. Then, in the midst of a
delightful dream of mother and Clara and home, I was roused up by a
rude shake, and awoke to find my musket fallen from my hands, and my
Captain and Colonel standing over me. It was several minutes before I
could travel back from the pleasant land of sleep and dreams and
realize my real position. When I did I had nothing to say. The
inevitable ruin I felt had come, and crushed me into a sort of dumb
despair. Nor did my superior officers reproach me--their revenge was
too perfect. The captain called a sergeant to take my gun, and I was
marched off to my present prison. And, Herbert, no sooner was I left
alone here than sleep overcame me again, like a strong man, and despite
all the gloom and terror of my situation, despite all of my thoughts of
home and mother and Clara, I slept like a tired child. But this
awakening. Oh! this awakening. Herbert!"

"Be of good courage. Let us hope that heaven will enable us to confound
the plots of the evil, and save you!"

"Ah, Herbert, that will be impossible. The duty of a soldier is clear
and stern; his punishment if he fails in it, swift and sure. At the
word of command he must march into the very jaws of death, as is right.
He must die or madden for the want of rest, rather than fall asleep on
his post, for if he does, his punishment is certain and shameful death.
Oh, my mother! Oh, Clara! Would heaven I had fallen at Vera Cruz or
Churubusco, rather than live to bring this dreadful sorrow upon you,"
cried Traverse, covering his convulsed face with his hands.

"Cheer up, cheer up, old comrade. All is not lost that is endangered,
and we shall save you yet!"

"Herbert, you know it is impossible."

"No, I do not know any such thing!"

"You know that I shall be tried to-day and shot tomorrow! Oh, Herbert,
never let my dear ones at home know how I shall die. Tell them that I
fell before Chepultepec--which will be literally true, you know. Oh, my
mother! Oh, my dear Clara, shall I never see you more? Never hear your
sweet voices calling me? Never feel the kind clasp of your hands again?
Is this the end of a life of aspiration and endeavor? Is this the
comfort and happiness I was to bring you?--early bereavement,
dishonored names and broken hearts?"

"I tell you, no! You shall be saved! I say it!"

"Ah, it is impossible."

"No, it is only very difficult--so very difficult that I shall be sure
to accomplish it!"

"What a paradox."

"It is a truth. Things difficult--almost to impossibility--can always
be accomplished. Write that upon your tables, for it is a valuable
truth. And no cheer up, for I bring you letters from Clara and your
mother."

"Letters! from Clara! and mother! Oh, give them to me!" exclaimed the
young man eagerly.

Herbert handed them, and Traverse eagerly broke the seals, one after
another, and devoured the contents.

"They are well! They are well and happy! Oh, thank God they are so. Oh,
Herbert, never let them know how I shall die! If they think I fell
honorably in battle, they will get over it in time, but if they know I
died a convict's death it will break their hearts. Oh, Herbert, my dear
friend, by all our boyhood's love, never let my poor mother and dear
Clara know the manner of my death!" cried Traverse, in an imploring
voice.

Before he could say another word or Herbert could answer, an orderly
sergeant entered and put into Major Greyson's hands a paper that proved
to be a summons for him to attend immediately at headquarters to serve
upon a court-martial, to try Private Traverse Rocke upon the charge of
sleeping on his post.

"This is done on purpose to prevent me becoming a witness for the
defense!" whispered Herbert to his friend, "but take courage. We will
see yet whether you shall succeed!"




CHAPTER XXII.

THE COURT-MARTIAL.


     I wish I could
     Meet all accusers with as good excuse,
     As well as I am certain I can clear
     Myself of this.

                       --SHAKESPEARE.


Pursuant with the general orders issued from headquarters, the
court-martial, consisting of thirteen officers, convened at Tacubaya,
for the trial of Traverse Rocke, private in the--Regiment of Infantry,
accused of sleeping on his post.

It was a sultry morning, early in September, and by seven o'clock the
drum was heard beating before the Archiepiscopal palace, where it was
understood the trial, involving life or death, would come off.

The two sentinels on guard before the doors and a few officers off
duty, loitering about the verandas, were the only persons visible near
the well-ordered premises, until the members of the court-martial, with
the prosecutors and witnesses, began to assemble and pass in.

Within a lofty apartment of the building, which was probably at one
time the great dining-hall of the priests, were collected some twenty
persons, comprising the court-martial and its attendants.

An extension table covered with green cloth occupied the middle of the
long room.

At the head of this table sat General W., the president of the court.
On his right and left, at the sides of the table, were arranged the
other members according to their rank.

At a smaller table, near the right hand of the President, stood the
Judge Advocate or prosecutor on behalf of the United States.

At the door stood a sentinel on guard, and near him two or three
orderly sergeants in attendance upon the officers.

The Judge Advocate opened the court by calling over the names of the
members, beginning with the President and ending with the youngest
officer present, and recording them as they responded.  This
preliminary settled, orders were despatched to bring the prisoner,
prosecutor and witnesses into court.

And in a few minutes entered Colonel Le Noir, Captain Zuten, Ensign
Allen and Sergeant Baker. They were accommodated with seats near the
left hand of the President.

Lastly, the prisoner was brought in guarded, and placed standing at the
foot of the table.

Traverse looked pale, from the severe effects of excessive fatigue and
anxiety, but he deported himself with firmness and dignity, bowed
respectfully to the court, and then drew his stately form up to its
fullest height, and stood awaiting the proceedings.

The Judge Advocate at the order of the President, commenced and read
the warrant for holding the court. He then read over the names of the
members, commencing as before, with the President, and descending
through the gradations of rank to the youngest officer, and demanded of
the prisoner whether he had any cause of challenge, or took any
exception to any member present, and if so, to declare it, as was his
privilege.

Traverse lifted his noble head and keen eyes, and looked slowly around,
in turn, upon each officer of the court-martial.

They might all be said to be strangers to him, since he knew them only
by sight--all except his old acquaintance, Herbert Greyson, who sat
first at the left hand of the President, and who returned his look of
scrutiny with a gaze full of encouragement.

"I find no cause of challenge, and take no exception to any among the
officers composing this court," answered Traverse, again bowing with
such sweetness and dignity in tone and gesture that the officers, in
surprise, looked first at the prisoner and then at each other. No one
could doubt that the accused, in the humble garb of a private soldier,
was nevertheless a man of education and refinement--a true gentleman,
both in birth and breeding.

As no challenge was made, the Judge Advocate proceeded to administer to
each of the members of the court the oath prescribed in the Articles of
War, to the intent that they should "try the matter before them,
between the prisoner and the United States, according to the evidence,
without fear, favor or affection."

This oath was taken by each member holding up his right hand and
repeating the words after the officer.

The court then being regularly constituted, and every preliminary form
observed, the Judge Advocate arose and directed the prisoner to listen
to the charge brought against him, and preferred by the Colonel of his
Regiment, Gabriel Le Noir.

Traverse raised his head and fixed his eagle eyes upon the prosecutor,
who stood beside the Judge Advocate, while the latter in an audible
voice read the accusation, charging the prisoner with wilful neglect of
duty, in that he, the said Traverse Rocke, on the night of the first of
September, being placed on guard at the northwestern outpost of the
Infantry quarters, at Tacubaya, did fall asleep upon his post, thereby
endangering the safety of the quarters, and violating the 46th Article
of War.

To which charge the prisoner, in a firm voice, replied:

"Not guilty of wilful neglect of duty, though found sleeping upon my
post."

The Judge Advocate then cautioned all witnesses to withdraw from the
court and come only as they were called. They withdrew, and he then
arranged some preliminaries of the examination, and called in--Captain
Zuten, of the--Regiment of Infantry.

This witness was a short, coarse-featured, red-haired person of Dutch
extraction, without intellect enough to enable him to conceal the
malignity of his nature.

He testified that on Thursday, the first of September, Traverse Rocke,
private in his company, was ordered on guard at the northwestern out
post of the quarters, between the hours of four and eight a.m. That
about five o'clock on the same morning, he, Joseph Zuten, in making his
usual rounds, and being accompanied on that occasion by Colonel Gabriel
Le Noir, Lieutenant Adams and Ensign Baker, did surprise Private
Traverse Rocke asleep on his post leaning against the sentry box with
his musket at his feet.

This witness was cross-examined by the Judge Advocate, who, it is
known, combines in his own person the office of prosecutor on the part
of the United States and counsel for the prisoner, or rather, if he be
honest, he acts as impartial inquirer and arbiter between the two.

As no new facts were gained by the cross-examination, the Judge
Advocate proceeded to call the next witness, Colonel Le Noir.

Here, then, was a gentleman of most prepossessing exterior, as well as
of most irreproachable reputation.

In brief, his testimony corroborated that of the foregoing witness, as
to the finding of the prisoner asleep on his post at the time and place
specified. In honor of his high social and military standing, this
witness was not cross-examined.

The next called was Lieutenant Adams, who corroborated the evidence of
former witnesses. The last person examined was Ensign Baker, whose
testimony corresponded exactly to that of all who had gone before him.

The Judge Advocate then briefly summed up the case on the part of the
United States--first by reading the 46th Article of War, to wit, that:

"Any sentinel who shall be found sleeping on his post, or shall leave
it before he shall be regularly relieved, shall suffer death," etc.,
etc., etc.

And secondly, by reading the recorded evidence to the effect that:

Traverse Rocke had been found by competent witnesses sleeping on his
post.

And concluded by saying:

"Gentlemen, officers of the court-martial, here is the law and here is
the fact both proven, and it remains for the court to find a verdict in
accordance with both."

The prisoner was then put upon his defence.

Traverse Rocke drew himself up and said, that the truth, like the
blessed sun, must, on its shining forth, dispel all clouds of error;
that, trusting in the power of truth, he should briefly relate the
history of the preceding seven days. And then he commenced and narrated
the facts with which the reader is, already acquainted.

Traverse was interrupted several times in the course of his narrative
by the President, General W., a severe martinet, who reminded him that
an attempt to criminate his superior Officers would only injure his
cause before the court.

Traverse, bowing, as in duty bound to the President at every fresh
interruption, nevertheless proceeded straight on with his narrative to
its conclusion.

The defence being closed, the Judge Advocate arose, as was his
privilege, to have the last word. He stated that if the prisoner had
been oppressed or aggrieved by his superior officer, his remedy lay in
the 35th of the Articles of War, providing that any soldier who shall
feel himself wronged by his captain shall complain thereof to the
Colonel of his Regiment.

To this the prisoner begged to reply that he had considered the Colonel
of his Regiment his personal enemy, and as such could have little hope
of the issue, even if he had had opportunity afforded him, of appealing
to that authority.

The Judge Advocate expressed his belief that this complaint was
vexatious and groundless.

And here the evidence was closed, the prosecutor, prisoner and
witnesses dismissed, and the court adjourned to meet again to
deliberate with closed doors.

It was a period of awful suspense with Traverse Rocke. The prospect
seemed dark for him.

The fact of the offence and the law affixing the penalty of death to
that offence was established, and as the Judge Advocate truly said,
nothing remained but for the court to find their verdict in accordance
to both.

Extenuating circumstances there were certainly; but extenuating
circumstances were seldom admitted in courts-martial, the law and
practice of which were severe to the extent of cruelty.

Another circumstance against him was the fact that it did not require
an unanimous vote to render a legal verdict, but that if a majority of
two-thirds should vote for conviction, the fate of the prisoner would
be sealed. Traverse had but one friend in the court, and what could his
single voice do against so many? Apparently nothing: yet, as the
prisoner on leaving the court-room, raised his eyes to that friend,
Herbert Greyson returned the look with a glance of more than
encouragement--of triumph.




CHAPTER XXIII.

THE VERDICT.


     We must not make a scare-crow of the law,
     Setting it up to frighten birds of prey;
     And let it keep one shape till custom makes it,
     Their perch and not their terror.

                                    --SHAKESPEARE.


The members of a court-martial sit in the double capacity of jurors and
judges; as jurors they find the facts, and as judges they award the
punishment. Yet their session with closed doors was without the solemn
formality that the uninitiated might have supposed to attend a grave
deliberation upon a matter of guilt or innocence involving a question
of life or death.

No sooner were the doors closed that shut out the "vulgar" crowd, than
the "high and mighty" officials immediately fell into easy attitudes,
and disengaged conversation upon the weather, the climate, yesterday's
dinner at General Cushion's quarters, the claret, the cigars and the
Mexican signoritas.

They were presently recalled from this easy chat by the President, a
severe disciplinarian, who reminded them rather sharply of the business
upon which they had convened.

The officers immediately wheeled themselves around in the chairs,
facing the table, and fell into order.

The Judge Advocate seated himself at his detached stand, opened his
book, called the attention of the court, and commenced and read over
the whole record of the evidence and the proceedings up to this time.

The President then said:

"For my own part, gentlemen, I think this quite a simple matter,
requiring but little deliberation. Here is the fact of the offence
proved, and here is the law upon that offence clearly defined. Nothing
seems to remain for us to do but to bring in a verdict in accordance
with the law and the fact."

Several of the elder officers and sterner disciplinarians agreed with
the President, who now said:

"I move that the vote be immediately made upon this question."

To this, also, the elder officers assented. And the Judge Advocate was
preparing to take the ballot, when one of the younger members arose and
said:

"Mr. President and gentlemen, there are mitigating circumstances
attending this offence, which, in my opinion, should be duly weighed
before making up our ballot."

"Lieutenant Lovel, when your hair has grown white in the service of
your country, as mine has, and when your skin is mottled with the scars
of a score of well-fought fields, you will find your soft theories
corrected by hard experience, and you will know that in the case of a
sentinel steeping upon, his post there can be no mitigating
circumstances; that nothing can palliate such flagrant and dangerous
neglect, involving the safety of the whole army; a crime that martial
law and custom have very necessarily made punishable by death," said
the President, sternly.

The young lieutenant sat down abashed, under the impression that he had
betrayed himself into some act of gross impropriety. This was his first
appearance in the character of juror and judge; he was literally
unaccustomed to public speaking, and did not hazard a reply.

"Has any other gentleman any views to advance before we proceed to a
general ballot?" inquired the President.

Several of the officers whispered together, and then some one replied
that there seemed to be no reason why the vote should not be
immediately taken.

Herbert Greyson remained perfectly silent. Why he did not speak then,
in reply to this adjuration--why, indeed, he had not spoken before, in
support of Lieutenant Lovel's views in favor of his friend, I do not
know to this day, though I mean to ask him the first time I have the
opportunity. Perhaps he wished to "draw the enemy's fire," perhaps he
was inclined to dramatic effects; but whatever might have been the
motive, he continued silent, offering no obstacle to the immediate
taking of the vote.

The Judge Advocate then called the court to order for the taking of the
ballot, and proceeded to question the members in turn, commencing with
the youngest.

"How say you, Lieutenant Lovel, is the prisoner on trial guilty or not
guilty of the offence laid to his charge?"

"Guilty," responded the young officer, as his eyes filled with tears of
pity for the other young life against which he had felt obliged to
record this vote.

"If that is the opinion of one who seems friendly to him, what will be
the votes of the other stern judges?" said Herbert Greyson to himself,
in dismay.

"What say you, Lieutenant Adams--is the prisoner guilty or not guilty?"
said the Judge Advocate, proceeding with the ballot.

"Guilty!"

"Lieutenant Cragin?"

"Guilty!"

"Lieutenant Evans?"

"Guilty!"

"Lieutenant Goffe?"

"Guilty!"

"Lieutenant Hesse?"

"Guilty!"

"Captain Kingsley?"

"Guilty!"

"Captain McConkey?"

"Guilty!"

"Captain Lucas?"

"Guilty!"

"Captain O'Donnelly?"

"Guilty!"

"Captain Rozencrantz?"

"Guilty!"

"Major Greyson?"

"NOT GUILTY!"

Every officer sprang to his feet and gazed in astonishment,
consternation and indignant inquiry upon the renderer of this
unprecedented vote.

The President was the first to speak, breaking out with:

"Sir! Major Greyson! your vote, sir, in direct defiance of the fact and
the law upon it, is unprecedented, sir, in the whole history of
court-martial!"

"I record it as uttered, nevertheless," replied Herbert.

"And your oath, sir! What becomes of your oath as a judge, of this
court?"

"I regard my oath in my vote!"

"What, sir?" inquired Captain McConkey, "do you mean to say that you
have rendered that vote in accordance with the facts elicited in
evidence, as by your oath you were bound to do?"

"Yes."

"How, sir, do you mean to say that the prisoner did not sleep upon his
post?"

"Certainly I do not; on the contrary, I grant that he did sleep upon
his post, and yet I maintain that in doing so he was not guilty!"

"Major Greyson plays with us," said the President.

"By no means, sir! I never was in more solemn earnest than at present!
Your honor, the President and gentlemen judges of the court, as I am
not counsel for the prisoner, nor civil officer, nor lawyer, of whose
interference courts-martial are proverbially jealous, I beg you will
permit me to say a few words in support, or at least, I will say, in
explanation of the vote which you have characterized as an opinion in
opposition to fact and law, and unprecedented in the whole history of
courts-martial."

"Yes, it is! it is!" said General W., shifting uneasily in his seat.

"You heard the defense of the prisoner," continued Herbert; "you heard
the narrative of his wrongs and sufferings, to the truth of which his
every aspect bore testimony. I will not here express a judgment as to
the motives that prompted his superior officers, I will merely advert
to the facts themselves, in order to prove that the prisoner, under the
circumstances, could not, with his human power, have done otherwise
than he did."

"Sir, if the prisoner considered himself wronged by his captain, which
is very doubtful, he could have appealed to the Colonel of his
Regiment!"

"Sir, the Articles of War accord him that privilege. But is it ever
taken advantage of? Is there a case on record where a private soldier
ventures to make a dangerous enemy of his immediate superior by
complaining of his Captain to his Colonel? Nor in this case would it
have been of the least use, inasmuch as this soldier had well-founded
reasons for believing the Colonel of his regiment his personal enemy,
and the Captain as the instrument of this enmity."

"And you, Major Greyson, do you coincide in the opinion of the
prisoner? Do you think that there could have been anything in common
between the Colonel of the regiment and the poor private in the ranks,
to explain such an equalizing sentiment as enmity?" inquired Captain
O'Donnelly.

"I answer distinctly, yes, sir! In the first place, this poor private
is a young gentleman of birth and education, the heir of one of the
most important estates in Virginia, and the betrothed of one of the
most lovely girls in the world. In both these capacities he has stood
in the way of Colonel Le Noir, standing between him and the estate on
the one hand, and between him and the young lady on the other. He has
disappointed Le Noir both in love and ambition. And he has thereby made
an enemy of the man who has, besides, the nearest interest in his
destruction. Gentlemen, what I say now in the absence of Colonel Le
Noir, I am prepared to repeat in his presence, and maintain at the
proper time and place."

"But how came this young gentleman of birth and expectations to be
found in the ranks?" inquired Captain Rosencrantz.

"How came we to have headstrong sons of wealthy parents, fast young men
of fortune, and runaway students from the universities and colleges of
the United States in our ranks? In a burst of boyish impatience the
youth enlisted. Destiny gave him as the Colonel of his regiment his
mortal enemy. Colonel Le Noir found in Captain Zuten a ready instrument
for his malignity. And between them both they have done all that could
possibly be effected to defeat the good fortune and insure the
destruction of Traverse Rocke. And I repeat, gentlemen, that what I
feel constrained to affirm here in the absence of those officers, I
shall assuredly reassert and maintain in their presence, upon the
proper occasion. In fact I shall bring formal charges against Colonel
Le Noir and Captain Zuten, of conduct unworthy of officers and
gentlemen!"

"But it seems to me that this is not directly to the point at issue,"
said Captain Kingsley.

"On the contrary, sir, it is the point, the whole point, and only
point, as you shall presently see by attending to the facts that I
shall recall to your memory. You and all present must, then, see that
there was a deliberate purpose to effect the ruin of this young man. He
is accused of having been found sleeping on his post, the penalty of
which, in time of war, is death. Now listen to the history of the days
that preceded his fault, and tell me if human nature could have
withstood the trial?"

"Sunday night was the last of repose to the prisoner until Friday
morning, when he was found asleep on his post."

"Monday night he was sent with the reconnoitering party to
Casa-de-Mata."

"Tuesday he was sent with the officer that carried our General's
expostulation to Santa Anna. At night he was put on guard."

"Wednesday he was sent with another party to protect a band of
emigrants crossing the marshes. At night he was sent with still another
party to reconnoiter Molina-del-Rey."

"Thursday he was sent in attendance upon the officer that carried
despatches to General Quitman, and did not return until after midnight,
when, thoroughly worn out, driven indeed to the extreme degree of
mortal endurance, he was again on a sultry, oppressive night, in a
still, solitary place, set on guard where a few hours later he was
found asleep upon his post--by whom? The Colonel of his regiment and
the Captain of his company, who seemed bent upon his ruin--as I hold
myself bound to establish before another court-martial."

"This result had been intended from the first! If five nights' loss of
sleep would not have effected this, fifteen probably would; if fifteen
would not, thirty would; or if thirty wouldn't sixty would!--and all
this Captain Zuten had the power to enforce until his doomed victim
should fall into the hands of the provost-marshal, and into the arms of
death!"

"And now, gentlemen, in view of all these circumstances, I ask you--was
Traverse Rocke guilty of wilful neglect of duty in dropping asleep on
his post? And I move for a reconsideration, and a new ballot!"

"Such a thing is without precedent, sir! These mitigating circumstances
may be brought to bear on the Commander-in-Chief, and may be embodied
in a recommendation to mercy! They should have no weight in the finding
of the verdict," said the President, "which should be in accordance
with the fact and the law."

"And with justice and humanity! to find a verdict against this young
man would be to place an unmerited brand upon his spotless name, that
no after clemency of the Executive could wipe out! Gentlemen, will you
do this! No! I am sure that you will not! And again I move for a new
ballot!"

"I second the motion!" said Lieutenant Lovel, rising quite encouraged
to believe in his own first instincts, which had been so favorable.

"Gentlemen," said the President sternly, "this thing is without
precedent! In all the annals of courts-martial, without precedent!"

"Then, if there is no such precedent, it is quite time that such a one
were established, so that the iron car of literal law should not always
roll over and crush justice! Gentlemen, shall we have a new ballot?"

"Yes! yes! yes!" were the answers.

"It is irregular! It is illegal! It is unprecedented! A new ballot?
Never heard of such a thing in forty years of military life! Lord bless
my soul, what is the service coming to!"

"A new ballot! a new ballot! a new ballot!" was the unanimous cry.

The President groaned in spirit, and recorded a vow never to forgive
Herbert Greyson for this departure from routine.

The new ballot demanded by acclamation had to be held.

The Judge Advocate called the court to order and began anew. The votes
were taken as before, commencing with the young lieutenant, who now
responded sonorously:

"Not guilty!"

And so it ran around the entire circle.

"Not guilty!" "Not guilty!" "Not guilty!" were the hearty responses of
the court.

The acquittal was unanimous. The verdict was recorded.

The doors were then thrown open to the public, and the prisoner called
in and publicly discharged from custody.

The court then adjourned.

Traverse Rocke threw himself upon the bosom of his friend, exclaiming
in a broken voice:

"I cannot sufficiently thank you! My dear mother and Clara will do
that!"

"Nonsense!" said Herbett laughing; "didn't I tell you that the Lord
reigns, and the devil is a fool? This is only the beginning of
victories!"




CHAPTER XXIV.

THE END OF THE WAR


     Now are our brows bound with victorious wreaths,
     Our bruised arms hung up for monuments;
     Our stern alarums changed to merry meetings,
     Our dreadful marches to delightful measures.
     Grim-visaged war hath smoothed his wrinkled front,
     And now instead of mounting barbed steeds,
     To fright the souls of fearful adversaries,
     He capers nimbly in a lady's chamber,
     To the lascivious pleasing of a lute.

                                   --SHAKESPEARE.


Ten days later Molina-del-Rey, Casa-de-Mata, and Chapultepec had
fallen! The United States forces occupied the city of Mexico, General
Scott was in the Grand Plaza, and the American standard waved above the
capital of the Montezumas!

Let those who have a taste for swords and muskets, drums and trumpets,
blood and fire, describe the desperate battles and splendid victories
that led to this final magnificent triumph!

My business lies with the persons of our story, to illustrate whom I
must pick out a few isolated instances of heroism in this glorious
campaign.

Herbert Greyson's division was a portion of the gallant Eleventh that
charged the Mexican batteries on Molina-del-Rey. He covered his name
with glory, and qualified himself to merit the command of the regiment,
which he afterwards received.

Traverse Rocke fought like a young Paladin. When they were marching
into the very mouths of the cannon they were vomiting fire upon them,
and when the young ensign of his company was struck down before him,
Traverse Rocke took the colors from his falling hand, and crying
"Victory!" pressed onward and upward over the dead and the dying, and
springing upon one of the guns which continued to belch forth fire, he
thrice waved the flag over his head and then planted it upon the
battery. Captain Zuten fell in the subsequent assault upon Chapultepec.

Colonel Le Noir entered the city of Mexico with the victorious army,
but on the subsequent day, being engaged in a street skirmish with the
leperos, or liberated convicts, he fell mortally wounded by a copper
bullet, and he was now dying by inches at his quarters near the Grand
Cathedral.

It was on the evening of the 20th of September, six days from the
triumphant entry of General Scott into the capital, that Major Greyson
was seated at supper at his quarters, with some of his brother
officers, when an orderly entered and handed a note to Herbert, which
proved to be a communication from the surgeon of their regiment,
begging him to repair without delay to the quarters of Colonel Le Noir,
who, being in extremity, desired to see him.

Major Greyson immediately excused himself to his company, and repaired
to the quarters of the dying man.

He found Colonel Le Noir stretched upon his bed in a state of extreme
exhaustion and attended by the surgeon and chaplain of his regiment.

As Herbert advanced to the side of his bed, Le Noir stretched out his
pale hand and said:

"You bear no grudge against a dying man, Greyson?"

"Certainly not," said Herbert, "especially when he proposes doing the
right thing, as I judge you do, from the fact of your sending for me."

"Yes, I do; I do!" replied Le Noir, pressing the hand that Herbert's
kindness of heart could not withhold.

Le Noir then beckoned the minister to hand him two sealed packets,
which he took and laid upon the bed before him.

Then taking up the larger of the two packets, he placed it in the hands
of Herbert Greyson, saying:

"There, Greyson, I wish you to hand that to your friend, young Rocke,
who has received his colors, I understand?"

"Yes, he has now the rank of ensign."

"Then give this parcel into the hands of Ensign Rocke, with the
request, that being freely yielded up, they may not be used in any
manner to harass the last hours of a dying man."

"I promise, on the part of my noble young friend, that they shall not
be so used," said Herbert as he took possession of the parcel.

Le Noir then took up the second packet, which was much smaller, but
much more firmly secured, than the first, being in an envelope of
parchment, sealed with three great seals.

Le Noir held it in his hand for a moment, gazing from the surgeon to
the chaplain, and thence down upon the mysterious packet, while spasms
of pain convulsed his countenance. At length he spoke:

"This second packet, Greyson, contains a--well, I may as well call it a
narrative. I confide it to your care upon these conditions--that it
shall not be opened until after my death and funeral, and that, when it
has served its purpose of restitution, it may be, as far as possible,
forgotten. Will you promise me this?"

"On my honor, yes," responded the young man, as he received the second
parcel.

"This is all I have to say, except this--that you seemed to me, upon
every account, the most proper person to whom I could confide this
trust. I thank you for accepting it, and I believe that I may safely
promise that you will find the contents of the smaller packet of great
importance and advantage to yourself and those dear to you."

Herbert bowed in silence.

"That is all, good-by. I wish now to be alone with our chaplain," said
Colonel Le Noir, extending his hand.

Herbert pressed that wasted hand; silently sent up a prayer for the
dying wrong-doer, bowed gravely and withdrew.

It was almost eight o'clock, and Herbert thought that he would scarcely
have time to find Traverse before the drum should beat to quarters.

He was more fortunate than he had anticipated, for he had scarcely
turned the Grand Cathedral when he came full upon the young ensign.

"Ah! Traverse, I am very glad to meet you! I was just going to look for
you. Come immediately to my rooms, for I have a very important
communication to make to you. Colonel Le Noir is supposed to be dying.
He has given me a parcel to be handed to you, which I shrewdly suspect
to contain your intercepted correspondence for the last two years,"
said Herbert.

Traverse started and gazed upon his friend in amazement, and was about
to express his astonishment, when Herbert, seeing others approach, drew
the arm of his friend within his own, and they hurried silently on
toward Major Greyson's quarters.

They had scarcely got in and closed the door and stricken a light
before Traverse exclaimed impatiently:

"Give it me!" and almost snatched the parcel from Herbert's hands.

"Whist! don't be impatient! I dare say it is all stale news!" said
Herbert, as he yielded up the prize.

They sat down together on each side of a little stand supporting a
light.

Herbert watched with sympathetic interest while Traverse tore open the
envelope and examined its contents.

They were, as Herbert had anticipated, letters from the mother and the
betrothed of Traverse--letters that had arrived and been intercepted,
from time to time, for the preceding two years.

There were blanks, also, directed in a hand strange to Traverse, but
familiar to Herbert as that of Old Hurricane, and those blanks inclosed
drafts upon a New Orleans bank, payable to the order of Traverse Rocke.

Traverse pushed all these latter aside with scarcely a glance and not a
word of inquiry, and began eagerly to examine the long-desired,
long-withheld letters from the dear ones at home.

His cheek flamed to see that every seal was broken, and the fresh aroma
of every heart-breathed word inhaled by others, before they reached
himself.

"Look here, Herbert! look here! Is not this insufferable? Every fond
word of my mother, every delicate and sacred expression of--of regard
from Clara, all read by the profane eyes of that man!"

"That man is on his deathbed, Traverse, and you must forgive him! He
has restored your letters."

"Yes, after their sacred privacy has been profaned! Oh!"

Traverse handed his mother's letters over to Herbert, that his foster
brother might read them, but Clara's "sacred epistles" were kept to
himself.

"What are you laughing at?" inquired Traverse, looking up from his
page, and detecting Herbert with a smile upon his face.

"I am thinking that you are not as generous as you were some few years
since, when you would have given me Clara herself; for now you will not
even let me have a glimpse of her letters!"

"Have they not been already sufficiently published?" said Traverse,
with an almost girlish smile and blush.

When those cherished letters were all read and put away, Traverse
stooped down and "fished up" from amidst envelopes, strings and waste
paper another set of letters which proved to be the blanks inclosing
the checks, of various dates, which Herbert recognized as coming
anonymously from Old Hurricane.

"What in the world is the meaning of all this, Herbert? Have I a nabob
uncle turned up anywhere, do you think? Look here!--a hundred
dollars--and a fifty, and another--all drafts upon the Planters' Bank,
New Orleans, drawn in my favor and signed by Largent Dor, bankers!--I,
that haven't had five dollars at a time to call my own for the last two
years! Here, Herbert, give me a good, sharp pinch to wake me up! I may
be sleeping on my post again?" said Traverse in perplexity.

"You are not sleeping, Traverse!"

"Are you sure?"

"Perfectly," replied Herbert, laughing.

"Well, then, do you think that crack upon the crown of my head that I
got upon Chapultepec has not injured my intellect?"

"Not in the slightest degree!" said Herbert, still laughing at his
friend's perplexity.

"Then I am the hero of a fairy tale, that is all--a fairy tale in which
waste paper is changed into bank notes and private soldiers prince
palatines! Look here!" cried Traverse, desperately, thrusting the bank
checks under the nose of his friend, "do you see those things and know
what they are, and will you tell me that everything in this castle
don't go by enchantment?"

"Yes, I see what they are, and it seems to me perfectly natural that
you should have them!"

"Humph!" said Traverse, looking at Herbert with an expression that
seemed to say that he thought the wits of his friend deranged.

"Traverse," said Major Greyson, "did it never occur to you that you
must have other relatives in the world besides your mother? Well, I
suspect that those checks were sent by some relative of yours or your
mother's, who just begins to remember that he has been neglecting you."

"Herbert, do you know this?" inquired Traverse, anxiously.

"No, I do not know it; I only suspect this to be the case," said
Herbert, evasively. "But what is that which you are forgetting."

"Oh! this--yes, I had forgotten it. Let us see what it is!" said
Traverse, examining a paper that had rested unobserved upon the stand.

"This is an order for my discharge, signed by the Secretary of War, and
dated--ha-ha-ha--two years ago! Here I have been serving two years
illegally, and if I had been convicted of neglect of duty in sleeping
on my post, I should have been shot unlawfully, as that man, when he
prosecuted me, knew perfectly well!" exclaimed Traverse.

"That man, as I said before, lies upon his deathbed! Remember, nothing
against him! But that order for a discharge! now that you are in the
way of promotion and the war is over, will you take advantage of it?"

"Decidedly, yes! for though I am said to have acquitted myself passably
well at Chapultepec--"

"Gloriously, Traverse! You won your colors gloriously!"

"Yet for all that my true mission is not to break men's bones, but to
set them when broken. Not to take men's lives, but to save them when
endangered! So to-morrow morning, please Providence, I shall present
this order to General Butler and apply for my discharge."

"And you will set out immediately for home?"

The face of Traverse suddenly changed.

"I should like to do so! Oh, how I should like to see my dear mother
and Clara, if only for a day! but I must not indulge the longing of my
heart. I must not go home until I can do so with honor!"

"And can you not do so now? You, who triumphed over all your personal
enemies and who won your colors at Chapultepec?"

"No, for all this was in my legitimate profession! Nor will I present
myself at home until, by the blessing of the Lord, I have done what I
set out to do, and established myself in a good practice. And so, by
the help of heaven, I hope within one week to be on my way to New
Orleans to try my fortune in that city."

"To New Orleans! And a new malignant fever of some horrible, unknown
type, raging there!" exclaimed Herbert.

"So much the more need of a physician! Herbert, I am not the least
uneasy on the subject of infection! I have a theory for its
annihilation."

"I never saw a clever young professional man without a theory!" laughed
Herbert.

The drum was now heard beating the tattoo, and the friends separated
with hearts full of revived hope.

The next morning Traverse presented the order of the Secretary to the
Commander-in-Chief and received his discharge.

And then, after writing long, loving and hopeful letters to his mother
and his betrothed, and entreating the former to try to find out who was
the secret benefactor who had sent him such timely aid, Traverse took
leave of his friends, and set out for the Southern Queen of Cities,
once more to seek his fortune.

Meantime the United States army continued to occupy the City of Mexico,
through the whole of the autumn and winter. General Butler, who
temporarily succeeded the illustrious Scott in the chief command, very
wisely arranged the terms of an armistice with the enemy that was
intended to last two months from the beginning of February, but which
happily lasted until the conclusion of the treaty of peace between the
two countries.

Colonel Le Noir had not been destined soon to die; his wound, an inward
canker from a copper bullet, that the surgeon had at length succeeded
in extracting, took the form of a chronic fester disease. Since the
night, upon which he had been so extremely ill to be supposed dying,
and yet had rallied, the doctors felt no apprehensions of his speedy
death, though they gave no hopes of his final recovery.

Under these circumstances there were hours in which Le Noir bitterly
regretted his precipitation in permitting those important documents to
go out of his own hands. And he frequently sent for Herbert Greyson in
private to require assurances that he would not open the packet
confided to him before the occurrence of the event specified.

And Herbert always soothed the sufferer by reiterating his promise that
so long as Colonel Le Noir should survive the seals of that packet
should not be broken.

Beyond the suspicion that the parcel contained an important confession,
Herbert Greyson was entirely ignorant of its contents.

But the life of Gabriel Le Noir was prolonged beyond all human calculus
of probabilities.

He was spared to experience a more effectual repentance than that
spurious one into which he had been frightened by the seeming rapid
approach of death. And after seven months of lingering illness and
gradual decline, during the latter portions of which he was comforted
by the society of his only son, who had come at his summons to visit
him, in May, 1848, Gabriel Le Noir expired a sincere penitent,
reconciled to God and man.

And soon afterward, in the month of May, the treaty of peace having
been ratified by the Mexican Congress at Queretaro, the American army
evacuated the city and territory of Mexico.

And our brave soldiers, their "brows crowned with victorious wreaths,"
set out upon their return to home and friends.




CHAPTER XXV.

THE FORTUNATE BATH


     Heaven has to all allotted soon or late
     Some lucky revolution of their fate;
     Whose motions if we watch and guide with skill
     (For human good depends on human will)
     Our fortune rolls as from a smooth descent.
     And from the first impression takes its bent.
     Now, now she meets you with a glorious prize,
     And spreads her locks before her as she flies.

                                   --DRYDEN.


Meanwhile, what had our young adventurer been doing in all these months
between September and June!

Traverse, with his two hundred dollars, had set out for New Orleans
about the first of October.

But by the time he had paid his traveling expenses and fitted himself
out with a respectable suit of professional black and a few necessary
books, his little capital had diminished three-quarters.

So that when he found himself settled in his new office, in a highly
respectable quarter of the city, he had but fifty dollars and a few
dimes left.

A portion of this sum was expended in a cheap sofa-bedstead, a closed
washstand and a spirit lamp coffee boiler, for Traverse determined to
lodge in his office and board himself--"which will have this additional
advantage," said the cheerful fellow to himself--"for besides saving me
from debt, it will keep me always on hand for calls."

The fever, though it was October, had scarcely abated; indeed, on the
contrary, it seemed to have revived and increased in virulency in
consequence of the premature return of many people who had fled on its
first appearance, and who in coming back too soon to the infected
atmosphere, were less able to withstand contagion than those who
remained.

That Traverse escaped the plague was owing not so much to his favorite
"theory" as to his vigorous constitution, pure blood and regular habits
of temperance, cleanliness and cheerful activity of mind and body.

Just then the demand was greater than the supply of medical service.
Traverse found plenty to do, and his pleasant, young face and hopeful
and confident manners won him great favor in sick rooms, where, whether
it were to be ascribed to his "theory," his "practice" or to the happy,
inspiring influence of his personal presence, or to all these together,
with the blessing of the Lord upon them, it is certain that he was very
successful in raising the sick. It is true that he did not earn five
dollars in as many days, for his practice, like that of almost every
very young professional man, was among the indigent.

But what of that? What if he were not running up heavy accounts against
wealthy patrons? He was "giving to the poor," not money, for he himself
was as poor as any of them; but his time, labor and professional skill;
he was "giving to the poor;" he was "lending to the Lord," and he
"liked the security." And the most successful speculator that ever made
a fortune on 'change never, never invested time, labor or money to a
surer advantage.

And this I would say for the encouragement of all young persons in
similar circumstances--do not be impatient if the "returns" are a
little while delayed, for they are so sure and so rich that they are
quite worth waiting for, nor will the waiting be long. Give your
services cheerfully, also, for "the Lord loveth a cheerful giver."

Traverse managed to keep out of debt; he regularly paid his office rent
and his laundress' bill; he daily purchased his mutton chop or pound of
beefsteak and broiled it himself; he made his coffee, swept and dusted
his office, put up his sofa-bed, blacked his boots; and oh! miracle of
independence, he mended his own gloves and sewed on his own shirt
buttons, for you may depend that the widow's son knew how to do all
these things; nor was there a bit of hardship in his having so to wait
upon himself, though if his mother and Clara, in their well-provided
and comfortable home at Willow Heights, had only known how destitute
the young man was of female aid and comfort, how they would have cried!

"No one but himself to mend his poor dear gloves! Oh--oh-boo-hoo-oo!"

Traverse never alluded to his straitened circumstances, but boasted of
the comfort of his quarters and the extent of his practice, and
declared that his income already exceeded his outlay, which was
perfectly true, since he was resolved to live within it, whatever it
might be.

As the fever began to subside Traverse's practice declined, and about
the middle of November his "occupation was gone."

We said that his office was in the most respectable locality in the
city; it was, in fact, on the ground floor of a first-class hotel.

It happened that one night, near the close of winter, Traverse lay
awake on his sofa-bedstead, turning over in his mind how he should
contrive to make both ends meet at the conclusion of the present term
and feeling as near despondency as it was possible for his buoyant and
God-trusting soul to be, when there came a loud ringing at his office
bell.

This reminded him of the stirring days and nights of the preceding
autumn. He started up at once to answer the summons.

"Who's there?"

"Is Doctor Rocke in?"

"Yes, what's wanted?"

"A gentleman, sir, in the house here, sir, taken very bad, wants the
doctor directly, room number 555."

"Very well, I will be with the gentleman immediately," answered
Traverse, plunging his head into a basin of cold water and drying it
hastily.

In five minutes Traverse was in the office of the hotel, inquiring for
a waiter to show him up into 555.

One was ordered to attend him, who led the way up several flights of
stairs and around divers galleries, until he opened a door and ushered
the doctor immediately into the sick room.

There was a little, old, dried-up Frenchman in a blue nightcap,
extended on a bed in the middle of the room and covered with a white
counterpane that clung close to his rigid form as to a corpse.

And there was a little, old, dried-up Frenchwoman in a brown merino
gown and a high-crowned muslin cap who hopped and chattered about the
bed like a frightened magpie.

"Ou! Monsieur le Docteur!" she screamed, jumping at Traverse in a way
to make him start back; "Ou, Monsieur le Docteur, I am very happy you
to see! Voila mon frere! Behold my brother! He is ill! He is verra ill!
He is dead! He is verra dead!"

"I hope not," said Traverse, approaching the bed.

"Voila, behold! Mon dieu, he is verra still! He is verra cold! He is
verra dead! What can you, mon frere, my brother to save?"

"Be composed, madam, if you please, and allow me to examine my
patient," said Traverse.

"Ma foi! I know not what you speak 'compose.' What can you my brother
to save?"

"Much, I hope, madam, but you must leave me to examine my patient and
not interrupt me," said Traverse, passing his hand over the naked chest
of the sick man.

"Mon Dieu! I know not 'exam' and 'interrup'! and I know not what can
you mon frere to save!"

"If you don't hush parley-vooing, the doctor can do nothink, mum," said
the waiter, in a respectful tone.

Traverse found his patient in a bad condition--in a stupor, if not in a
state of positive insensibility. The surface of his body was cold as
ice, and apparently without the least vitality. If he was not, as his
sister had expressed it, "very dead," he was certainly "next to it."

By close questioning, and by putting his questions in various forms,
the doctor learned from the chattering little magpie of a Frenchwoman
that the patient had been ill for nine days; that he had been under the
care of Monsieur le Doctor Cartiere; that there had been a consultation
of physicians; that they had prescribed for him and given him over:
that le Docteur Cartiere still attended him, but was at this instant in
attendance as accoucheur to a lady in extreme danger, whom he could not
leave; but Doctor Cartiere had directed them, in his unavoidable
absence, to call in the skilful, the talented, the soon to be
illustrious young Docteur Rocque, who was also near at hand.

The heart of Traverse thrilled with joy. The Lord had remembered him!
His best skill spent upon the poor and needy who could make him no
return, but whose lives he had succeeded in saving, had reached the
ears of the celebrated Dr. C., who had with the unobtrusive magnanimity
of real genius quietly recommended him to his own patrons.

Oh! well, he would do his very best, not only to advance his own
professional interests, and to please his mother and Clara, but also to
do honor to the magnanimous Doctor C.'s recommendation!

Here, too, was an opportunity of putting in practise his favorite
theory; but first of all it was necessary to be informed of the
preceding mode of treatment and its results.

So he further questioned the little, restless magpie, and by
ingeniously framed inquiries succeeded in gaining from her the
necessary knowledge of his patient's antecedents. He examined all the
medicines that had been used, and informed himself of their effects
upon the disease. But the most serious difficulty of all seemed to be
the impossibility of raising vital action upon the cold, dead skin.

The chattering little woman informed him that the patient had been
covered with blisters that would not "pull," that would not
"delineate," that would not, what call you it--"draw!"

Traverse could easily believe this, for not only the skin, but the very
flesh of the old doctor seemed bloodless and lifeless.

Now for his theory! What would kill a healthy man with a perfect
circulation might save the life of this dying one, whose whole surface,
inch deep, seemed already dead.

"Put him in a bath of mustard water, as hot as you can bear your own
hand in and continue to raise the temperature slowly, watching the
effect, for about five minutes. I will go down and prepare a cordial
draught to be taken the moment he gets back to bed," said Doctor Rocke,
who immediately left the room.

His directions were all but too well obeyed. The bathing tub was
quickly brought into the chamber and, filled with water as hot as the
nurse could bear her hand in then the invalid was hastily invested in a
slight bathing gown and lifted by two servants and laid in the hot bath.

"Now, bring quickly, water boiling," said the little, old woman,
imperatively. And when a large copper kettleful was forthcoming, she
took it and began to pour a stream of hissing, bubbling water in at the
foot of the bath.

The skin of the torpid patient had been reddening for a few seconds, so
as to prove that its sensibility was returning, and now when the stream
from the kettle began to mix with the already very hot bath, and to
raise its temperature almost to boiling, suddenly there was heard a cry
from the bath, and the patient, with the agility of youth and health,
skipped out of the tub and into his bed, kicking vigorously and
exclaiming:

"Brigands! Assassins! You have scalded my legs to death!"

"Glory be to the Lord, he's saved!" cried one of the waiters, a devout
Irishman.

"Ciel! he speaks! he moves! he lives! mon frere!" cried the little
Frenchwoman, going to him.

"Ah, murderers! bandits! you've scalded me to death! I'll have you all
before the commissaire!"

"He scolds! he threatens! he swears! he gets well! mon frere!" cried
the old woman, busying herself to change his clothes and put on his
flannel nightgown. They then tucked him up warmly in bed and put
bottles of hot water all around, to keep up this newly stimulated
circulation.

At that moment Dr. Rocke came in, put his hand into the bath-tub and
could scarcely repress a cry of pain and of horror--the water scalded
his fingers! What must it have done to the sick man?

"Good heavens, madam! I did not tell you to parboil your patient!"
exclaimed Traverse, speaking to the old woman. Traverse was shocked to
find how perilously his orders had been exceeded.

"Eh bien, Monsieur! he lives! he does well! voila mon frere!" exclaimed
the little old woman.

It was true: the accidental "boiling bath" as it might almost be
called, had effected what perhaps no other means in the world could--a
restored circulation.

The disease was broken up, and the convalescence of the patient was
rapid. And as Traverse kept his own secret concerning the accidental
high temperature of that bath, which every one considered a fearful and
successful experiment, the fame of Dr. Rocke spread over the whole city
and country.

He would soon have made a fortune in New Orleans, had not the hand of
destiny beckoned him elsewhere. It happened thus:

The old Frenchman whose life Traverse had, partly by accident and
partly by design, succeeded in saving, comprehended perfectly well how
narrow his escape from death had been, and attributed his restoration
solely to the genius, skill and boldness of his young physician, and
was grateful accordingly with all a Frenchman's noisy demonstration.

He called Traverse his friend, his deliverer, his son.

One day, as soon as he found himself strong enough to think of pursuing
his journey, he called his "son" into the room and explained to him
that he, Doctor Pierre St. Jean, was the proprietor of a private insane
asylum, very exclusive, very quiet, very aristocratic, indeed,
receiving none but patients of the highest rank; that this retreat was
situated on the wooded banks of a charming lake in one of the most
healthy and beautiful neighborhoods of East Feliciana; that he had
originally come down to the city to engage the services of some young
physician of talent as his assistant, and finally, that he would be
delighted, enraptured if "his deliverer, his friend, his son," would
accept the post.

Now Traverse particularly wished to study the various phases of mental
derangement, a department of his professional education that had
hitherto been opened to him only through books.

He explained this to his old friend, the French physician, who
immediately went off into ecstatic exclamations of joy as, "Good!
Great! Grand!" and "I shall now repay my good child! my dear son! for
his so excellent skill!"

The terms of the engagement were soon arranged, and Traverse prepared
to accompany his new friend to his "beautiful retreat," the private
madhouse. But Traverse wrote to his mother and to Clara in Virginia,
and also to Herbert Greyson in Mexico, to apprise them of his good
fortune.




CHAPTER XXVI.

THE MYSTERIOUS MANIAC.


     Stay, jailer, stay, and hear my woe;
     She is not mad, who kneels to thee,
     For what I am, full well I know,
     And what I was, and what should be;
     I'll rave no more in proud despair--
     My language shall be calm tho' sad
     But yet I'll truly, firmly swear,
     I am not mad! no, no, not mad!

                          --M.G. LEWIS


It was at the close of a beautiful day in early spring that Traverse
Rocke, accompanying the old doctor and the old sister, reached the
grove on the borders of the beautiful lake upon the banks of which was
situated the "Calm Retreat."

A large, low, white building surrounded with piazzas and shaded by
fragrant and flowering southern trees, it looked like the luxurious
country seat of some wealthy merchant or planter rather than a prison
for the insane.

Doctor St. Jean conducted his young assistant into a broad and cool
hall on each side of which doors opened into spacious rooms, occupied
by the proprietor and his household. The cells of the patients, as it
appeared were up-stairs. The country doctor and the matron who had been
in charge during the absence of the proprietor and his sister now came
forward to welcome the party and report the state of the institution
and its inmates.

All were as usual, the country doctor said, except "Mademoiselle."

"And what of her--how is Mademoiselle--?"

"A patient most interesting, Doctor Rocke," said the old Frenchman,
alternately questioning his substitute and addressing Traverse.

"She has stopped her violent ravings, and seems to me to be sinking
into a state of stupid despair," replied the substitute.

"A patient most interesting, my young friend! A history most pathetic!
You shall hear of it some time. But come into the parlor, and you,
Angele, my sister, ring and order coffee," said the old Frenchman,
leading the way into a pleasant apartment on the right of the hall,
furnished with straw matting upon the floor and bamboo settees and
chairs around the walls.

Here coffee was presently served to the travelers, who soon after
retired for the night.

Traverse's room was a large, pleasant apartment at the end of a wide,
long hall, on each side of which were the doors opening into the cells
of the patients.

Fatigued by his journey, Traverse slept soundly through the night; but
early in the morning he was rudely awakened by the sounds of maniac
voices from the cells. Some were crying, some laughing aloud some
groaning and howling and some holding forth in fancied exhortations.

He dressed himself quickly and left his room to walk down the length of
the long hall and observe the cells on each side. The doors were at
regular intervals, and each door had in its center a small opening to
enable the proprietor to look in upon the patients.

As these were all women, and some of them delicate and refined even in
their insanity, Traverse felt shocked at this necessary, if it were
necessary, exposure of their sanctuary.

The cells were, in fact, small bedrooms that with their white-washed
walls and white-curtained beds and windows looked excessively neat,
clean and cool, but also, it must be confessed, very bare, dreary and
cheerless.

"Even a looking-glass would be a great benefit to those poor girls, for
I remember that even Clara, in her violent grief, and mother in her
lifelong sorrow, never neglected their looking-glass and personal
appearance," said Traverse to himself, as he passed down the hall and
resolved that this little indulgence should be afforded the patients.

And except those first involuntary glances he scrupulously avoided
looking in through the gratings upon those helpless women who had no
means of secluding themselves.

But as he turned to go down the stairs his eyes went full into an
opposite cell and fell upon a vision of beauty and sorrow that
immediately riveted his gaze.

It was a small and graceful female figure, clothed in deep black,
seated by the window, with her elbow resting upon the sill and her chin
supported on her hand. Her eyes were cast down until her eyelashes lay
like inky lines upon her snow-white cheek. Her face, of classic
regularity and marble whiteness, bore a ghastly contrast to the long
eyelashes, arched eyebrows and silken ringlets black as midnight. She
might have been a statue or a picture, so motionless she sat.

Conscious of the wrong of gazing upon this solitary woman, Traverse
forced his looks away and passed on down-stairs, where he again met the
old doctor and Mademoiselle Angele at breakfast.

After breakfast Doctor St. Jean invited his young assistant to
accompany him on a round of visits to the patients, and they went
immediately up to the hall, at the end of which Traverse had slept.

"There are our incurables, but they are not violent; incurables never
are! Poor Mademoiselle! She has just been conveyed to this ward," said
the doctor, opening the door of the first cell on the right at the head
of the stairs and admitting Traverse at once into the presence of the
beautiful, black-haired, snow-faced woman, who had so much interested
him.

"This is my friend, Doctor Rocke, Mademoiselle; Doctor, this is my
friend, Mademoiselle Mont de St. Pierre!"

Traverse bowed profoundly, and the lady arose, curtsied and resumed her
seat, saying, coldly:

"I have told you, Monsieur, never to address me as Mademoiselle; you
persist in doing so, and I shall never notice the insult again."

"Ten thousand pardons, madame! But if madame will always look so young,
so beautiful, can I ever remember that she is a widow?"

The classic lip of the woman curled in scorn, and she disdained a reply.

"I take an appeal to Monsieur Le Docteur--is not madame young and
beautiful?" asked the Frenchman, turning to Traverse, while the
splendid, black eyes of the stranger passed from the one to the other.

Traverse caught the glance of the lady and bowed gravely. It was the
most delicate and proper reply.

She smiled almost as gravely, and with a much kinder expression than
any she had bestowed upon the Frenchman.

"And how has madame fared during my absence so long? The servants--have
they been respectful? Have they been observant? Have they been obedient
to the will of madame? Madame has but to speak!" said the doctor,
bowing politely.

"Why should I speak when every word I utter you believe, or affect to
believe, to be the ravings of a maniac? I will speak no more," said the
lady, turning away her superb dark eyes and looking out of the window.

"Ah, madame will not so punish her friend, her servant, her slave!"

A gesture of fierce impatience and disgust was the only reply deigned
by the lady.

"Come away; she is angry and may become dangerously excited," said the
old doctor, leading the way from the cell.

"Did you tell me this lady is one of the incurables?" inquired
Traverse, when they had left her apartment.

"Bah! yes, poor girl, vera incurable, as my sister would say."

"Yet she appears to me to be perfectly sane, as well as exceedingly
beautiful and interesting."

"Ah, bah; my excellent, my admirable, my inexperienced young friend,
that is all you know of lunatics! With more or less violence of
assertion, they every one insist upon their sanity, just as criminals
protest their innocence. Ah, bah! you shall go into every cell in this
ward and find not one lunatic among them," sneered the old doctor, as
he led the way into the next little room.

It was indeed as he had foretold, and Traverse Rocke found himself
deeply affected by the melancholy, the earnest and sometimes the
violent manner in which the poor unfortunates protested their sanity
and implored or demanded to be restored to home and friends.

"You perceive," said the doctor, with a dry laugh, "that they are none
of them crazy?"

"I see," said Traverse, "but I also detect a very great difference
between that lovely woman in the south cell and these other inmates."

"Bah! bah! bah! She is more beautiful, more accomplished, more refined
than the others, and she is in one of her lucid intervals! That is all;
but as to a difference between her insanity and that of the other
patients, it lies in this, that she is the most hopelessly mad of the
whole lot! She has been mad eighteen years!"

"Is it possible?" exclaimed Traverse, incredulously.

"She lost her reason at the age of sixteen, and she is now thirty-four;
you can calculate!"

"It is amazing and very sorrowful! How beautiful she is!"

"Yes; her beauty was a fatal gift. It is a sad story. Ah, it is a sad
story. You shall hear it when we get through."

"I can connect no idea of woman's frailty with that refined and
intellectual face," said Traverse coldly.

"Ah, bah! you are young! you know not the world! you, my innocent, my
pious young friend!" said the old doctor, as they crossed the hall to
go into the next wing of the building, in which were situated the men's
wards.

Traverse found nothing that particularly interested him in this
department, and when they had concluded their round of visits and were
seated together in the old doctor's study, Traverse asked him for the
story of his beautiful patient.

The doctor shrugged his shoulders.

"It is a story miserable, as I told you before. A gentleman,
illustrious, from Virginia, an officer high in the army, and
distinguished in the war, he brought this woman to me nearly three
years ago. He informed me that--oh, bien! I had better tell you the
story in my own manner. This young lady, Mademoiselle Mont de St.
Pierre, is of a family noble and distinguished--a relative of this
officer, illustrious and brave. At fifteen Mademoiselle met a man,
handsome and without honor. Ah, bah! you understand! at sixteen the
child became a fallen angel! She lost her reason through sorrow and
shame. This relative--this gentleman, illustrious and noble, tender and
compassionate--took her to the seclusion of his country house, where
she lived in elegance, luxury and honor. But as the years passed her
malady increased; her presence became dangerous; in a word, the
gentleman, distinguished and noble, saw the advertisement of my 'Calm
Retreat,' my institution incomparable, and he wrote to me. In a word,
he liked my terms and brought to me his young relative, so lovely and
so unfortunate. Ah! he is a good man, this officer, so gallant, so
chivalrous; but she is ungrateful!"

"Ungrateful!"

"Ah, bah! yes; it is the way of lunatics! They ever imagine their best
friends to be their worst enemies. The poor, crazed creature fancies
that she is the sister-in-law of this officer illustrious! She thinks
that she is the widow of his elder brother, whom she imagines he
murdered, and that she is the mother of children, whom she says he has
abducted or destroyed, so that he may enjoy the estate that is her
widow's dower and their orphans' patrimony. That is the reason why she
insists on being called madame instead of mademoiselle, and we indulge
her when we think of it!"

"But all this is very singular!"

"Ah, bah! who can account for a lunatic's fancies? She is the maddest
of the whole lot. Sometimes she used to become so violent that we would
have to restrain her. But lately, Doctor Wood tells me, she is quite
still; that we consider a bad sign; there is always hope for a lunatic
until they begin to sink into this state," said the doctor, with an air
of competency.




CHAPTER XXVII.

THE MANIAC'S STORY,


     A scheming villain forged the tale
     That chains me in this dreary cell,
     My fate unknown, my friends bewail,
     Oh, doctor, haste that fate to tell!
     Oh, haste my daughter's heart to cheer,
     Her heart, at once, 'twill grieve and glad
     To know, tho' chained and captive here,
     I am not mad! I am not mad!

                          --M. G. LEWIS.


There is some advantage in having imagination, since that visionary
faculty opens the mental eyes to facts that more practical and duller
intellects could never see.

Traverse was young and romantic, and deeply interested in the doctor's
beautiful patient. He, therefore, did not yield his full credulity to
the tale told by the "relative illustrious" to the old doctor, as to
the history and cause of the lady's madness, or even take it for
granted that she was mad. He thought it quite possible that the
distinguished officer's story might be a wicked fabrication, to conceal
a crime, and that the lady's "crazy fancy" might be the pure truth.

And Travers had heard to what heinous uses private madhouses were
sometimes put by some unscrupulous men, who wished to get certain women
out of their way, yet who shrank from bloodshed.

And he thought it not impossible that this "gentleman so noble, so
compassionate and tender," might be just such a man, and this "fallen
angel" such a victim. And he determined to watch and observe. And he
further resolved to treat the interesting patient with all the studious
delicacy and respect due to a refined and accomplished woman in the
full possession of her faculties. If she were really mad, this demeanor
would not hurt her, and if she were not mad it was the only proper
conduct to be observed toward her, as any other must be equally cruel
and offensive. Her bodily health certainly required the attendance of a
physician, and Traverse had therefore a fair excuse for his daily
visits to her cell.

His respectful manners, his grave bow, and his reverential tone in
saying--

"I hope I find you stronger to-day, Madam," seemed to gratify one who
had few sources of pleasure.

"I thank you," she would answer, with a softened tone and look, adding,
"Yes" or "No," as the truth might be.

One day, after looking at the young physician some time, she suddenly
said:

"You never forget. You always address me by my proper title of Madam,
and without the touch of irony which others indulge in when 'humoring'
me, as they call it! Now, pray explain to me why, in sober earnest, you
give me this title?"

"Because, Madam, I have heard you lay claim to that title, and I think
that you yourself, of all the world, have the best right to know how
you should be addressed," said Traverse, respectfully.

The lady looked wistfully at him and said:

"But my next-door neighbor asserts that she is a queen; she insists
upon being called 'your majesty.' Has she, then, the best right to know
how she should be addressed?"

"Alas! no, Madam, and I am pained that you should do yourself the great
wrong to draw such comparisons."

"Why? Am not I and the 'queen' inmates of the same ward of incurables,
in the same lunatic asylum?"

"Yes, but not with equal justice of cause. The 'queen' is a hopelessly
deranged, but happy lunatic. You, Madam, are a lady who has retained
the full possession of your faculties amid circumstances and
surroundings that must have overwhelmed the reason of a weaker mind."

The lady looked at him in wonder and almost in joy.

"Ah! it was not the strength of my mind; it was the strength of the
Almighty upon whom my mind was stayed, for time and for eternity, that
has saved my reason in all these many years! But how did you know that
I was not mad? How do you know that this is anything more than a lucid
interval of longer duration than usual?" she asked.

"Madam, you will forgive me for having looked at you so closely, and
watched you so constantly, but I am your physician, you know--"

"I have nothing to forgive and much to thank you for, young man. You
have an honest, truthful, frank, young face! the only one such that I
have seen in eighteen years of sorrow! But why, then, did you not
believe the doctor? Why did you not take the fact of my insanity upon
trust, as others did?" she asked, fixing her glorious, dark eyes
inquiringly upon his face.

"Madam, from the first moment in which I saw you, I disbelieved the
story of your insanity, and mentioned my doubts to Doctor St. Jean--"

"Who ridiculed your doubts, of course. I can readily believe that he
did. Doctor St. Jean is not a very bad man, but he is a charlatan and a
dullard; he received the story of my reported insanity as he received
me, as an advantage to his institution, and he never gave himself the
unprofitable trouble to investigate the circumstances. I told him the
truth about myself as calmly as I now speak to you, but somebody else
had told him that this truth was the fiction of a deranged imagination,
and he found it more convenient and profitable to believe somebody
else. But again I ask you, why were not you, also, so discreetly
obtuse?"

"Madam," said Traverse, blushing ingenuously, "I hope you will forgive
me for saying that it is impossible any one could see you without
becoming deeply interested in your fate. Your face, Madam, speaks
equally of profound sorrows and of saintly resignation. I saw no sign
of madness there. In the calm depths of those sad eyes, lady, I knew
that the fires of insanity never could have burned. Pardon me that I
looked at you so closely; I was your physician, and was most deeply
anxious concerning my patient."

"I thank you; may the Lord bless you! Perhaps he has sent you here for
my relief, for you are right, young friend--you are altogether right; I
have been wild with grief, frantic with despair, but never for one hour
in the whole course of my life have I been insane."

"I believe you, Madam, on my sacred honor I do!" said Traverse,
fervently.

"And yet you could get no one about this place to believe you! They
have taken my brother-in-law's false story, indorsed as it is by the
doctor-proprietor, for granted. And just so long as I persist in
telling my true story, they will consider me a monomaniac, and so often
as the thought of my many wrongs and sorrows combines with the nervous
irritability to which every woman is occasionally subject, and makes me
rave with impatience and excitement, they will report me a dangerous
lunatic, subject to periodical attacks of violent frenzy; but, young
man, even at my worst, I am no more mad than any other woman, wild with
grief and hysterical through nervous irritation, might at any time
become without having her sanity called in question."

"I am sure that you are not, nor ever could have been, Madam. The
nervous excitement of which you speak is entirely within the control of
medicine, which mania proper is not. You will use the means that I
prescribe and your continued calmness will go far to convince even
these dullards that they have been wrong."

"I will do everything you recommend; indeed, for some weeks before you
came, I had put a constraint upon myself and forced myself to be very
still; but the effect of that was, that acting upon their theory they
said that I was sinking into the last or 'melancholy-mad' state of
mania, and they put me in here with the incurables."

"Lady," said Traverse, respectfully taking her hand, "now that I am
acquainted in some slight degree with the story of your heavy wrongs,
do not suppose that I will ever leave you until I see you restored to
your friends."

"Friends! ah, young man, do you really suppose that if I had had
friends I should have been left thus long unsought? I have no friends,
Doctor Rocke, except yourself, newly sent me by the Lord; nor any
relatives except a young daughter whom I have seen but twice in my
life!--once upon the dreadful night when she was born and torn away
from my sight and once about two years ago, when she must have been
sixteen years of age. My little daughter does not know that she has a
poor mother living, and I have no friend upon earth but you, whom the
Lord has sent."

"And not in vain!" said Traverse, fervently, "though you have no other
friends, yet you have the law to protect you. I will make your case
known and restore you to liberty. Then, lady, listen: I have a good
mother, to whom suffering has taught sympathy with the unfortunate, and
I have a lovely betrothed bride, whom you will forgive her lover for
thinking an angel in woman's form; and we have a beautiful home among
the hills of Virginia, and you shall add to our happiness by living
with us."

The lady looked at Traverse Rocke with astonishment and incredulity.

"Boy," she said, "do you know what you are promising--to assume the
whole burden of the support of a useless woman for her whole life? What
would your mother or your promised wife say to such a proposition?"

"Ah! you do not know my dear mother nor my Clara--no, nor even me. I
tell you the truth when I say that your coming among us would make us
happier. Oh. Madam, I myself owe so much to the Lord and to His
instruments, the benevolent of this world, for all that has been done
for me. I seize with gratitude the chance to serve in my turn any of
His suffering children. Pray believe me!"

"I do! I do, Doctor Rocke! I see that life has not deprived you of a
generous, youthful enthusiasm," said the lady, with the tears welling
up into her glorious black eyes.

After a little, with a smile, she held out her hand to him, saying:

"Young friend, if you should succeed in freeing me from this prison and
establishing my sanity before a court of justice, I and my daughter
will come into the immediate possession of one of the largest estates
in your native Virginia! Sit you down, Doctor Rocke, while I tell you
my true story, and much, very much more of it than I have ever confided
to any human being."

"Lady, I am very impatient to hear your history, but I am your
physician, and must first consider your health. You have been
sufficiently excited for one day; it is late; take your tea and retire
early to bed. To-morrow morning, after I have visited the wards and you
have taken your breakfast, I will come, and you shall tell me the story
of your life."

"I will do whatever you think best," said the lady.

Traverse lifted her hand to his lips, bowed and retreated from the cell.

That same night Traverse wrote to his friend Herbert Greyson, in
Mexico, and to his mother and Clara, describing his interesting
patient, though as yet he could tell but little of her, not even in
fact her real name, but promising fuller particulars next time, and
declaring hi intention of bringing her home for the present to their
house.




CHAPTER XXVIII.

END OF THE LADY'S STORY.


     Of the present naught is bright,
     But in the coming years I see
     A brilliant and a cheerful light,
     Which burns before thee constantly.

                           --W. D. GALLAGHER


At the appointed hour the next morning Traverse Rocke repaired to the
cell of his mysterious patient.

He was pleased to find her up, dressed with more than usual care and
taste and looking, upon the whole, much better in health and spirits
than upon the preceding day.

"Ah, my young hero, it is you; you see that I am ready for you," she
said, holding out her hand.

"You are looking very well this morning," said Traverse, smiling.

"Yes, hope is a fine tonic, Doctor Rocke."

She was seated by the same window at which Traverse had first seen her,
and she now beckoned the young doctor to come and take a seat near her.

"My story is almost as melodramatic as a modern romance, Doctor Rocke,"
she said.

Traverse bowed gravely and waited.

"My father was a French patriot, who suffered death in the cause of
liberty when I, his only child, was but fourteen years of age. My
mother, broken-hearted by his loss, followed him within a few months. I
was left an orphan and penniless, for our estate was confiscated."

"Ah, your sorrows came early and heavily indeed," said Traverse.

"Yes; well, a former servant of my father held an humble situation of
porter on the ground floor of a house, the several floors of which were
let out to different lodgers. This poor man and his wife gave me a
temporary home with themselves. Among the lodgers of the house there
was a young Virginian gentleman of fortune, traveling for pleasure and
improvement; his name was Mr. Eugene Le Noir."

"Le Noir!" cried Traverse, with a violent start.

"Yes--what is the matter?"

"It is a familiar Virginia name, Madam, that is all; pray go on."

"Mr. Le Noir was as good and kind as he was wise and cultivated. He
used to stop to gossip with old Cliquot every time he stopped at the
porter's room to take or to leave his key. There he heard of the poor
little orphan of the guillotine, who had no friend in the world but her
father's old servant. He pitied me, and after many consultations with
Father and Mother Cliquot, he assumed the position of guardian to me,
and placed me at one of the best schools in Paris. He lingered in the
city and came to see me very often; but always saw me in the presence
of Madame, the directress. I clung to him with affection as to a father
or an elder brother, and I knew he loved me with the tender, protecting
affection that he would have given a younger sister, had he possessed
one. Ah! Doctor Rocke, tell me, besides yourself, are there many other
men in your State like him?"

"I knew but one such; but go on, dear Madam."

"When I had been to school some months he came to me one day scarcely
able to conceal his woe. He told me that his father was ill and that he
should have to sail in the first packet from Havre, and that, in fact,
he had then come to take leave of me. I was wild with grief, not only
upon his account but upon my own, at the prospect of losing him, my
only friend. I was but a child, and a French child to boot. I knew
nothing of the world; I regarded this noble gentleman, who was so much
my superior in years as in everything else, as a father, guardian or
elder brother; so in an agony of grief I threw myself into his arms,
sobbing and weeping bitterly and imploring him not to break my heart by
leaving me. It was in vain Madame the Directress exclaimed and
expostulated at these improprieties. I am sure I did not hear a word
until he spoke. Putting me out of his arms, he said:"

"I must go, my child; duty calls me."

"Then take me with you; take your poor little one with you, and do not
pull her out of your warm, good heart, or she will wither and die like
a flower torn up by the roots!" I cried, between my sobs and tears.

"He drew me back to his bosom and whispered:"

"There is but one way in which I can take you with me, my child. Will
you be my wife, little Capitolie?"

"Capitola!" cried Traverse, with another great start.

"Yes! Why? What is the matter now?"

"Why, it is such an odd name, that is all! Pray proceed, Madam."

"We were married the same day, and sailed the third morning thereafter
from Havre for the United States, where we arrived, alas! only to find
the noble gentleman, my Eugene's father, laid in his grave. After Mr.
Le Noir's natural grief was over we settled down peaceably to our
country life at the Hidden House--"

"The Hidden House!" again exclaimed Traverse Rocke.

"Yes! that is another odd name, isn't it? Well, I was very happy. At
first when I understood my real position, I had been afraid that my
husband had married me only from compassion; but he soon proved to me
that his love was as high, as pure and as noble as himself. I was very
happy. But one day, in the midst of my exultant joy, a thunderbolt fell
and shattered my peace to destruction forever! Oh, Doctor Rocke, my
husband was murdered by some unknown hand in his own woods, in open
day! I cannot talk of this!" cried the widow, breaking down,
overwhelmed with the rush of terrible recollections.

Traverse poured out a glass of water and handed it to her.

She drank it, made an effort at self-control, and resumed:

"Thus, scarcely sixteen years of age, I was a widow, helpless,
penniless and entirely dependent--upon my brother-in-law, Colonel
Gabriel Le Noir, for by the terms of their father's will, if Eugene
died without issue the whole property descended to his younger brother,
Gabriel. To speak the truth, Colonel Le Noir was exceedingly kind to me
after, my awful bereavement, until a circumstance was discovered that
changed all our relations. It was two months after my husband's death
that I discovered, with mingled emotions of joy and sorrow, that heaven
had certainly destined me to become a mother! I kept my cherished
secret to myself as long as it was possible, but it could not indeed be
long concealed from the household. I believe that my brother-in-law was
the first to suspect it. He called me into his study one day, and I
obeyed like a child. And there he rudely questioned me upon the subject
of my sacred mother-mystery. He learned the truth more from my silence
than from my replies, for I could not answer him."

"The brute! the miserable hound!" ejaculated Traverse.

"Oh, Doctor Rocke, I could not tell you the avalanche of abuse, insult
and invective that he hurled upon my defenseless head. He accused me of
more crimes than I had ever heard talk of. He told me that my condition
was an impossible one unless I had been false to the memory of his
brother; that I had dishonored his name, disgraced his house and
brought myself to shame; that I should leave the roof, leave the
neighborhood and die as I deserved to die, in a ditch! I made no reply.
I was crushed into silence under the weight of his reproaches."

"The caitiff! The poltroon! Ah, poor stranger, why did you not leave
the house at once and throw yourself upon the protection of the
minister of your parish or some other kind neighbor?"

"Alas! I was a child, a widow and a foreigner all in one! I did not
know your land or your laws or your people. I was not hopeful or
confident; I had suffered so cruelly and I was overwhelmed by his
abuse."

"But did you not know, dear lady, that all his rage was aroused only by
the fact that the birth of your child would disinherit him?"

"Ah, no! I was not aware, at that time, that Gabriel Le Noir was a
villain. I thought his anger honest, though unjust, and I was as
ignorant as a child. I had no mother nor matronly friend to instruct
me. I knew that I had broken no command of God or man; that I had been
a faithful wife, but when Gabriel Le Noir accused me with such bitter
earnestness I feared that some strange departure from the usual course
of nature had occurred for my destruction. And I was overwhelmed by
mortification, terror and despair!"

"Ah, the villain!" exclaimed Traverse, between his teeth.

"He told me at last that to save the memory of his dead brother he
would hide my dishonor, and he ordered me to seclude myself from the
sight of all persons. I obeyed him like a slave, grateful even for the
shelter of his roof."

"A roof that was your own, as he very well knew. And he knew, also, the
caitiff! that if the circumstance became known the whole State would
have protected you in your rights, and ejected him like a cur."

"Nay, even in that case no harm should have reached him on my account.
He was my husband's brother."

"And worst enemy! But proceed, dear lady."

"Well, I secluded myself as he commanded. For four months I never left
the attic to which he had ordered me to retreat. At the end of that
time I became the mother of twins--a boy and a girl. The boy only
opened his eyes on this world to close them again directly. The girl
was living and healthy. The old nurse who attended me had an honest and
compassionate face; I persuaded her to secrete and save the living
child, and to present the dead babe to Colonel Le Noir as the only one,
for the suspicions that had never been awakened for myself were alarmed
for my child. I instinctively felt that he would have destroyed it."

"The mother's instinct is like inspiration," said Traverse.

"It may be so. Well, the old woman pitied me and did as I desired. She
took the dead child to Colonel Le Noir, who carried it off, and
afterward buried it as the sole heir of his elder brother. The old
woman carried off my living child and my wedding ring, concealed under
her ample shawl. Anxiety for the 'fate of my child caused me to do what
nothing else on earth would have tempted me to do--to creep about the
halls and passages on tiptoe and under cover of the night and listen at
keyholes," said the lady, blushing deeply at the recollection.

"You--you were perfectly right, Mrs. Le Noir! In a den of robbers,
where your life and honor were always at stake, you could have done no
otherwise!" exclaimed Traverse, warmly.

"I learned by this means that my poor old nurse had paid with her
liberty for her kindness to me. She had been, abducted and forced from
her native country together with a child found in her possession, which
they evidently suspected, and I knew, to be mine. Oh, heaven! the agony
then of thinking of what might be her unknown fate, worse than death,
perhaps! I felt that I had only succeeded in saving her life-doubtful
good!"

Here Mrs. Le Noir paused in thought for a few moments and then resumed.

"It is the memory of a long, dreary and hopeless imprisonment, my
recollection of my residence in that house! In the same manner in which
I gained all my information, I learned that it was reported in the
neighborhood that I had gone mad with grief for the loss of my husband
and that I was an inmate of a madhouse in the North! It was altogether
false! I never left the Hidden House in all those years until about two
years ago. My life there was dreary beyond all conception. I was
forbidden to go out or to appear at a window. I had the whole attic,
containing some eight or ten rooms, to rove over, but I was forbidden
to descend. An ill-looking woman called Dorcas Knight, between whom and
the elder Le Noir there seemed to have been some sinful bond was
engaged ostensibly as my attendant, but really as my jailer.
Nevertheless, when the sense of confinement grew intolerable I
sometimes eluded her vigilance and wandered about the house at night."

"Thence, no doubt," said Traverse, "giving rise to the report that the
house was haunted."

Mrs. Le Noir smiled, saying:

"I believe the Le Noirs secretly encouraged that report. I'll tell you
why. They gave me a chamber lamp inclosed in an intense blue, shade,
that cast a strange, unearthly light around. Their ostensible reason
was to insure my safety from fire. Their real reason was that this
light might be seen from without in what was reputed to be an
uninhabited portion of the house, and give color to its bad reputation
among the ignorant of being haunted."

"So much for the origin of one authenticated ghost story," said
Traverse.

"Yes, and there was still more circumstantial evidence to support this
ghostly reputation of the house. As the years passed I had, even in my
confined state, gathered knowledge in one way and another--picking up
stray books and hearing stray conversation; and so, in the end I
learned how gross a deception and how great a wrong had been practised
upon me. I was not wise or cunning. I betrayed constantly to my
attendant my knowledge of these things. In consequence of which my
confinement became still more restricted."

"Yes, they were afraid of you, and fear is always the mother of
cruelty," said Traverse.

"Well, from the time that I became enlightened as to my real position,
all my faculties were upon the alert to find means of escaping and
making my condition known to the authorities. One night they had a
guest, Colonel Eglen, of the army, Old Dorcas had her hands full, and
forgot her prisoner. My door was left unlocked. So, long after Colonel
Eglen had retired to rest, and when all the household were buried in
repose, I left my attic and crept down to the chamber of the guest,
with no other purpose than to make known my wrongs and appeal to his
compassion. I entered his chamber, approached his bed to speak to him,
when this hero of a hundred fields started up in a panic, and at the
sight of the pale woman who drew his curtains in the dead of the night,
he shrieked, violently rang his bell and fainted prone away."

"Ha! ha! ha! he could brave an army or march into a cannon's mouth
easier than meet a supposed denizen of another world! Well, Doctor
Johnson believed in ghosts," laughed Traverse.

"It remained for me to retreat as fast as possible to my room to avoid
the Le Noirs, who were hurrying with head-long speed to the
guest-chamber. They knew of course, that I was the ghost, although they
affected to treat their visitor's story as a dream. After that my
confinement was so strict that for years I had no opportunity of
leaving my attic. At last the strict espionage was relaxed. Sometimes
my door would be left unlocked. Upon one such occasion, in creeping
about in the dark, I learned, by overhearing a conversation between Le
Noir and his housekeeper, that my long lost daughter, Capitola, had
been found and was living at Hurricane Hall! This was enough to comfort
me for years. About three years ago the surveillance over me was so
modified that I was left again to roam about the upper rooms of the
house at will, until I learned that they had a new inmate, young Clara
Day, a ward of Le Noir! Oh, how I longed to warn that child to fly! But
I could not; alas, again I was restricted to my own room, lest I should
be seen by her. But again, upon one occasion, old Dorcas forgot to lock
my door at night. I stole forth from my room and learned that a young
girl, caught out in the storm, was to stay all night at the Hidden
House. Young girls were not plentiful in that neighborhood, I knew.
Besides, some secret instinct told me that this was my daughter: I knew
that she would sleep in the chamber under mine, because that was the
only habitable guest-room in the whole house. In the dead of night I
left my room and went below and entered the chamber of the young girl.
I went first to the toilet table to see if among her little girlish
ornaments, I could find any clue to her identity. I found it in a
plain, gold ring--the same that I had intrusted to the old nurse. Some
strange impulse caused me to slip the ring upon my finger. Then I went
to the bed and threw aside the curtains to gaze upon the sleeper. My
girl--my own girl! With what strange sensations I first looked upon her
face! Her eyes were open and fixed upon mine in a panic of terror. I
stooped to press my lips to her's and she closed her eyes in mortal
fear, I carried nothing but terror with me! I withdrew from the room
and went back, sobbing, to my chamber. My poor girl next morning
unconsciously betrayed her mother. It had nearly cost me my life."

"When the Le Noirs came home, the first night of their arrival they
entered my room, seized me in my bed and dragged me shrieking from it!"

"Good heaven! What punishment is sufficient for such wretches!"
exclaimed Traverse, starting up and pacing the narrow limits of the
cell.

"Listen! They soon stopped both my shrieks and my breath at once. I
lost consciousness for a time, and when I awoke I found myself in a
close carriage, rattling over a mountain road, through the night. Late
the next morning we reached an uninhabited country house, where I was
again imprisoned, in charge of an old dumb woman, whom Le Noir called
Mrs. Raven. This I afterwards understood to be Willow Heights, the
property of the orphan heiress, Clara Day. And here, also, for the term
of my stay, the presence of the unknown inmate got the house the
reputation of being haunted."

"The old dumb woman was a shade kinder to me than Dorcas Knight had
been, but I did not stay in her charge very long. One night the Le
Noirs came in hot haste. The young heiress had been delivered from
their charge by a degree, of the Orphans' Court, and they had to give
up her house. I was drugged and hurried away. Some narcotic sedative
must have been insinuated into all my food, for I was in a state of
semi-sensibility and mild delirium during the whole course of a long
journey by land and sea, which passed to me like a dream, and at the
end of which I found myself here. No doubt, from the excessive use of
narcotics, there was something wild and stupid in my manner and
appearance that justified the charge of madness. And when I found that
I was a prisoner in a lunatic asylum, far, far away from the
neighborhood where at least I had once been known I gave way to the
wilder grief that further confirmed the story of my madness. I have
been here two years, occasionally giving way to outbursts of wild
despair, that the doctor calls frenzy. I was sinking into an apathy,
when one day I opened the little Bible that lay upon the table of my
cell. I fixed upon the last chapters in the gospel of John. That
narrative of meek patience and divine love. It did for me what no power
under that of God could have done. It saved me! It saved me from
madness! It saved me from despair! There is a time for the second birth
of every soul; that time had collie fur me. From that hour, this book
has been my constant companion and comfort. I have learned from its
pages how little it matters how or where this fleeting, mortal life is
passed, so that it answers its purpose of preparing the soul for
another. I have learned patience with sinners, forgiveness of enemies,
and confidence in God. In a word, I trust I have learned the way of
salvation, and in that have learned everything. Your coming and your
words, young friend, have stirred within my heart the desire to be
free, to mingle again on equal terms with my fellow beings, and above
all, to find and to embrace my child. But not wildly anxious am I even
for these earthly blessings. These, as well as all things else, I
desire to leave to the Lord, praying that His will may be mine. Young
friend, my story is told."

"Madam," said Traverse, after a thoughtful pause, "our fates have been
more nearly connected than you could have imagined. Those Le Noirs have
been my enemies as they are yours. That young orphan heiress, who
appealed from their cruelty to the Orphans' Court, was my own
betrothed. Willow Heights was her patrimony and is now her quiet home
where she lives with my mother, and where in their names I invited you
to come. And take this comfort also; your enemy no longer lives: months
ago I left him ill with a mortal wound. This morning the papers
announce his death. There remains, therefore, but little for me to do,
but to take legal measures to free you from this place, and restore you
to your home. Within an hour I shall set out for New Orleans, for the
purpose of taking the initiatory steps. Until my return then, dear
lady," said Traverse, respectfully taking her hand--"farewell, and be
of good cheer!"




CHAPTER XXIX.

PROSPECTS BRIGHTEN.


     Thus far our fortune keeps an onward course,
     And we are graced with wreaths of victory.

                                 --SHAKESPEARE.


Leaving Mrs. Le Noir, Traverse went down to the stable, saddled the
horse that had been allotted to his use, and set off for a long day's
journey to New Orleans, where late at night he arrived, and put up at
the St. Charles.

He slept deeply from fatigue until late the next morning, when he was
awakened by the sounds of trumpets, drums and fifes, and by general
rejoicing.

He arose and looked from his windows to ascertain the cause, and saw
the square full of people in a state of the highest excitement,
watching for a military procession coming up the street.

It was the United States troops under their gallant commanders, who had
landed from the steamboats that morning and were now marching from the
quays up to their quarters at the St. Charles.

As they advanced, Traverse, eagerly upon the lookout, recognized his
own regiment.

Traverse withdrew from the window, hurriedly completed his toilet, and
hastened down-stairs, where he soon found himself face to face with
Herbert, who warmly grasping his hand, exclaimed:

"You here, old friend? Why, I thought you were down in East Feliciana,
with your interesting patient!"

"It is for the interest of that 'interesting patient' that I am here,
Herbert! Did I tell you, she was one of the victims of that demon Le
Noir?"

"No: but I know it from another source. I know as much, or more of her,
perhaps, than you do!"

"Ah!" exclaimed Traverse, in surprise.

"Yes! I know, for instance, that she is Capitola's mother, the
long-lost widow of Eugene Le Noir, the mistress of the Hidden House,
and the ghost who drew folks' curtains there at night."

"Then you do know something about her, but how did you arrive at the
knowledge?"

"By the 'last dying speech and confession' of Gabriel Le Noir, confided
to me to be used in restitution after his decease. But, come! There is
the second bell. Our mess are going in to breakfast; join us and
afterwards you and I will retire and compare notes," said Herbert,
taking the arm of his friend as they followed the moving crowd into the
breakfast parlor.

After the morning meal was concluded the friends withdrew together to
the chamber occupied by Traverse Rocke, where they sat down for mutual
explanations.

Herbert first related to Traverse all that had occurred from the time
that the latter left the city of Mexico, including the arrival of
Craven Le Noir at the dying bed of his father, the subsequent death and
funeral of Colonel Le Noir, and the late emigration of Craven, who to
avoid the shame of the approaching revelation, joined a party of
explorers bound for the recently discovered gold mines in California.

"The civilized world is then rid of two villains at once," said the
uncompromising Traverse.

Herbert took from his pocket the confession of Colonel Le Noir, which
he said he was now at liberty to use as he thought proper for the ends
of justice. That certain parts of the disclosure intimately concerned
Traverse Rocke, to whom he should therefore read the whole. The
confession may be briefly summed up as follows:

The first item was that he had sought to win the affections of Marah
Rocke, the supposed wife of Major Ira Warfield; he had sedulously
waylaid and followed her with his suit during the whole summer; she had
constantly repulsed and avoided him; he, listening to his own evil
passions, had bribed her maid to admit him in the dark to Marah's
cabin, upon a certain night when her husband was to be absent; that the
unexpected return of Major Warfield who had tracked him to the house,
had prevented the success of his evil purpose, but had not saved the
reputation of the innocent wife, whose infuriated husband would not
believe her ignorant of the presence of the villain in her house; that
he, Gabriel Le Noir, in hatred as well as in shame, had forborne until
now to make the explanation, which he hoped might now, late in life as
it was, bring the long-severed pair together, and establish Marah Rocke
and her son in their legal and social rights.

The second item in the black list of crime was the death of his elder
brother, whom he declared he had not intended to kill. He said that,
having contracted large debts which he was unable to pay he had
returned secretly from his distant quarters to demand the money from
his brother, who had often helped him; that, meeting his brother in the
woods, he made this request. Eugene reproached him for his extravagance
and folly, and refused to aid him; an encounter ensued, in which Eugene
fell. He, Gabriel Le Noir, fled pursued by the curse of Cain, and
reached his own quarters before even his absence had been suspected.
His agency in the death of his brother was not suspected even by his
accomplice in other crimes, the outlaw called Black Donald, who,
thinking to gain an ascendency over one whom he called his patron,
actually pretended to have made way with Eugene Le Noir for the sake of
his younger brother.

The third item of confession was the abduction of the nurse and babe of
the young widow of Eugene, the circumstances of which are already known
to the reader.

The fourth in the dreadful list comprised the deceptions, wrongs and
persecutions practised upon Madame Eugene Le Noir, and the final false
imprisonment of that lady under the charge of insanity, in the private
madhouse kept by Doctor Pierre St. Jean, in East Feliciana.

In conclusion, he spoke of the wrongs done to Clara Day, whose pardon,
with that of others, he begged. And he prayed that in consideration of
his son, as little publicity as was possible might be given to these
crimes.

During the reading of this confession, the eyes of Traverse Rocke were
fixed in wonder and half incredulity upon the face of Herbert, and at
its conclusion he said:

"What a mass of crime! But that we may not dare to question the mercy
of the Lord, I should ask if these were sins that he would ever pardon!
Herbert, it appals me to think of it!"

Then, after deep thought, he added:

"This, then, was the secret of my dear mother's long unhappiness. She
was Major Warfield's forsaken wife. Herbert, I feel as though I never,
never could forgive my father!"

"Traverse, if Major Warfield had wilfully and wantonly forsaken your
mother, I should say that your resentment was natural and right. Who
should be an honorable woman's champion if not her own son? But Major
Warfield, as well as his wife, was more sinned against than sinning.
Your parents were both victims of a cruel conspiracy, and he suffered
as much in his way as she did in hers," said Herbert.

"I always thought, somehow, that my dear mother was a forsaken wife.
She never told me so, but there was some-thing about her circumstances
and manners, her retired life, her condition, so much below her
deserts, her never speaking of her husband's death, which would have
been natural for her to do, had she been a widow--all, somehow, went to
give me the impression that my father had abandoned us. Lately I had
suspected Major Warfield had something to do with the sad affair,
though I never once suspected him to be my father. So much for natural
instincts," said Traverse, with a melancholy smile.

"Traverse," said Herbert, with the design of drawing him off from sad
remembrances of his mother's early trials. "Traverse, this confession,
signed and witnessed as it is, will wonderfully simplify your course of
action in regard to the deliverance of Madame Le Noir."

"Yes; so it will," said Traverse, with animation. "There will be no
need now of applying to law, especially if you will come down with me
to East Feliciana and bring the confession with you."

"I will set out with you this very morning, if you wish, as I am on
leave. What! To hasten to the release of Capitola's mother, I would set
out at midnight and ride straight on for a week!"

"Ah! there is no need of such extravagant feats of travel. It is now
ten o'clock; if we start within an hour we can reach the 'Calm Retreat'
by eleven o'clock to-night."

"En avant, then," exclaimed Herbert, rising and ringing the bell.

Traverse ordered horses, and in twenty minutes the friends were on the
road to East Feliciana.

They reached the "Calm Retreat" so late that night that there was none
but the porter awake to admit them.

Traverse took his friend up to his own dormitory, saying, laughingly:

"It is an unappreciable distance of time since you and I occupied the
same bed, Herbert."

"Yes; but it is not the first, by five hundred times. D' you remember,
Traverse, the low attic where we used to sleep and how on stormy nights
we used to listen to the rain pattering on the roof, within two or
three inches of our faces, and how we used to be half afraid to turn
over for fear that we should bump our heads against the timbers of the
ceiling?"

"Yes, indeed," said Traverse.

And thereupon the two friends launched into a discussion of old times,
when the two widows and their sons lived together--the two women
occupying one bed, and the two boys the other. And this discussion they
kept up until long after they retired, and until sleep overtook them.

The next morning Traverse conducted his friend down to the breakfast
parlor, to introduce him to Doctor St. Jean, who, as soon as he
perceived his young medical assistant, sprang forward exclaiming:

"Grand ciel! Is this then you? Have you then returned? What for did you
run away with my horse?"

"I went to New Orleans in great haste, upon very important business,
sir."

"Grand Dieu! I should think so, when you ride off on my horse without
saying a word. If it had been my ambling pony I should have been in
despair, I! Your business so hasty and so important was accomplished, I
hope."

"Yes; I did my errand with less trouble than I had anticipated, owing
to the happy circumstance of meeting my friend here, who has come down
hither connected with the same business."

"Ah! vera happy to see your friend. In the medical profession, I
suppose?"

"No, sir; in the army. Allow me to present him. Major Herbert Greyson,
of the -th Regiment of Cavalry."

"Ou! ay! Grand ciel! This is the brave, the distinguished, the
illustrious officer, so honorably mentioned in the dispatches of the
invincible Taylor and the mighty Scott!" said the little Frenchman,
bowing his night-capped head down to his slippery toes.

Herbert smiled as he returned the bow. And then the little French
doctor, turning to Traverse said:

"But your business, so important and so hasty, which has brought this
officer so illustrious down here--what is it, my friend?"

"We will have the honor of explaining to Monsieur le Docteur, over our
coffee, if he will oblige us by ordering the servant to retire," said
Traverse, who sometimes adopted, in speaking to the old Frenchman, his
own formal style of politeness. "Go, then, John!"

"Oui, oui, certainement! Allez donc, John!"

As soon as the man had gone, Traverse said:

"I propose to discuss this business over our coffee, because it will
save time without interfering with our morning meal, and I know that
immediately afterwards you will go your usual round of visits to your
patients."

"Eh bien! proceed, my son! proceed!"

Traverse immediately commenced and related all that was necessary
concerning the fraud practised upon the institution by introducing into
it an unfortunate woman, represented to be mad, but really only
sorrowful, nervous and excitable. And to prove the truth of his words,
Traverse desired Herbert to read from the confession the portion
relating to this fraud, and to show the doctor the signature of the
principal and the witness.

To have seen the old French doctor then! I rejoice in a Frenchman, for
the frank abandon with which he gives himself up to his emotions! Our
doctor, after staring at the confession, took hold of the top of his
blue tasseled night-cap, pulled it off his head and threw it violently
upon the floor! Then remembering that he was exposing a cranium as bald
as a peeled potato, he suddenly caught it up again, clapped it upon his
crown and exclaimed:

"Sacre! Diable!" and other ejaculations dreadful to translate, and
others again which it would be profane to set down in French or English.

Gabriel Le Noir was no longer an officer illustrious, a gentleman noble
and distinguished, compassionate and tender; he was a robber infamous!
a villain atrocious, a caitiff ruth, and without remorse!

After breakfast the doctor consented that his young hero, his little
knight-errant, his dear son, should go to the distressed lady and open
the good news to her, while the great Major Greyson, the warrior
invincible, should go around with himself to inspect the institution.

Traverse immediately repaired to the chamber of Mrs. Le Noir, whom he
found sitting at the window, engaged in some little trifle of
needlework, the same pale, patient woman that she had first appeared to
him.

"Ah, you have come! I read good news upon your smiling face, my friend!
Tell it! I have borne the worst of sorrows! Shall I not have strength
to bear joy?"

Traverse told her all, and then ended by saying:

"Now, dear madame, it is necessary that we leave this place within two
hours, as Major Greyson's regiment leaves New Orleans for Washington
to-morrow, and it is advisable that you go under our protection. We can
get you a female attendant from the St. Charles."

"Oh, I can be ready in ten minutes! Bless you, I have no fine lady's
wardrobe to pack up!" replied Mrs. Le Noir, with a smile.

Traverse bowed and went out to procure a carriage from the next
village. And in half an hour afterwards the whole party took leave of
Doctor Pierre St. Jean and his "institution in-comparable," and set
forth on their journey to New Orleans, whence in two days afterwards
they sailed for the North. And now, dear reader, let you and I take the
fast boat and get home before them, to see our little Cap, and find out
what adventures she is now engaged in, and how she is getting on.




CHAPTER XXX.

CAPITOLA A CAPITALIST.


              Plumed victory
       Is truly painted with a cheerful look,
       Equally distant from proud insolence
       And sad dejection.

                              --MASSINGER.


How glad I am to get back to my little Cap, for I know very well,
reader, just as well as if you had told me, that you have been
grumbling for some time for the want of Cap. But I could not help it,
for, to tell the truth, I was pining after her myself, which was the
reason that I could not do half justice to the scenes of the Mexican
War.

Well, now let us see what Cap has been doing--what oppressors she has
punished--what victims she has delivered--in a word, what new heroic
adventures she has achieved.

Well, the trial of Donald Bayne, alias Black Donald, was over. Cap, of
course, had been compelled to appear against him. During the whole
course of the trial the court-room was crowded with a curious
multitude, "from far and near," eager to get sight of the notorious
outlaw.

Black Donald, through the whole ordeal, deported himself with a gallant
and joyous dignity, that would have better become a triumph than a
trial.

He was indicted upon several distinct counts, the most serious of
which--the murder of the solitary widow and her daughter in the forest
cabin, and the assassination of Eugene Le Noir in the woods near the
Hidden House--were sustained only by circumstantial evidence. But the
aggregate weight of all these, together with his very bad reputation,
was sufficient to convict him, and Black Donald was sentenced to death.

This dreadful doom, most solemnly pronounced by the judge was received
by the prisoner with a loud laugh, and the words:

"You're out o' your reckoning now, cap'n! I never was a saint, the Lord
knows, but my hands are free from blood guiltiness! There's an honest
little girl that believes me--don't you?" he said, turning laughingly
to our little heroine.

"Yes, I do!" said Cap, bursting into tears; "and I am sorry for you as
ever I can be, Donald Bayne."

"Bother! It was sure to come to this first or last, and I knew it! Now,
to prove you do not think this rugged hand of mine stained with blood,
give it a friendly shake!" said the condemned man. And before Old
Hurricane could prevent her, Capitola had jumped over two or three
intervening seats and climbed up to the side of the dock, and reached
up her hand to the prisoner, saying:

"God help you, Donald Bayne, in your great trouble, and I will do all I
can to help you in this world. I will go to the Governor myself, and
tell him I know you never did any murder."

"Remove the prisoner," said the judge, peremptorily.

The constables approached and led away Black Donald.

Old Hurricane rushed upon Cap, seized her, and, shaking her fiercely,
exclaimed, under his breath:

"You--you--you--you New York hurrah boy! You foundling! You vagabond!
You vagrant! You brat! You beggar! Will you never be a lady? To go and
shake hands with that ruffian!"

"Sure, uncle, that's nothing new; I have shaken hands with you often
enough!"

"Demmy, you--you--you New York trash, what do you mean by that?"

"Of course I mean, uncle, that you are as rough a ruffian as ever
Donald Bayne was!"

"Demmy, I'll murder you!"

"Don't, uncle; they have an uncivilized way here of hanging murderers,"
said Cap, shaking herself free of Old Hurricane's grasp, and hastening
out of the court-room to mount her horse and ride home.

One night after tea, Capitola and her uncle occupied their usual seats
by the little bright wood fire, that the chilly evening and keen
mountain air made agreeable, even in May.

Old Hurricane was smoking his pipe and reading his paper.

Cap was sitting with her slender fingers around her throat, which she,
with a shudder, occasionally compressed:

"Well, that demon Black Donald will be hanged the 26th of July," said
Old Hurricane, exultingly, "and we shall get rid of one villain, Cap."

"I pity Black Donald, and I can't bear to think of his being hanged! It
quite breaks my heart to think that I was compelled to bring him to
such a fate!"

"Oh, that reminds me! The reward offered for the apprehension of Black
Donald, to which you were entitled, Cap, was paid over to me for you. I
placed it to your account in the Agricultural Bank."

"I don't want it! I won't touch it! The price of blood! It would burn
my fingers!" said Cap.

"Oh, very well! A thousand dollars won't go a-begging," said Old
Hurricane.

"Uncle, it breaks my heart to think of Black Donald's execution! It
just does! It must be dreadful, this hanging! I have put my finger
around my throat and squeezed it, to know how it feels, and it is
awful. Even a little squeeze makes my head feel as if it would burst,
and I have to let go! Oh, it is horrible to think of!"

"Well, Cap, it wasn't intended to be as pleasant as tickling, you know.
I wish it was twenty times worse! It would serve him right, the
villain! I wish it was lawful to break him on the wheel--I do!"

"Uncle, that is very wicked in you! I declare I won't have it! I'll
write a petition to the Governor to commute his sentence, and carry it
all around the county myself!"

"You wouldn't get a soul to sign it to save your life, much less his."

"I'll go to the Governor myself, and beg him to pardon Donald Bayne!"

"Ha! ha! ha! the Governor would not do it to save all our lives, and if
he were to do such an outrageous thing he might whistle for his
reelection!"

"I declare, Donald Bayne shall not be hanged--and so there!" said Cap,
passionately.

"Whe-ew! You'll deliver him by the strength of your arm, my little
Donna Quixota."

"I'll save him one way or another, now mind I tell you! He sinned more
against me than against anybody else, and so I have the best right of
anybody in the world to forgive him, and I do forgive him! And he
shan't be hanged I I say it!"

"You say it! Ha! ha! ha! Who are you, to turn aside the laws?"

"I, Capitola Black, say that Donald Bayne, not having deserved to be
hanged, shall not be hanged! And in one way or another I'll keep my
word!"

And Cap did her best to keep it. The next morning she mounted Gyp and
rode up to Tip Top, where she employed the village lawyer to draw up a
petition to the Governor for the commutation of Donald Bayne's
sentence. And then she rode all over the county to try to get
signatures to the document. But all in vain. People of every age and
condition too thoroughly feared and hated the famous outlaw, and too
earnestly wished to be entirely and forever rid of him, to sign any
petition for a commutation of his sentence. If a petition for his
instant execution had been carried around it would have stood a much
better chance of success.

Cap spent many days in her fruitless enterprise, but at last gave it
up--but by no means in despair, for--

"I'll save his life, yet! by one means or another! I can't change
clothes with him as I did with Clara; he's too big, but one way or
other I'll save him," said Cap, to herself. She said it to no one else,
for the more difficult the enterprise the more determined she was to
succeed, and the more secretive she grew as to her measures.

In the mean time the outlaw, double-ironed, was confined in the
condemned cell, the strongest portion of the county jail. All persons
were strictly prohibited from visiting him, except certain of the
clergy.

They did all they could to bring the outlaw to a sense of his
condition, to prepare him to meet his fate and to induce him to make a
confession and give up the retreat of his band.

And Donald listened to them with respect, acknowledged himself a great
sinner, and knelt with them when they knelt to pray for him.

But he denied that he was guilty of the murders for which he had been
doomed to die, and he utterly refused to give up his old companions,
replying to the ministers in something like these words:

"Poor wretches! They are no more fit to die than I am, and a condemned
cell, with the thought of the scaffold before him, are not exactly the
most favorable circumstances under which a man might experience sincere
repentance, my masters!"

And so, while the convict listened with docility to all that the
ministers had to say, he steadily persisted in asserting his own
innocence of the crimes for which he was condemned, and in his refusal
to deliver up his companions.

Meantime, Capitola, at Hurricane Hall, was doing all she could to
discover or invent means to save the life of Black Donald. But still
she said no more about it even to Old Hurricane.

One evening, while Cap was sitting by the fire with her thoughts busy
with this subject, her uncle came in saying:

"Cap, I have got some curiosities to show you!"

"What are they?" said Cap, languidly.

"A set of burglar's tools, supposed to belong to some member of Black
Donald's band! One of my negroes found them in the woods in the
neighborhood of the Devil's Punch Bowl! I wrote to the sheriff
concerning them, and he requested me to take care of them until he
should have occasion to call for them. Look! Did you ever see such
things?" said Old Hurricane, setting down a canvas bag upon the table
and turning out from it all sorts of strange looking instruments--tiny
saws, files, punches, screws, picks, etc., etc., etc.

Cap looked at them with the most curious interest, while Old Hurricane
explained their supposed uses.

"It must have been an instrument of this sort, Cap, that that blamed
demon, Donald, gave to the imprisoned men to file their fetters off
with!" he said, showing a thin file of tempered steel.

"That!" said Cap. "Hand it here! Let me see it!" And she examined it
with the deepest interest.

"I wonder what they force locks with?" she inquired.

"Why, this, and this, and this!" said Old Hurricane, producing a
burglar's pick, saw and chisel.

Cap took them and scrutinized them so attentively that Old Hurricane
burst out into a loud laugh, exclaiming:

"You'll dream of house-breakers to-night, Cap!" and taking the tools,
he put them all back in the little canvas bag, and put the bag up on a
high shelf of the parlor closet.

The next morning, while Cap was arranging flowers on the parlor
mantelpiece, Old Hurricane burst in upon her with his hands full of
letters and newspapers, and his heart full of exultation--throwing up
his hat and cutting an alarming caper for a man of his age, he
exclaimed:

"Hurrah, Cap! Hurrah! Peace is at last proclaimed and our victorious
troops are on their way home! It's all in the newspapers, and here are
letters from Herbert, dated from New Orleans! Here are letters for you,
and here are some for me! I have not opened them yet! Hurrah, Cap!
Hurrah!"

"Hurrah, Uncle! Hurrah!" cried Cap, tossing up her flowers and rushing
into his arms.

"Don't squeeze me into an apoplexy, you little bear," said Old
Hurricane, turning purple in the face, from the savage hug of Cap's
joyful arms. "Come along and sit down with me, at this table, and let
us see what the letters have brought us."

They took their seats opposite each other at a small table, and Old
Hurricane threw the whole mail between them, and began to pick out the
letters.

"That's for you, Cap. This is for me," he said, pitching out two in the
handwriting of Herbert Greyson.

Cap opened hers and commenced reading. It was in fact Herbert's first
downright, practical proposal of marriage, in which he begged that
their union might take place as soon as he should return, and that as
he had written to his uncle by the same mail, upon another subject,
which he did not wish to mix up with his own marriage, she would, upon
a proper opportunity, let her uncle know of their plans.

"Upon my word, he takes my consent very coolly as a matter of course,
and even forces upon me the disagreeable duty of asking myself of my
own uncle! Who ever heard of such proceedings? If he were not coming
home from the wars, I declare I should get angry; but I won't get upon
my dignity with Herbert--dear, darling, sweet Herbert. If it were
anybody else, shouldn't they know the difference between their liege
lady and Tom Trotter? However, as it's Herbert, here goes! Now, I
suppose the best way to ask myself of uncle, for Herbert, will be just
to hand him over this matter. The dear knows it isn't so over and above
affectionate that I should hesitate. Uncle," said Cap, pulling Old
Hurricane's coat sleeve.

"Don't bother me, Cap," exclaimed Major Warfield, who sat there,
holding a large, closely written document in his hand, with his great
round eyes strained from their sockets, as they passed along the lines
with devouring interest.

"Well, I do declare! I do believe he has received a proposal of
marriage himself," cried Cap, shooting much nearer the truth than she
knew.

Old Hurricane did not hear her. Starting up with the document in his
hand, he rushed from the room and went and shut himself up in his own
study.

"I vow, some widow has offered to marry him," said Cap, to herself.

Old Hurricane did not come to dinner, nor to supper. But after supper,
when Capitola's wonder was at its climax, and while she was sitting by
the little wood fire that that chilly evening required, Old Hurricane
came in, looking very unlike himself, in an humble, confused,
deprecating, yet happy manner, like one who had at once a mortifying
confession to make, and a happy secret to tell.

"Cap," he said, trying to suppress a smile, and growing purple in the
face.

--"Oh, yes! You've come to tell me, I suppose, that you're going to put
a step-aunt-in-law over my head, only you don't know how to announce
it," answered Capitola, little knowing how closely she had come to the
truth; when, to her unbounded astonishment, Old Hurricane answered:

"Yes, my dear, that's just it!"

"What! My eyes! Oh, crickey!" cried Cap, breaking into her newsboy's
slang, from mere consternation.

"Yes, my dear, it is perfectly true!" replied the old man, growing
furiously red, and rubbing his face.

"Oh! oh! oh! Hold me! I'm 'kilt!'" cried Cap, falling back in her chair
in an inextinguishable fit of laughter, that shook her whole frame. She
laughed until the tears ran down her cheeks. She wiped her eyes and
looked at Old Hurricane, and every time she saw his confused and happy
face she burst into a fresh paroxysm that seemed to threaten her life
or her reason.

"Who is the happy--Oh, I can't speak! Oh, I'm 'kilt' entirely!" she
cried, breaking off in the midst of her question and falling into fresh
convulsions.

"It's no new love, Cap; it's my old wife!" said Old Hurricane, wiping
his face.

This brought Capitola up with a jerk! She sat bolt upright gazing at
him with her eyes fixed as if In death.

"Cap," said Old Hurricane, growing more and more confused, "I've been a
married man more years than I like to think of! Cap, I've--I've a wife
and grown-up son! Why do you sit there staring at me, you little demon?
Why don't you say something to encourage me, you little wretch?"

"Go on!" said Cap, without removing her eyes.

"Cap, I was--a jealous--passionate--Demmy, confession isn't in my line.
A diabolical villain made me believe that my poor little wife wasn't
good!"

"There! I knew you'd lay it on somebody else. Men always do that," said
Cap, to herself.

"He was mortally wounded in Mexico. He made a confession and confided
it to Herbert, who has just sent me an attested copy. It was Le Noir.
My poor wife lived under her girlhood's name of Marah Rocke." Old
Hurricane made a gulp, and his voice broke down.

Cap understood all now, as well as if she had known it as long as Old
Hurricane had. She comprehended his extreme agitation upon a certain
evening, years ago, when Herbert Greyson had mentioned Marah Rocke's
name, and his later and more lasting disturbance upon accidentally
meeting Marah Rocke at the Orphans' Court.

This revelation filled her with strange and contradictory emotions. She
was glad; she was angry with him; she was sorry for him; she was
divided between divers impulses to hug and kiss him, to cry over him,
and to seize him and give him a good shaking! And between them she did
nothing at all.

Old Hurricane was again the first to speak,

"What was that you wished to say to me, Cap, when I ran ray from you
this morning?"

"Why, uncle, that Herbert wants to follow your example,
and--and--and--" Cap blushed and broke down.

"I thought as much. Getting married at his age! A boy of twenty-five!"
said the veteran in contempt.

"Taking a wife at your age, uncle, an infant of sixty-six!"

"Bother, Cap! Let me see that fellow's letter to you."

Cap handed it to him and the old man read it.

"If I were to object, you'd get married all the same! Demmy! you're
both of age. Do as you please!"

"Thank you, sir," said Cap, demurely.

"And now, Cap, one thing is to be noticed. Herbert says, both in your
letter and in mine, that they were to start to return the day after
these letters were posted. These letters have been delayed in the mail.
Consequently we may expect our hero here every day. But Cap, my dear,
you must receive them. For to-morrow morning, please the Lord, I shall
set out for Staunton and Willow Heights, and go and kneel down at the
feet of my wife, and ask her pardon on my knees!"

Cap was no longer divided between the wish to pull Old Hurricane's gray
beard and to cry over Him. She threw herself at once into his arms and
exclaimed:

"Oh, uncle! God bless you! God bless you! God bless you! It has come
very late in life, but may you be happy with her through all the ages
of eternity!"

Old Hurricane was deeply moved by the sympathy of his little madcap,
and pressed her to his bosom, saying:

"Cap, my dear, if you had not set your heart upon Herbert, I would
marry you to my son Traverse, and you two should inherit all that I
have in the world! But never mind, Cap, you have an inheritance of your
own. Cap, Cap, my dear, did it ever occur to you that you might have
had a father and mother?"

"Yes! often! But I used to think you were my father, and that my mother
was dead."

"I wish to the Lord that I had been your father, Cap, and that Marah
Rocke had been your mother! But Cap, your father was a better man than
I, and your mother as good a woman as Marah. And Cap, my dear, you
vagabond, you vagrant, you brat, you beggar, you are the sole heiress
of the Hidden House estate and all its enormous wealth! What do you
think of that, now? What do you think of that, you beggar? cried Old
Hurricane."

A shriek pierced the air, and Capitola starting up, stood before Old
Hurricane, crying in an impassioned voice:

"Uncle! Uncle! Don't mock me! Don't overwhelm me! I do not care for
wealth or power; but tell me of the parents who possessing both, cast
off their unfortunate child--a girl, too! to meet the sufferings and
perils of such a life as mine had been, if I had not met you!"

"Cap, my dear, hush! Your parents were no more to blame for their
seeming abandonment of you, than I was to blame for the desertion of my
poor wife. We are all the victims of one villain, who has now gone to
his account, Capitola. I mean Gabriel Le Noir. Sit down, my dear, and I
will read the copy of his whole confession, and afterwards, in
addition, tell you all I know upon the subject!"

Capitola resumed her seat, Major Warfield read the confession of
Gabriel Le Noir, and afterwards continued the subject by relating the
events of that memorable Hallowe'en when he was called out in a snow
storm to take the dying deposition of the nurse who had been abducted
with the infant Capitola.

And at the end of his narrative Cap knew as much of her own history as
the reader has known all along.

"And I have a mother, and I shall even see her soon! You told me she
was coming home with the party--did you not, Uncle?" said Capitola.

"Yes, my child. Only think of it! I saved the daughter from the streets
of New York, and my son saved the mother from her prison at the
madhouse! And now, my dear Cap, I must bid you good night and go to
bed, for I intend to rise to-morrow morning long before daylight, to
ride to Tip Top to meet the Staunton stage," said the old man, kissing
Capitola.

Just as he was about to leave the room he was arrested by a loud
ringing and knocking at the door.

Wool was heard running along the front hall to answer the summons.

"Cap, I shouldn't wonder much if that was our party. I wish it may be,
for I should like to welcome them before I leave home to fetch my
wife," said Old Hurricane, in a voice of agitation.

And while they were still eagerly listening, the door was thrown open
by Wool, who announced:

"Marse Herbert, which I mean to say, Major Herbert Greyson;" and
Herbert entered and was grasped by the two hands of Old Hurricane, who
exclaimed:

"Ah, Herbert, my lad! I have got your letters. It is all right,
Herbert, or going to be so. You shall marry Cap when you like. And I am
going to-morrow morning to throw myself at the feet of my wife."

"No need of your going so far, dear sir, no need. Let me speak to my
own dear girl a moment, and then I shall have something to say to you,"
said Herbert, leaving the old man in suspense, and going to salute
Capitola, who returned his fervent embrace by an honest, downright
frank kiss, that made no secret of itself.

"Capitola! My uncle has told you all?"

"Every single bit! So don't lose time by telling it all over again! Is
my mother with you?"

"Yes! and I will bring her in, in one moment; but first I must bring in
some one else," said Herbert, kissing the hand of Capitola and turning
to Old Hurricane, to whom he said:

"You need not travel far to find Marah. We took Staunton in our way and
brought her and Clara along--Traverse!" he said going to the
door--"bring in your mother."

And the next instant Traverse entered with the wife of Major Warfield
upon his arm.

Old Hurricane started forward to meet her, exclaiming in a broken voice:

"Marah, my dear Marah, God may forgive me, but can you--can you ever do
so?" And he would have sunk at her feet, but that she prevented, by
meeting him and silently placing both her hands in his. And so quietly
Marah's forgiveness was expressed, and the reconciliation sealed.

Meanwhile Herbert went out and brought in Mrs. Le Noir and Clara. Mrs.
Le Noir, with a Frenchwoman's impetuosity, hurried to her daughter and
clasped her to her heart.

Cap gave one hurried glance at the beautiful pale woman that claimed
from her a daughter's love and then, returning the caress, she said:

"Oh, mamma! Oh, mamma! If I were only a boy instead of a girl, I would
thrash that Le Noir within an inch of his life! But I forgot! He has
gone to his account."

Old Hurricane was at this moment shaking hands with his son, Traverse,
who presently took occasion to lead up and introduce his betrothed
wife, Clara Day, to her destined father-in-law.

Major Warfield received her with all a soldier's gallantry, a
gentleman's courtesy and a father's tenderness.

He next shook hands with his old acquaintance, Mrs. Le Noir.

And then supper was ordered and the evening was passed in general and
comparative reminiscences and cheerful conversation.




CHAPTER XXXI.

"THERE SHALL BE LIGHT AT THE EVENTIDE."--Holy Bible.


     They shall be blessed exceedingly, their store
     Grow daily, weekly more and more,
     And peace so multiply around,
     Their very hearth seems holy ground.

                             --MARY HOWITT.


The marriage of Capitola and of Herbert and that of Clara and of
Traverse was fixed to take place upon the first of August, which was
the twenty-first birthday of the doctors daughter, and also the
twenty-fifth anniversary of the wedding of Ira Warfield and Marah Rocke.

German husbands and wives have a beautiful custom of keeping the
twenty-fifth anniversary of their marriage by a festival, which they
call the "Silver Wedding." And thus Major Warfield and Marah resolved
to keep this first of August, and further to honor the occasion by
uniting the hands of their young people.

There was but one cloud upon the happiness of Capitola; this was the
approaching execution of Black Donald.

No one else seemed to care about the matter, until a circumstance
occurred which painfully aroused their interest.

This was the fact that the Governor, through the solicitation of
certain ministers of the gospel who represented the condemned as
utterly unprepared to meet his fate, had respited him until the first
of August, at which time he wished the prisoner to be made to
understand that his sentence would certainly, without further delay, be
carried into effect.

This carried a sort of consternation into the heart of every member of
the Hurricane Hall household!

The idea of Black Donald being hanged in their immediate neighborhood
upon their wedding day was appalling!

Yet there was no help for it, unless their wedding was postponed to
another occasion than that upon which Old Hurricane had set his heart.
No one knew what to do.

Cap fretted herself almost sick. She had cudgeled her brains to no
purpose. She had not been able to think of any plan by which she could
deliver Black Donald. Meantime the last days of July were rapidly
passing away.

Black Donald in the condemned cell maintained his firmness, resolutely
asserting his innocence of any capital crime and persistently refusing
to give up his band. As a last motive of confession, the paper written
by Gabriel Le Noir upon his death-bed was shown him. He laughed a loud,
crackling laugh, and said that was all true, but that he, for his part,
never had intended to harm a hair of Capitola's head; that he had taken
a fancy to the girl when he had first seen her, and had only wanted to
carry her off and force her into a marriage with himself; that he had
pretended to consent to her death only for the purpose of saving her
life.

When Cap heard this she burst into tears and said she believed it was
true.

The night before the wedding of Capitola and Herbert, and Clara and
Traverse, and of the execution of Black Donald, came.

At Hurricane Hall the two prospective bridegrooms were busy with Old
Hurricane over some papers that had to be prepared in the library.

The two intended brides were engaged, under the direction of Mrs.
Warfield, in her dressing-room, consulting over certain proprieties of
the approaching festival. But Capitola could give only a half attention
to the discussion. Her thoughts were with the poor condemned man who
was to die the next day.

And suddenly she flew out of the room, summoned her groom, mounted her
horse, and rode away.

In his condemned cell Black Donald was bitterly realizing how
unprepared he was to die, and how utterly impossible it was for him to
prepare in the short hours left him. He tried to pray, but could form
no other petition than that he might be allowed, if possible, a little
longer to fit himself to meet his Creator. From his cell he could hear
the striking of the great clock in the prison hall. And as every hour
struck it seemed "a nail driven in his coffin."

At eight o'clock that night the warden sat in his little office,
consulting the sheriff about some details of the approaching execution.
While they were still in discussion, a turnkey opened the door, saying:

"A lady to see the warden."

And Capitola stood before them!

"Miss Black!" exclaimed both sheriff and warden, rising in surprise,
gazing upon our heroine, and addressing her by the name under which
they had first known her.

"Yes, gentlemen, it is I. The truth is, I cannot rest tonight without
saying a few words of comfort to the poor man who is to die to-morrow.
So I came hither, attended by my groom, to know if I may see him for a
few minutes."

"Miss Black, here is the sheriff. It is just as he pleases. My orders
were so strict that had you come to me alone I should have been obliged
to refuse you."

"Mr. Keepe, you will not refuse me," said Capitola, turning to the
sheriff.

"Miss Black, my rule is to admit no one but the officers of the prison
and the ministers of the gospel, to see the condemned! This we have
been obliged to observe as a measure of safety. This convict, as you
are aware, is a man of consummate cunning, so that it is really
wonderful he has not found means to make his escape, closely as he has
been watched and strongly as he has been guarded."

"Ah, but Mr. Keepe, his cunning was no match for mine, you know!" said
Capitola, smiling.

"Ha-ha-ha! so it was not! You took him very cleverly! Very cleverly,
indeed! In fact, if it had not been for you, I doubt if ever we should
have captured Black Donald at all. The authorities are entirely
indebted to you for the capture of this notorious outlaw. And really
that being the case, I do think it would be straining a point to refuse
you admittance to see him. So, Miss Black, you have my authority for
visiting the condemned man in his cell and giving him all the comfort
you can. I would attend you thither myself, but I have got to go to see
the captain of a militia company to be on the scene of action
to-morrow," said the sheriff, who soon after took leave of the warden
and departed.

The warden then called a turnkey and ordered him to attend Miss Black
to the condemned cell.

The young turnkey took up a lamp and a great key and walked before,
leading the way down-stairs to a cell in the interior of the basement,
occupied by Black Donald.

He unlocked the door, admitted Capitola, and then walked off to the
extremity of the lobby, as he was accustomed to do when he let in the
preachers.

Capitola thanked heaven for this chance, for had he not done so she
would have to invent some excuse for getting rid of him.

She entered the cell. It was very dimly lighted from the great lamp
that hung in the lobby, nearly opposite the cell door.

By its light she saw Black Donald, not only doubly ironed but confined
by a chain and staple to the wall. He was very pale and haggard from
long imprisonment and great anxiety.

Cap's heart bled for the poor banned and blighted outlaw, who had not a
friend in the world to speak a kind word to him in his trouble.

He also recognized her, and rising and coming to meet her as far as the
length of the chain would permit, he held out his hand and said:

"I am very glad you have come, little one; it is very kind of you to
come and see a poor fellow in his extremity! You are the first female
that has been in this cell since my imprisonment. Think of that, child!
I wanted to see you, too, I wanted to say to you yourself again, that I
was never guilty of murder, and that I only seemed to consent to your
death to save your life! Do you believe this? On the word of a dying
man it is truth!"

"I do believe you, Donald Bayne," said Capitola, in a broken voice.

"I hear that you have come into your estate. I am glad of it. And they
tell me that you are going to be married to-morrow! Well! God bless
you, little one!"

"Oh, Donald Bayne! Can you say God bless me, when it was I who put you
here?"

"Tut, child, we outlaws bear no malice. Spite is a civilized vice. It
was a fair contest, child, and you conquered. It's well you did. Give
me your hand in good will, since I must die to-morrow!"

Capitola gave her hand, and whilst he held it, she stooped and said:

"Donald, I have done everything in the world I could to save your life!"

"I know you have, child. May yours be long and happy."

"Donald, may your life be longer and better than you think. I have
tried all other means of saving you in vain; there is but one means
left!"

The outlaw started violently, exclaiming:

"Is there one?"

"Donald, yes! There is! I bring you the means of deliverance and
escape. Heaven knows whether I am doing right--for I do not! I know
many people would blame me very much, but I hope that He who forgave
the thief upon the cross and the sinful woman at his feet, will not
condemn me for following His own compassionate example! For Donald, as
I was the person whom you injured most of all others, so I consider
that I of all others have the best right to pardon you and set you
free. Oh, Donald! Use well the life I am about to give you, else I
shall be chargeable with every future sin you commit!"

"In the name of mercy, girl, do not hold out a false hope! I had nerved
myself to die!'"

"But you were not prepared to meet your Maker! Oh, Donald! I hold out
no false hope! Listen, for I must speak low and quick. I could never be
happy again if on my wedding-day you should die a felon's death! Here!
here are tools with the use of which you must be acquainted, for they
were found in the woods near the Hidden House!" said Capitola,
producing from her pockets a burglar's lock-pick, saw, chisel, file,
etc.

Black Donald seized them as a famished wolf might seize his prey.

"Will they do?" inquired Capitola, in breathes anxiety.

"Yes--yes--yes! I can file off my irons, pick every lock, drive back
every bolt, and dislodge every bar between myself and freedom with
these instruments! But, child, there is one thing you have forgotten:
suppose a turnkey or a guard should stop me? You have brought me no
revolver!"

Capitola turned pale.

"Donald, I could easily have brought you a revolver; but I would not,
even to save you from to-morrow's death! No, Donald, no! I give you the
means of freeing yourself, if you can do it, as you may, without
bloodshed! But, Donald, though your life is not justly forfeited, your
liberty is, and so I cannot give you the means of taking any one's life
for the sake of saving your own!"

"You are right," said the outlaw.

"Listen further, Donald. Here are a thousand dollars! I thought never
to have taken it from the bank, for I would never have used the price
of blood! But I drew it to-day for you. Take it--it will help you to
live a better life! When you have picked your way out of this place, go
to the great elm-tree at the back of the old mill, and you will find my
horse, Gyp, which I shall have tied there. He is very swift. Mount him
and ride for your life to the nearest seaport, and so escape by a
vessel to some foreign country. And oh, try to lead a good life, and
may God redeem you, Donald Bayne! There--conceal your tools and your
money quickly, for I hear the guard coming. Good-by--and again, God
redeem you, Donald Bayne!"

"God bless you, brave and tender girl! And God forsake me if I do not
heed your advice!" and the outlaw pressed the hand she gave him while
the tears rushed to his eyes.

The guard approached; Capitola turned to meet him. They left the cell
together and Black Donald was locked in for the last time!

"Oh, I hope, I pray, that he may get off! Oh, what shall I do if he
doesn't! How can I enjoy my wedding to-morrow! How can I bear the music
and the dancing and the rejoicing, when I know that a fellow creature
is in such a strait! Oh, Lord grant that Black Donald may get clear off
to-night, for he isn't fit to die!" said Cap to herself, as she hurried
out of the prison.

Her young groom was waiting for her and she mounted her horse and rode
until they got to the old haunted church at the end of the village,
when drawing rein, she said:

"Jem, I am very tired. I will wait here and you must just ride back to
the village, to Mr. Cassell's livery stable, and get a gig, and put
your horse into it, and come back here to drive me home, for I cannot
ride."

Jem, who never questioned his imperious little mistress's orders, rode
off at once to do her bidding.

Cap immediately dismounted from her pony and led him under the deep
shadows of the elm tree, where she fastened him. Then taking his face
between her hands, and looking him in the eyes, she said:

"Gyp, my son, you and I have had many a frolic together, but we've got
to part now! It almost breaks my heart, Gyp, but it is to save a fellow
creature's life, and it can't be helped! He'll treat you well, for my
sake, dear Gyp. Gyp, he'll part with his life sooner than sell you!
Good-by, dear, dear Gyp."

Gyp took all these caresses in a very nonchalant manner, only snorting
and pawing in reply.

Presently the boy came back, bringing the gig. Cap once more hugged Gyp
about the neck, pressed her cheek against his mane, and with a
whispered "Good-by, dear Gyp," sprang into the gig and ordered the boy
to drive home.

"An' leab the pony, miss?"

"Oh, yes, for the present; everybody knows Gyp--no one will steal him.
I have left him length of line enough to move around a little and eat
grass, drink from the brook, or lie down. You can come after him early
to-morrow morning."

The little groom thought this a queer arrangement, but he was not in
the habit of criticising his young mistress's actions.

Capitola got home to a late supper and to the anxious inquiries of her
friends she replied that she had been to the prison to take leave of
Black Donald, and begged that they would not pursue so painful a
subject.

And, in respect to Cap's sympathies, they changed the conversation.

That night the remnant of Black Donald's band were assembled in their
first old haunt, the Old Road Inn. They had met for a twofold
purpose--to bury their old matron, Mother Raven, who, since the death
of her patron and the apprehension of her captain, had returned to the
inn to die--and to bewail the fate of their leader, whose execution was
expected to come off the next day.

The men laid the poor old woman in her woodland grave, and assembled in
the kitchen to keep a death watch in sympathy with their "unfortunate"
captain. They gathered around the table, and, foaming mugs of ale were
freely quaffed for "sorrow's dry," they said. But neither laugh, song
nor jest attended their draughts. They were to keep that night's vigil
in honor of their captain, and then were to disband and separate
forever.

Suddenly, in the midst of their heavy grief and utter silence a
familiar sound was heard--a ringing footstep under the back windows.

And every man leaped to his feet, with looks of wild delight and
questioning.

And the next instant the door was flung wide open, and the outlaw chief
stood among them!

Steve stopped rolling and curled himself around Black Donald's neck,
exclaiming:

"It's you--it's you--it's you!--my dear, my darling--my adored--my
sweetheart--my prince!--my lord!--my king!--my dear, dear captain!"

Steve, the lazy mulatto, rolled down upon the floor at his master's
feet, and embraced him in silence.

While Demon Dick growled forth:

"How the foul fiend did you get out?"

And the anxious faces of all the other men silently repeated the
question.

"Not by any help of yours, boys! But don't think I reproach you, lads!
Well I know that you could do nothing on earth to save me! No one on
earth could have helped me except the one who really freed
me--Capitola!"

"That girl again!" exclaimed Hal, in the extremity of wonder.

Steve stopped rolling, and curled himself around the feet of his master
and gazed up in stupid astonishment.

"It's to be hoped, then, you've got her at last, captain," said Demon
Dick.

"No--heaven bless her!--she's in better hands. Now listen, lads, for I
must talk fast! I have already lost a great deal too much time. I went
first to the cave in the Punch Bowl, and, not finding you there, came
here at a venture, where I am happy to meet you for the last time--for
to-night we disband forever!"

"'Twas our intention, captain," said Hal, in a melancholy voice.

Black Donald then threw himself into a seat at the head of the table,
poured out a mug of ale, and invited his band to pledge him. They
gathered around the table, filled their mugs, pledged him standing, and
then resumed their seats to listen to the last words of their chief.

Black Donald commenced and related the manner of his deliverance by
Capitola; and then, taking from his bosom a bag of gold, he poured it
upon the table and divided it two into equal portions, one of which he
handed to "Headlong Hal," saying:

"There, Hal, take that and divide it among your companions, and scatter
to distant parts of the country, where you may yet have a chance of
earning an honest livelihood! As for me, I shall have to quit the
country altogether, and it will take nearly half this sum to enable me
to do it. Now I have not a minute more to give you! So once more pledge
your captain and away!"

The men filled their mugs, rose to their feet, and pledged their leader
in a parting toast and then:

"Good luck to you all!" exclaimed Black Donald, waving his hat thrice
above his head with a valedictory hurrah. And the next moment he was
gone!

That night, if any watchman had been on guard near the stables of
Hurricane Hall, he might have seen a tall man mounted upon Capitola's
pony, ride up in hot haste, dismount and pick the stable lock, take Gyp
by the bridle and lead him in, and presently return leading out
Fleetfoot, Old Hurricane's racer, upon which he mounted and rode away.

The next morning, while Capitola was dressing; her groom rapped at the
door and, in great dismay, begged that he might speak to Miss Cap one
minute.

"Well, what is it, Jem?" said Capitola.

"Oh, Miss Cap, you'll kill me! I done been got up long afore day and
gone to Tip-Top arter Gyp, but somebody done been stole him away afore
I got there!"

"Thank heaven!" cried Capitola, to little Jem's unspeakable amazement.
For to Capitola the absence of her horse meant just the escape of Black
Donald!

The next minute Cap sighed and said:

"Poor Gyp! I shall never see you again!"

That was all she knew of the future!

That morning while they were all at breakfast a groom from the stables
came in with a little canvas bag in his hand, which he laid, with a
bow, before his master.

Major Warfield took it up; it was full of gold, and upon its side was
written, in red chalk:

"Three hundred dollars, to pay for Fleetfoot.--Black Donald, Reformed
Robber."

While Old Hurricane was reading this inscription, the groom said that
Fleetfoot was missing from his stall, and that Miss Cap's pony, that
was supposed to have been stolen, was found in his place, with this bag
of gold tied around his neck!

"It is Black Donald--he has escaped!" cried Old Hurricane, about to
fling himself into a rage, when his furious eyes encountered the gentle
gaze of Marah, that fell like oil on the waves of his rising passion.

"Let him go! I'll not storm on my silver wedding day," said Major
Warfield.

As for Cap, her eyes danced with delight--the only little clouds upon
her bright sky were removed. Black Donald had escaped, to commence a
better life, and Gyp was restored!

That evening a magnificent old-fashioned wedding came off at Hurricane
Hall.

The double ceremony was performed by the bishop of the diocese (then on
a visit to the neighborhood) in the great salon of Hurricane Hall, in
the presence of as large and splendid an assembly as could be gathered
together from that remote neighborhood.

The two brides, of course, were lovely in white satin, Honiton lace,
pearls and orange flowers. "Equally," of course, the bridegrooms were
handsome and elegant, proud and happy.

To this old-fashioned wedding succeeded a round of dinners and evening
parties, given by the wedding guests. And when all these old-time
customs had been observed for the satisfaction of old friends, the
bridal party went upon the new-fashioned tour, for their own delight.
They spent a year in traveling over the eastern continent, and then
returned home to settle upon their patrimonial estates.

Major Warfield and Marah lived at Hurricane Hall and as his heart is
satisfied and at rest, his temper is gradually improving. As the lion
shall be led by the little child, Old Hurricane is led by the gentlest
woman that ever loved or suffered, and she is leading him in his old
age to the Saviour's feet.

Clara and Traverse live at Willow Heights, which has been repaired,
enlarged and improved, and where Traverse has already an extensive
practice, and where both endeavor to emulate the enlightened goodness
of the sainted Doctor Day.

Cap and Herbert, with Mrs. Le Noir, live at the Hidden House, which has
been turned by wealth and taste into a dwelling of light and beauty. As
the bravest are always the gentlest, so the most high-spirited are
always the most forgiving. And thus the weak or wicked old Dorcas
Knight finds still a home under the roof of Mrs. Le Noir. Her only
retribution being the very mild one of having her relations changed in
the fact that her temporary prisoner is now her mistress and sovereign
lady.

I wish I could say "they all lived happy ever after." But the truth is
I have reason to suppose that even Clara had sometimes occasion to
administer to Doctor Rocke dignified curtain lectures, which no doubt
did him good. And I know for a positive fact that our Cap sometimes
gives her "dear, darling, sweet Herbert," the benefit of the sharp edge
of her tongue, which, of course, he deserves.

But notwithstanding all this, I am happy to say that all enjoy a fair
amount of human felicity.









End of Project Gutenberg's Capitola the Madcap, by Emma D. E. N. Southworth

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CAPITOLA THE MADCAP ***

***** This file should be named 3792.txt or 3792.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/7/9/3792/

Produced by Charles Franks and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team. HTML version by Al Haines.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
