Project Gutenberg's Christopher Columbus, Volume 8, by Filson Young

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Christopher Columbus, Volume 8
       And The New World Of His Discovery, A Narrative

Author: Filson Young

Release Date: December 5, 2004 [EBook #4115]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS, VOLUME 8 ***




Produced by David Widger





                         CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS

                   AND THE NEW WORLD OF HIS DISCOVERY

                      A NARRATIVE BY FILSON YOUNG


                              Volume 8



CHAPTER VI

RELIEF OF THE ADMIRAL

There was no further difficulty about provisions, which were punctually
brought by the natives on the old terms; but the familiar, spirit of
sedition began to work again among the unhappy Spaniards, and once more a
mutiny, led this time by the apothecary Bernardo, took form--the
intention being to seize the remaining canoes and attempt to reach
Espanola.  This was the point at which matters had arrived, in March
1504, when as the twilight was falling one evening a cry was raised that
there was a ship in sight; and presently a small caravel was seen
standing in towards the shore.  All ideas of mutiny were forgotten, and
the crew assembled in joyful anticipation to await, as they thought, the
coming of their deliverers.  The caravel came on with the evening breeze;
but while it was yet a long way off the shore it was seen to be lying to;
a boat was lowered and rowed towards the harbour.

As the boat drew near Columbus could recognise in it Diego de Escobar,
whom he remembered having condemned to death for his share in the
rebellion of Roldan.  He was not the man whom Columbus would have most
wished to see at that moment.  The boat came alongside the hulks, and a
barrel of wine and a side of bacon, the sea-compliment customary on such
occasions, was handed up.  Greatly to the Admiral's surprise, however,
Escobar did not come on board, but pushed his boat off and began to speak
to Columbus from a little distance.  He told him that Ovando was greatly
distressed at the Admiral's misfortunes; that he had been much occupied
by wars in Espanola, and had not been able to send a message to him
before; that he greatly regretted he had no ship at present large enough
to bring off the Admiral and his people, but that he would send one as
soon as he had it.  In the meantime the Admiral was to be assured that
all his affairs in Espanola were being attended to faithfully, and that
Escobar was instructed to bring back at once any letters which the
Admiral might wish to write.

The coolness and unexpectedness of this message completely took away
the breath of the unhappy Spaniards, who doubtless stood looking in
bewilderment from Escobar to Columbus, unable to believe that the caravel
had not been sent for their relief.  Columbus, however, with a
self-restraint which cannot be too highly praised, realised that Escobar
meant what he said, and that by protesting against his action or trying
to interfere with it he would only be putting himself in the wrong.  He
therefore retired immediately to his cabin and wrote a letter to Ovando,
in which he drew a vivid picture of the distress of his people, reported
the rebellion of the Porras brothers, and reminded Ovando that he relied
upon the fulfilment of his promise to send relief.  The letter was
handed over to Escobar, who rowed back with it to his caravel and
immediately sailed away with it into the night.


Before he could retire to commune with his own thoughts or to talk with
his faithful brother, Columbus had the painful duty of speaking to his
people, whose puzzled and disappointed faces must have cost him some
extra pangs.  He told them that he was quite satisfied with the message
from Ovando, that it was a sign of kindness on his part thus to send them
news in advance that relief was coming, that their situation was now
known in San Domingo, and that vessels would soon be here to take them
away.  He added that he himself was so sure of these things that he had
refused to go back with Escobar, but had preferred to remain with them
and share their lot until relief should come.  This had the desired
effect of cheering the Spaniards; but it was far from representing the
real sentiments of Columbus on the subject.  The fact that Escobar had
been chosen to convey this strange empty message of sympathy seemed to
him suspicious, and with his profound distrust of Ovando Columbus began
to wonder whether some further scheme might not be on foot to damage him
in the eyes of the Sovereigns.  He was convinced that Ovando had meant to
let him starve on the island, and that the real purpose of Escobar's
visit had been to find out what condition the Admiral was in, so that
Ovando might know how to act.  It is very hard to get at the truth of
what these two men thought of each other.  They were both suspicious,
each was playing for his own hand, and Ovando was only a little more
unscrupulous than Columbus; but there can be no doubt that whatever his
motives may have been Ovando acted with abominable treachery and cruelty
in leaving the Admiral unrelieved for nearly nine months.


Columbus now tried to make use of the visit of Escobar to restore to
allegiance the band of rebels that were wandering about in the
neighbourhood under the leadership of the Porras brothers.  Why he should
have wished to bring them back to the ships is not clear, for by all
accounts he was very well rid of them; but probably his pride as a
commander was hurt by the thought that half of his company had defied his
authority and were in a state of mutiny.  At any rate he sent out an
ambassador to Porras, offering to receive the mutineers back without any
punishment, and to give them a free passage to Espanola in the vessels
which were shortly expected, if they would return to their allegiance
with him.

The folly of this overture was made manifest by the treatment which it
received.  It was bad enough to make advances to the Porras brothers, but
it was still worse to have those advances repulsed, and that is what
happened.  The Porras brothers, being themselves incapable of any
single-mindedness, affected not to believe in the sincerity of the
Admiral's offer; they feared that he was laying some kind of trap for
them; moreover, they were doing very well in their lawless way, and
living very comfortably on the natives; so they told Columbus's
ambassadors that his offer was declined.  At the same time they
undertook to conduct themselves in an amicable and orderly manner on
condition that, when the vessels arrived, one of them should be
apportioned to the exclusive use of the mutineers; and that in the
meantime the Admiral should share with them his store of provisions
and trinkets, as theirs were exhausted.

This was the impertinent decision of the Porras brothers; but it did not
quite commend itself to their followers, who were fearful of the possible
results if they should persist in their mutinous conduct.  They were very
much afraid of being left behind in the island, and in any case, having
attempted and failed in the main object of their mutiny, they saw no
reason why they should refuse a free pardon.  But the Porras brothers
lied busily.  They said that the Admiral was merely laying a trap in
order to get them into his power, and that he would send them home to
Spain in chains; and they even went so far as to assure their
fellow-rebels that the story of a caravel having arrived was not really
true; but that Columbus, who was an adept in the arts of necromancy, had
really made his people believe that they had seen a caravel in the dusk;
and that if one had really arrived it would not have gone away so
suddenly, nor would the Admiral and his brother and son have failed to
take their passage in it.

To consolidate the effect of these remarkable statements on the still
wavering mutineers, the Porras brothers decided to commit them to an open
act of violence which would successfully alienate them from the Admiral.
They formed them, therefore, into an armed expedition, with the idea of
seizing the stores remaining on the wreck and taking the Admiral
personally.  Columbus fortunately got news of this, as he nearly always
did when there was treachery in the wind; and he sent Bartholomew to try
to persuade them once more to return to their duty--a vain and foolish
mission, the vanity and folly of which were fully apparent to
Bartholomew.  He duly set out upon it; but instead of mild words he took
with him fifty armed men--the whole available able-bodied force, in
fact--and drew near to the position occupied by the rebels.


The exhortation of the Porras brothers had meanwhile produced its effect,
and it was decided that six of the strongest men among the mutineers
should make for Bartholomew himself and try to capture or kill him.  The
fierce Adelantado, finding himself surrounded by six assailants, who
seemed to be directing their whole effort against his life, swung his
sword in a berserk rage and slashed about him, to such good purpose that
four or five of his assailants soon lay round him killed or wounded.  At
this point Francisco de Porras rushed in and cleft the shield held by
Bartholomew, severely wounding the hand that held it; but the sword.
stuck in the shield, and while Porras was endeavouring to draw it out
Bartholomew and some others closed upon him, and after a sharp struggle
took him prisoner.  The battle, which was a short one, had been meanwhile
raging fiercely among the rest of the forces; but when the mutineers saw
their leader taken prisoner, and many of their number lying dead or
wounded, they scattered and fled, but not before Bartholomew's force had
taken several prisoners.  It was then found that, although the rebels had
suffered heavily, none of Bartholomew's men were killed, and only one
other besides himself was wounded.  The next day the mutineers all came
in to surrender, submitting an abject oath of allegiance; and Columbus,
always strangely magnanimous to rebels and insurgents, pardoned them all
with the exception of Francisco de Porras, who, one is glad to know, was
confined in irons to be sent to Spain for trial.


This submission, which was due to the prompt action of Bartholomew rather
than to the somewhat feeble diplomacy of the Admiral, took place on March
20th, and proved somewhat embarrassing to Columbus.  He could put no
faith in the oaths and protestations of the mutineers; and he was very
doubtful about the wisdom of establishing them once more on the wrecks
with the hitherto orderly remnant.  He therefore divided them up into
several bands, and placing each under the command of an officer whom he
could trust, he supplied them with trinkets and despatched them to
different parts of the island, for the purpose of collecting provisions
and carrying on barter with the natives.  By this means the last month or
two of this most trying and exciting sojourn on the island of Jamaica
were passed in some measure of peace; and towards the end of June it was
brought to an end by the arrival of two caravels.  One of them was the
ship purchased by Diego Mendez out of the three which had arrived from
Spain; and the other had been despatched by Ovando in deference, it is
said, to public feeling in San Domingo, which had been so influenced by
Mendez's account of the Admiral's heroic adventures that Ovando dared not
neglect him any longer.  Moreover, if it had ever been his hope that the
Admiral would perish on the island of Jamaica, that hope was now doomed
to frustration, and, as he was to be rescued in spite of all, Ovando no
doubt thought that he might as well, for the sake of appearances, have a
hand in the rescue.

The two caravels, laden with what was worth saving from the two abandoned
hulks, and carrying what was left of the Admiral's company, sailed from
Jamaica on June 28, 1504.  Columbus's joy, as we may imagine, was deep
and heartfelt.  He said afterwards to Mendez that it was the happiest day
of his life, for that he had never hoped to leave the place alive.

The mission of Mendez, then, had been successful, although he had had to
wait for eight months to fulfil it.  He himself, in accordance with
Columbus's instructions, had gone to Spain in another caravel of the
fleet out of which he had purchased the relieving ship; and as he passes
out of our narrative we may now take our farewell of him.  Among the many
men employed in the Admiral's service no figure stands out so brightly as
that of Diego Mendez; and his record, almost alone of those whose service
of the Admiral earned them office and distinction, is unblotted by any
stain of crime or treachery.  He was as brave as a lion and as faithful
as a dog, and throughout his life remained true to his ideal of service
to the Admiral and his descendants.  He was rewarded by King Ferdinand
for his distinguished services, and allowed to bear a canoe on his
coat-of-arms; he was with the Admiral at his death-bed at Valladolid,
and when he himself came to die thirty years afterwards in the same
place he made a will in which he incorporated a brief record of the
events of the adventurous voyage in which he had borne the principal
part, and also enshrined his devotion to the name and family of
Columbus.  His demands for himself were very modest, although there is
reason to fear that they were never properly fulfilled.  He was
curiously anxious to be remembered chiefly by his plucky canoe voyage;
and in giving directions for his tomb, and ordering that a stone should
be placed over his remains, he wrote: "In the centre of the said stone
let a canoe be carved, which is a piece of wood hollowed out in which
the Indians navigate, because in such a boat I navigated three hundred
leagues, and let some letters be placed above it saying: Canoa."  The
epitaph that he chose for himself was in the following sense:

                   Here lies the Honourable Gentleman

                              DIEGO MENDEZ

             He greatly served the royal crown of Spain in
             the discovery and conquest of the Indies with
                the Admiral Don Christopher Columbus of
               glorious memory who discovered them, and
              afterwards by himself, with his own ships,
                         at his own expense.
                            He died, etc.
                  He begs from charity a PATERNOSTER
                           and an AVE MARIA.


Surely he deserves them, if ever an honourable gentleman did.




CHAPTER VII

THE HERITAGE OF HATRED

Although the journey from Jamaica to Espanola had been accomplished in
four days by Mendez in his canoe, the caravels conveying the party
rescued from Puerto Santa Gloria were seven weary weeks on this short
voyage; a strong north-west wind combining with the west-going current to
make their progress to the north-west impossible for weeks at a time.  It
was not until the 13th of August 1503 that they anchored in the harbour
of San Domingo, and Columbus once more set foot, after an absence of more
than two years, on the territory from the governorship of which he had
been deposed.

He was well enough received by Ovando, who came down in state to meet
him, lodged him in his own house, and saw that he was treated with the
distinction suitable to his high station.  The Spanish colony, moreover,
seemed to have made something of a hero of Columbus during his long
absence, and they received him with enthusiasm.  But his satisfaction in
being in San Domingo ended with that.  He was constantly made to feel
that it was Ovando and not he who was the ruler there;--and Ovando
emphasised the difference between them by numerous acts of highhanded
authority, some of them of a kind calculated to be extremely mortifying
to the Admiral.  Among these things he insisted upon releasing Porras,
whom Columbus had confined in chains; and he talked of punishing those
faithful followers of Columbus who had taken part in the battle between
Bartholomew and the rebels, because in this fight some of the followers
of Porras had been killed.  Acts like these produced weary bickerings and
arguments between Ovando and Columbus, unprofitable to them, unprofitable
to us.  The Admiral seems now to have relapsed into a condition in which
he cared only for two things, his honours and his emoluments.  Over every
authoritative act of Ovando's there was a weary squabble between him and
the Admiral, Ovando claiming his right of jurisdiction over the whole
territory of the New World, including Jamaica, and Columbus insisting
that by his commission and letters of authority he had been placed in
sole charge of the members of his own expedition.

And then, as regards his emoluments, the Admiral considered himself (and
not without justice) to have been treated most unfairly.  By the
extravagant terms of his original agreement he was, as we know, entitled
to a share of all rents and dues, as well as of the gold collected; but
it had been no one's business to collect these for him, and every one's
business to neglect them.  No one had cared; no one had kept any accounts
of what was due to the Admiral; he could not find out what had been paid
and what had not been paid.  He accused Ovando of having impeded his
agent Carvajal in his duty of collecting the Admiral's revenues, and of
disobeying the express orders of Queen Isabella in that matter; and so
on-a state of affairs the most wearisome, sordid, and unprofitable in
which any man could be involved.

And if Columbus turned his eyes from the office in San Domingo inland to
that Paradise which he had entered twelve years before, what change and
ruin, dreary, horrible and complete, did he not discover!  The birds
still sang, and the nights were still like May in Cordova; but upon that
happy harmony the sound of piteous cries and shrieks had long since
broken, and along and black December night of misery had spread its pall
over the island.  Wherever he went, Columbus found the same evidence of
ruin and desolation.  Where once innumerable handsome natives had
thronged the forests and the villages, there were now silence and smoking
ruin, and the few natives that he met were emaciated, terrified, dying.
Did he reflect, I wonder, that some part of the responsibility of all
this horror rested on him?  That many a system of island government, the
machinery of which was now fed by a steady stream of human lives, had
been set going by him in ignorance, or greed of quick commercial returns?
It is probable that he did not; for he now permanently regarded himself
as a much-injured man, and was far too much occupied with his own wrongs
to realise that they were as nothing compared with the monstrous stream
of wrong and suffering that he had unwittingly sent flowing into the
world.

In the island under Ovando's rule Columbus saw the logical results of his
own original principles of government, which had recognised the right of
the Christians to possess the persons and labours of the heathen natives.
Las Casas, who was living in Espanola as a young priest at this time, and
was destined by long residence there and in the West Indies to qualify
himself as their first historian, saw what Columbus saw, and saw also the
even worse things that happened in after years in Cuba and Jamaica; and
it is to him that we owe our knowledge of the condition of island affairs
at this time.  The colonists whom Ovando had brought out had come very
much in the spirit that in our own day characterised the rush to the
north-western goldfields of America.  They brought only the slightest
equipment, and were no sooner landed at San Domingo than they set out
into the island like so many picnic parties, being more careful to carry
vessels in which to bring back the gold they were to find than proper
provisions and equipment to support them in the labour of finding it.
The roads, says Las Casas, swarmed like ant-hills with these adventurers
rushing forth to the mines, which were about twenty-five miles distant
from San Domingo; they were in the highest spirits, and they made it a
kind of race as to who should get there first.  They thought they had
nothing to do but to pick up shining lumps of gold; and when they found
that they had to dig and delve in the hard earth, and to dig
systematically and continuously, with a great deal of digging for very
little gold, their spirits fell.  They were not used to dig; and it
happened that most of them began in an unprofitable spot, where they
digged for eight days without finding any gold.  Their provisions were
soon exhausted; and in a week they were back again in San Domingo, tired,
famished, and bitterly disappointed.  They had no genius for steady
labour; most of them were virtually without means; and although they
lived in San Domingo, on what they had as long as possible, they were
soon starving there, and selling the clothes off their backs to procure
food.  Some of them took situations with the other settlers, more fell
victims to the climate of the island and their own imprudences and
distresses; and a thousand of them had died within two years.

Ovando had revived the enthusiasm for mining by two enactments.  He
reduced the share of discovered gold payable to the Crown, and he
developed Columbus's system of forced labour to such an extent that the
mines were entirely worked by it.  To each Spaniard, whether mining or
farming, so many natives were allotted.  It was not called slavery; the
natives were supposed to be paid a minute sum, and their employers were
also expected to teach them the Christian religion.  That was the plan.
The way in which it worked was that, a body of native men being allotted
to a Spanish settler for a period, say, of six or eight months--for the
enactment was precise in putting a period to the term of slavery--the
natives would be marched off, probably many days' journey from their
homes and families, and set to work under a Spanish foreman.  The work,
as we have already seen, was infinitely harder than that to which they
were accustomed; and most serious of all, it was done under conditions
that took all the heart out of the labour.  A man will toil in his own
garden or in tilling his own land with interest and happiness, not
counting the hours which he spends there; knowing in fact that his work
is worth doing, because he is doing it for a good reason.  But put the
same man to work in a gang merely for the aggrandisement of some other
over-man; and the heart and cheerfulness will soon die out of him.

It was so with these children of the sun.  They were put to work ten
times harder than any they had ever done before, and they were put to it
under the lash.  The light diet of their habit had been sufficient to
support them in their former existence of happy idleness and dalliance,
and they had not wanted anything more than their cassava bread and a
little fish and fruit; now, however, they were put to work at a pressure
which made a very different kind of feeding necessary to them, and this
they did not get.  Now and then a handful of pork would be divided among
a dozen of them, but they were literally starved, and were accustomed to
scramble like dogs for the bones that were thrown from the tables of the
Spaniards, which bones they ground up and mixed with their, bread so that
no portion of them might be lost.  They died in numbers under these hard
conditions, and, compared with their lives, their deaths must often have
been happy.  When the time came for them to go home they were generally
utterly worn out and crippled, and had to face a long journey of many
days with no food to support them but what they could get on the journey;
and the roads were strewn with the dead bodies of those who fell by the
way.

And far worse things happened to them than labour and exhaustion.  It
became the custom among the Spaniards to regard the lives of the natives
as of far less value than those of the dogs that were sometimes set upon
them in sport.  A Spaniard riding along would make a wager with his
fellow that he would cut the head off a native with one stroke of his
sword; and many attempts would be laughingly made, and many living bodies
hideously mutilated and destroyed, before the feat would be accomplished.
Another sport was one similar to pigsticking as it is practised in India,
except that instead of pigs native women and children were stuck with the
lances.  There was no kind of mutilation and monstrous cruelty that was
not practised.  If there be any powers of hell, they stalked at large
through the forests and valleys of Espanola.  Lust and bloody cruelty, of
a kind not merely indescribable but unrealisable by sane men and women,
drenched the once happy island with anguish and terror.  And in payment
for it the Spaniards undertook to teach the heathen the Christian
religion.


The five chiefs who had ruled with justice and wisdom over the island of
Espanola in the early days of Columbus were all dead, wiped out by the
wave of wild death and cruelty that had swept over the island.  The
gentle Guacanagari, when he saw the desolation that was beginning to
overwhelm human existence, had fled into the mountains, hiding his face
in shame from the sons of men, and had miserably died there.  Caonabo,
Lord of the House of Gold, fiercest and bravest of them all, who first
realised that the Spaniards were enemies to the native peace, after
languishing in prison in the house of Columbus at Isabella for some time,
had died in captivity during the voyage to Spain.  Anacaona his wife, the
Bloom of the Gold, that brave and beautiful woman, whose admiration of
the Spaniards had by their bloody cruelties been turned into detestation,
had been shamefully betrayed and ignominiously hanged.  Behechio, her
brother, the only cacique who did not sue for peace after the first
conquest of the island by Christopher and Bartholomew Columbus, was dead
long ago of wounds and sorrow.  Guarionex, the Lord of the Vega Real, who
had once been friendly enough, who had danced to the Spanish pipe and
learned the Paternoster and Ave Maria, and whose progress in conversion
to Christianity the seduction of his wives by those who were converting
him had interrupted, after wandering in the mountains of Ciguay had been
imprisoned in chains, and drowned in the hurricane of June 30, 1502.

The fifth chief, Cotabanama, Lord of the province of Higua, made the last
stand against Ovando in defence of the native right to existence, and was
only defeated after severe battles and dreadful slaughters.  His
territory was among the mountains, and his last insurrection was caused,
as so many others had been, by the intolerable conduct of the Spaniards
towards the wives and daughters of the Indians.  Collecting all his
warriors, Cotabanama attacked the Spanish posts in his neighbourhood.
At every engagement his troops were defeated and dispersed, but only to
collect again, fight again with even greater fury, be defeated and
dispersed again, and rally again against the Spaniards.  They literally
fought to the death.  After every battle the Spaniards made a massacre of
all the natives they could find, old men, children, and pregnant women
being alike put to the sword or burned in their houses.  When their
companions fell beside them, instead of being frightened they became more
furious; and when they were wounded they would pluck the arrows out of
their bodies and hurl them back at the Spaniards, falling dead in the
very act.  After one such severe defeat and massacre the natives
scattered for many months, hiding among the mountains and trying to
collect and succour their decimated families; but the Spaniards, who with
their dogs grew skilful at tracking the Indians and found it pleasant
sport, came upon them in the places of refuge where little groups of them
were sheltering their women and children, and there slowly and cruelly
slaughtered them, often with the addition of tortures and torments in
order to induce them to reveal the whereabouts of other bands.  When it
was possible the Spaniards sometimes hanged thirteen of them in a row in
commemoration of their Blessed Saviour and the Twelve Apostles; and while
they were hanging, and before they had quite died, they would hack at
them with their swords in order to test the edge of the steel.  At the
last stand, when the fierceness and bitterness of the contest rose to a
height on both sides, Cotabanama was captured and a plan made to broil
him slowly to death; but for some reason this plan was not carried out,
and the brave chief was taken to San Domingo and publicly hanged like a
thief.


After that there was never any more resistance; it was simply a case of
extermination, which the Spaniards easily accomplished by cutting of the
heads of women as they passed by, and impaling infants and little
children on their lances as they rode through the villages.  Thus, in the
twelve years since the discovery of Columbus, between half a million and
a million natives, perished; and as the Spanish colonisation spread
afterwards from island to island, and the banner of civilisation and
Christianity was borne farther abroad throughout the Indies, the same
hideous process was continued.  In Cuba, in Jamaica, throughout the
Antilles, the cross and the sword, the whip-lash and the Gospel advanced
together; wherever the Host was consecrated, hideous cries of agony and
suffering broke forth; until happily, in the fulness of time, the dire
business was complete, and the whole of the people who had inhabited this
garden of the world were exterminated and their blood and race wiped from
the face of the earth .  .  .  .  Unless, indeed, blood and race and hatred
be imperishable things; unless the faithful Earth that bred and reared
the race still keeps in her soil, and in the waving branches of the trees
and the green grasses, the sacred essences of its blood and hatred;
unless in the full cycle of Time, when that suffering flesh and blood
shall have gone through all the changes of substance and condition, from
corruption and dust through flowers and grasses and trees and animals
back into the living body of mankind again, it shall one day rise up
terribly to avenge that horror of the past.  Unless Earth and Time
remember, O Children of the Sun!  for men have forgotten, and on the soil
of your Paradise the African negro, learned in the vices of Europe,
erects his monstrous effigy of civilisation and his grotesque mockery of
freedom; unless it be through his brutish body, into which the blood and
hatred with which the soil of Espanola was soaked have now passed, that
they shall dreadfully strike at the world again.




CHAPTER VIII

THE ADMIRAL COMES HOME

On September 12, 1504., Christopher Columbus did many things for the last
time.  He who had so often occupied himself in ports and harbours with
the fitting out of ships and preparations for a voyage now completed at
San Domingo the simple preparations for the last voyage he was to take.
The ship he had come in from Jamaica had been refitted and placed under
the command of Bartholomew, and he had bought another small caravel in
which he and his son were to sail.  For the last time he superintended
those details of fitting out and provisioning which were now so familiar
to him; for the last time he walked in the streets of San Domingo and
mingled with the direful activities of his colony; he looked his last
upon the place where the vital scenes of his life had been set, for the
last time weighed anchor, and took his last farewell of the seas and
islands of his discovery.  A little steadfast looking, a little straining
of the eyes, a little heart-aching no doubt, and Espanola has sunk down
into the sea behind the white wake of the ships; and with its fading away
the span of active life allotted to this man shuts down, and his powerful
opportunities for good or evil are withdrawn.

There was something great and heroic about the Admiral's last voyage.
Wind and sea rose up as though to make a last bitter attack upon the man
who had disclosed their mysteries and betrayed their secrets.  He had
hardly cleared the island before the first gale came down upon him and
dismasted his ship, so that he was obliged to transfer himself and his
son to Bartholomew's caravel and send the disabled vessel back to
Espanola.  The shouting sea, as though encouraged by this triumph, hurled
tempest after tempest upon the one lonely small ship that was staggering
on its way to Spain; and the duel between this great seaman and the vast
elemental power that he had so often outwitted began in earnest.  One
little ship, one enfeebled man to be destroyed by the power of the sea:
that was the problem, and there were thousands of miles of sea-room, and
two months of time to solve it in!  Tempest after tempest rose and drove
unceasingly against the ship.  A mast was sprung and had to be cut away;
another, and the woodwork from the forecastles and high stern works had
to be stripped and lashed round the crazy mainmast to preserve it from
wholesale destruction.  Another gale, and the mast had to be shortened,
for even reinforced as it was it would not bear the strain; and so
crippled, so buffeted, this very small ship leapt and staggered on her
way across the Atlantic, keeping her bowsprit pointed to that region of
the foamy emptiness where Spain was.

The Admiral lay crippled in his cabin listening to the rush and bubble of
the water, feeling the blows and recoils of the unending battle,
hearkening anxiously to the straining of the timbers and the vessel's
agonised complainings under the pounding of the seas.  We do not know
what his thoughts were; but we may guess that they looked backward rather
than forward, and that often they must have been prayers that the present
misery would come somehow or other to an end.  Up on deck brother
Bartholomew, who has developed some grievous complaint of the jaws and
teeth--complaint not known to us more particularly, but dreadful enough
from that description--does his duty also, with that heroic manfulness
that has marked his whole career; and somewhere in the ship young
Ferdinand is sheltering from the sprays and breaking seas, finding his
world of adventure grown somewhat gloomy and sordid of late, and feeling
that he has now had his fill of the sea .  .  .  .  Shut your eyes and
let the illusions of time and place fade from you; be with them for a
moment on this last voyage; hear that eternal foaming and crashing of
great waves, the shrieking of wind in cordage, the cracking and slatting
of the sails, the mad lashing of loose ropes; the painful swinging, and
climbing up and diving down, and sinking and staggering and helpless
strivings of the small ship in the waste of water.  The sea is as empty
as chaos, nothing for days and weeks but that infinite tumbling surface
and heaven of grey storm-clouds; a world of salt surges encircled by
horizons of dim foam.  Time and place are nothing; the agony and pain of
such moments are eternal.

But the two brothers, grim and gigantic in their sea power, subtle as the
wind itself in their sea wit, win the battle.  Over the thousands of
miles of angry surges they urge that small ship towards calm and safety;
until one day the sea begins to abate a little, and through the spray and
tumult of waters the dim loom of land is seen.  The sea falls back
disappointed and finally conquered by Christopher Columbus, whose ship,
battered, crippled, and strained, comes back out of the wilderness of
waters and glides quietly into the smooth harbour of San Lucar, November
7, 1504.  There were no guns or bells to greet the Admiral; his only
salute was in the thunder of the conquered seas; and he was carried
ashore to San Lucar, and thence to Seville, a sick and broken man.




CHAPTER IX

THE LAST DAYS

Columbus, for whom rest and quiet were the first essentials, remained in
Seville from November 1504 to May 1505, when he joined the Court at
Segovia and afterwards at Salamanca and Valladolid, where he remained
till his death in May 1506.  During this last period, when all other
activities were practically impossible to him, he fell into a state of
letter-writing--for the most part long, wearisome complainings and
explainings in which he poured out a copious flood of tears and self-pity
for the loss of his gold.

It has generally been claimed that Columbus was in bitter penury and want
of money, but a close examination of the letters and other documents
relating to this time show that in his last days he was not poor in any
true sense of the word.  He was probably a hundred times richer than any
of his ancestors had ever been; he had, money to give and money to spend;
the banks honoured his drafts; his credit was apparently indisputable.
But compared with the fabulous wealth to which he would by this time have
been entitled if his original agreement with the Crown of Spain had been
faithfully carried out he was no doubt poor.  There is no evidence that
he lacked any comfort or alleviation that money could buy; indeed he
never had any great craving for the things that money can buy--only for
money itself.  There must have been many rich people in Spain who would
gladly have entertained him in luxury and dignity; but he was not the
kind of man to set much store by such things except in so far as they
were a decoration and advertisement of his position as a great man.  He
had set himself to the single task of securing what he called his rights;
and in these days of sunset he seems to have been illumined by some
glimmer of the early glory of his first inspiration.  He wanted the
payment of his dues now, not so much for his own enrichment, but as a
sign to the world that his great position as Admiral and Viceroy was
recognised, so that his dignities and estates might be established and
consolidated in a form which he would be able to transmit to his remote
posterity.

Since he wrote so copiously and so constantly in these last days, the
best picture of his mood and condition is afforded in his letters to his
son Diego; letters which, in spite of their infinitely wearisome
recapitulation and querulous complaint, should be carefully read by those
who wish to keep in touch with the Admiral to the end.

     Letter written by CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS to DON DIEGO, his Son,
     November 21, 1504.

     "VERY DEAR SON,--I received your letter by the courier.  You did
     well in remaining yonder to remedy our affairs somewhat and to
     employ yourself now in our business.  Ever since I came to Castile,
     the Lord Bishop of Palencia has shown me favour and has desired that
     I should be honoured.  Now he must be entreated that it may please
     him to occupy himself in remedying my many grievances and in
     ordering that the agreement and letters of concession which their
     Highnesses gave me be fulfilled, and that I be indemnified for so
     many damages.  And he may be certain that if their Highnesses do
     this, their estate and greatness will be multiplied to them in an
     incredible degree.  And it must not appear to him that forty
     thousand pesos in gold is more than a representation of it; because
     they might have had a much greater quantity if Satan had not
     hindered it by impeding my design; for, when I was taken away from
     the Indies, I was prepared to give them a sum of gold incomparable
     to forty thousand pesos.  I make oath, and this may be for thee
     alone, that the damage to me in the matter of the concessions their
     Highnesses have made to me, amounts to ten millions each year, and
     never can be made good.  You see what will be, or is, the injury to
     their Highnesses in what belongs to them, and they do not perceive
     it.  I write at their disposal and will strive to start yonder.  My
     arrival and the rest is in the hands of our Lord.  His mercy is
     infinite.  What is done and is to be done, St. Augustine says is
     already done before the creation of the world.  I write also to
     these other Lords named in the letter of Diego Mendez.  Commend me
     to their mercy and tell them of my going as I have said above.  For
     certainly I feel great fear, as the cold is so inimical to this, my
     infirmity, that I may have to remain on the road.

     "I was very much pleased to hear the contents of your letter and
     what the King our Lord said, for which you kissed his royal hands.
     It is certain that I have served their Highnesses with as much
     diligence and love as though it had been to gain Paradise, and more,
     and if I have been at fault in anything it has been because it was
     impossible or because my knowledge and strength were not sufficient.
     God, our Lord, in such a case, does not require more from persons
     than the will.

     "At the request of the Treasurer Morales, I left two brothers in the
     Indies, who are called Porras.  The one was captain and the other
     auditor.  Both were without capacity for these positions: and I was
     confident that they could fill them, because of love for the person
     who sent them to me.  They both became more vain than they had been.
     I forgave them many incivilities, more than I would do with a
     relation, and their offences were such that they merited another
     punishment than a verbal reprimand.  Finally they reached such a
     point that even had I desired, I could not have avoided doing what I
     did.  The records of the case will prove whether I lie or not.  They
     rebelled on the island of Jamaica, at which I was as much astonished
     as I would be if the sun's rays should cast darkness.  I was at the
     point of death, and they martyrised me with extreme cruelty during
     five months and without cause.  Finally I took them all prisoners,
     and immediately set them free, except the captain, whom I was
     bringing as a prisoner to their Highnesses.  A petition which they
     made to me under oath, and which I send you with this letter, will
     inform you at length in regard to this matter, although the records
     of the case explain it fully.  These records and the Notary are
     coming on another vessel, which I am expecting from day to day.  The
     Governor in Santo Domingo took this prisoner.--His courtesy
     constrained him to do this.  I had a chapter in my instructions in
     which their Highnesses ordered all to obey me, and that I should
     exercise civil and criminal justice over all those who were with me:
     but this was of no avail with the Governor, who said that it was not
     understood as applying in his territory.  He sent the prisoner to
     these Lords who have charge of the Indies without inquiry or record
     or writing.  They did not receive him, and both brothers go free.
     It is not wonderful to me that our Lord punishes.  They went there
     with shameless faces.  Such wickedness or such cruel treason were
     never heard of.  I wrote to their Highnesses about this matter in
     the other letter, and said that it was not right for them to consent
     to this offence.  I also wrote to the Lord Treasurer that I begged
     him as a favour not to pass sentence on the testimony given by these
     men until he heard me.  Now it will be well for you to remind him of
     it anew.  I do, not know how they dare to go before him with such an
     undertaking.  I have written to him about it again and have sent him
     the copy of the oath, the same as I send to you and likewise to
     Doctor Angulo and the Licentiate Zapata.  I commend myself to the
     mercy of all, with the information that my departure yonder will
     take place in a short time.

     "I would be glad to receive a letter from their Highnesses and to
     know what they order.  You must procure such a letter if you see the
     means of so doing.  I also commend myself to the Lord Bishop and to
     Juan Lopez, with the reminder of illness and of the reward for my
     services.

     "You must read the letters which go with this one in order to act in
     conformity with what they say.  Acknowledge the receipt of his
     letter to Diego Mendez.  I do not write him as he will learn
     everything from you, and also because my illness prevents it.

     "It would be well for Carbajal and Jeronimo--[Jeronimo de Aguero, a
     landowner in Espanola and a friend of Columbus]--to be at the-Court
     at this time, and talk of our affairs with these Lords and with the
     Secretary.

     "Done in Seville, November 21.

     "Your father who loves you more than himself.

                                                    .S.
                                                  .S.A.S.
                                                    XMY
                                                 Xpo FERENS."

     "I wrote again to their Highnesses entreating them to order that
     these people who went with me should be paid, because they are poor
     and it is three years since they left their homes.  The news which
     they bring is more than extraordinary.  They have endured infinite
     dangers and hardships.  I did not wish to rob the country, so as not
     to cause scandal, because reason advises its being populated, and
     then gold will be obtained freely without scandal.  Speak of this to
     the Secretary and to the Lord Bishop and to Juan Lopez and to
     whomever you think it advisable to do so."


The Bishop of Palencia referred to in this letter is probably Bishop
Fonseca--probably, because it is known that he did become Bishop of
Palencia, although there is a difference of opinion among historians as
to whether the date of his translation to that see was before or after
this letter.  No matter, except that one is glad to think that an old
enemy--for Fonseca and Columbus had bitter disagreements over the fitting
out of various expeditions--had shown himself friendly at last.


     Letter written by CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS to DON DIEGO, November 28,
     1504.

     "VERY DEAR SON,--I received your letters of the 15th of this month.
     It is eight days since I wrote you and sent the letter by a courier.
     I enclosed unsealed letters to many other persons, in order that you
     might see them, and having read them, seal and deliver them.
     Although this illness of mine troubles me greatly, I am preparing
     for my departure in every way.  I would very much like to receive
     the reply from their Highnesses and wish you might procure it: and
     also I wish that their Highnesses would provide for the payment of
     these poor people, who have passed through incredible hardships and
     have brought them such great news that infinite thanks should be
     given to God, our Lord, and they should rejoice greatly over it.
     If I [lie ?] the 'Paralipomenon'--[ The Book of Chronicles]--and
     the Book of Kings and the Antiquities of Josephus, with very many
     others, will tell what they know of this.  I hope in our Lord to
     depart this coming week, but you must not write less often on that
     account.  I have not heard from Carbajal and Jeronimo.  If they are
     there, commend me to them.  The time is such that both Carbajals
     ought to be at Court, if illness does not prevent them.  My regards
     to Diego Mendez.

     "I believe that his truth and efforts will be worth as much as the
     lies of the Porras brothers.  The bearer of this letter is Martin de
     Gamboa.  I am sending by him a letter to Juan Lopez and a letter of
     credit.  Read the letter to Lopez and then give it to him.  If you
     write me, send the letters to Luis de Soria that he may send them
     wherever I am, because if I go in a litter, I believe it will be by
     La Plata.--[The old Roman road from Merida to Salamanca.]--May our
     Lord have you in His holy keeping.  Your uncle has been very sick
     and is now, from trouble with his jaws and his teeth.

     "Done in Seville, November 28.

     "Your father who loves you more than himself.

                                                    .S.
                                                  .S.A.S.
                                                    XMY
                                                 Xpo FERENS."


Bartholomew Columbus and Ferdinand were remaining with Christopher at
Seville; Bartholomew probably very nearly as ill as the Admiral, although
we do not hear so many complaints about it.  At any rate Diego, being ay
Court, was the great mainstay of his father; and you can see the sick man
sitting there alone with his grievances, and looking to the next
generation for help in getting them redressed.  Diego, it is to be
feared, did not receive these letters with so much patience and attention
as he might have shown, nor did he write back to his invalid father with
the fulness and regularity which the old man craved.  It is a fault
common to sons.  Those who are sons will know that it does not
necessarily imply lack of affection on Diego's part; those who are
fathers will realise how much Christopher longed for verbal assurance of
interest and affection, even though he did not doubt their reality.  News
of the serious illness of Queen Isabella had evidently reached Columbus,
and was the chief topic of public interest.


     Letter written by CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS to DON DIEGO, his Son,
     December 1, 1504.

     "VERY DEAR SON,--Since I received your letter of November 15 I have
     heard nothing from you.  I wish that you would write me more
     frequently.  I would like to receive a letter from you each hour.
     Reason must tell you that now I have no other repose.  Many couriers
     come each day, and the news is of such a nature and so abundant that
     on hearing it all my hair stands on end; it is so contrary to what
     my soul desires.  May it please the Holy Trinity to give health to
     the Queen, our Lady, that she may settle what has already been
     placed under discussion.  I wrote you by another courier Thursday,
     eight days ago.  The courier must already be on his way back here.
     I told you in that letter that my departure was certain, but that
     the hope of my arrival there, according to experience, was very
     uncertain, because my sickness is so bad, and the cold is so well
     suited to aggravate it, that I could not well avoid remaining in
     some inn on the road.  The litter and everything were ready.  The
     weather became so violent that it appeared impossible to every one
     to start when it was getting so bad, and that it was better for so
     well-known a person as myself to take care of myself and try to
     regain my health rather than place myself in danger.  I told you in
     those letters what I now say, that you decided well in remaining
     there (at such a time), and that it was right to commence occupying
     yourself with our affairs; and reason strongly urges this.  It
     appears to me that a good copy should be made of the chapter of that
     letter which their Highnesses wrote me where they say they will
     fulfil their promises to me and will place you in possession of
     everything: and that this copy should be given to them with another
     writing telling of my sickness, and that it is now impossible for me
     to go and kiss their Royal feet and hands, and that the Indies are
     being lost, and are on fire in a thousand places, and that I have
     received nothing, and am receiving nothing, from the revenues
     derived from them, and that no one dares to accept or demand
     anything there for me, and I am living upon borrowed funds.  I spent
     the money which I got there in bringing those people who went with
     me back to their homes, for it would be a great burden upon my
     conscience to have left them there and to have abandoned them.  This
     must be made known to the Lord Bishop of Palencia, in whose favour
     I have so much confidence, and also to the Lord Chamberlain.
     I believed that Carbajal and Jeronimo would be there at such a time.
     Our Lord is there, and He will order everything as He knows it to be
     best for us.

     "Carbajal reached here yesterday.  I wished to send him immediately
     with this same order, but he excused himself profusely, saying that
     his wife was at the point of death.  I shall see that he goes,
     because he knows a great deal about these affairs.  I will also
     endeavour to have your brother and your uncle go to kiss the hands
     of Their Highnesses, and give them an account of the voyage if my
     letters are not sufficient.  Take good care of your brother.  He has
     a good disposition, and is no longer a boy.  Ten brothers would not
     be too many for you.  I never found better friends to right or to
     left than my brothers.  We must strive to obtain the government of
     the Indies and then the adjustment of the revenues.  I gave you a
     memorandum which told you what part of them belongs to me.  What
     they gave to Carbajal was nothing and has turned to nothing.
     Whoever desires to do so takes merchandise there, and so the eighth
     is nothing, because, without contributing the eighth, I could send
     to trade there without rendering account or going in company with
     any one.  I said a great many times in the past that the
     contribution of the eighth would come to nothing.  The eighth and
     the rest belongs to me by reason of the concession which their
     Highnesses made to me, as set forth in the book of my Privileges,
     and also the third and the tenth.  Of the tenth I received nothing,
     except the tenth of what their Highnesses receive; and it must be
     the tenth of all the gold and other things which are found and
     obtained, in whatever manner it may be, within this Admiralship, and
     the tenth of all the merchandise which goes and comes from there,
     after the expenses are deducted.  I have already said that in the
     Book of Privileges the reason for this and for the rest which is
     before the Tribunal of the Indies here in Seville, is clearly set
     forth.

     "We must strive to obtain a reply to my letter from their
     Highnesses, and to have them order that these people be paid.  I
     wrote in regard to this subject four days ago, and sent the letter
     by Martin de Gamboa, and you must have seen the letter of Juan Lopez
     with your own.

     "It is said here that it has been ordered that three or four Bishops
     of the Indies shall be sent or created, and that this matter is
     referred to the Lord Bishop of Palencia.  After having commended me
     to his Worship, tell him that I believe it will best serve their
     Highnesses for me to talk with him before this matter is settled.

     "Commend me to Diego Mendez, and show him this letter.  My illness
     permits me to write only at night, because in the daytime my hands
     are deprived of strength.  I believe that a son of Francisco Pinelo
     will carry this letter.  Entertain him well, because he does
     everything for me that he can, with much love and a cheerful
     goodwill.  The caravel which broke her mast in starting from Santo
     Domingo has arrived in the Algarves.  She brings the records of the
     case of the Porras brothers.  Such ugly things and such grievous
     cruelty as appear in this matter never were seen.  If their
     Highnesses do not punish it, I do not know who will dare to go out
     in their service with people.

     "To-day is Monday.  I will endeavour to have your uncle and brother
     start to-morrow.  Remember to write me very often, and tell Diego
     Mendez to write at length.  Each day messengers go from here yonder.
     May our Lord have you in His Holy keeping.

     "Done in Seville, December 1.

     "Your father who loves you as himself.

                                                    .S.
                                                  .S.A.S.
                                                    XMY
                                                 Xpo FERENS."


The gout from which the Admiral suffered made riding impossible to him,
and he had arranged to have himself carried to Court on a litter when he
was able to move.  There is a grim and dismal significance in the
particular litter that had been chosen: it was no other than the funeral
bier which belonged to the Cathedral of Seville and had been built for
Cardinal Mendoza.  A minute of the Cathedral Chapter records the granting
to Columbus of the use of this strange conveyance; but one is glad to
think that he ultimately made his journey in a less grim though more
humble method.  But what are we to think of the taste of a man who would
rather travel in a bier, so long as it had been associated with the
splendid obsequies of a cardinal, than in the ordinary litter of
every-day use?  It is but the old passion for state and splendour thus
dismally breaking out again.

He speaks of living on borrowed funds and of having devoted all his
resources to the payment of his crew; but that may be taken as an
exaggeration.  He may have borrowed, but the man who can borrow easily
from banks cannot be regarded as a poor man.  One is nevertheless
grateful for these references, since they commemorate the Admiral's
unfailing loyalty to those who shared his hardships, and his unwearied
efforts to see that they received what was due to them.  Pleasant also
are the evidences of warm family affection in those simple words of
brotherly love, and the affecting advice to Diego that he should love his
brother Ferdinand as Christopher loved Bartholomew.  It is a pleasant
oasis in this dreary, sordid wailing after thirds and tenths and eighths.
Good Diego Mendez, that honourable gentleman, was evidently also at Court
at this time, honestly striving, we may be sure, to say a good word for
the Admiral.

Some time after this letter was written, and before the writing of the
next, news reached Seville of the death of Queen Isabella.  For ten years
her kind heart had been wrung by many sorrows.  Her mother had died in
1496; the next year her only son and heir to the crown had followed; and
within yet another year had died her favourite daughter, the Queen of
Portugal.  Her other children were all scattered with the exception of
Juana, whose semi-imbecile condition caused her parents an anxiety
greater even than that caused by death.  As Isabella's life thus closed
sombrely in, she applied herself more closely and more narrowly to such
pious consolations as were available.  News from Flanders of the
scandalous scenes between Philip and Juana in the summer of 1504 brought
on an illness from which she really never recovered, a kind of feverish
distress of mind and body in which her only alleviation was the
transaction of such business as was possible for her in the direction of
humanity and enlightenment.  She still received men of intellect and
renown, especially travellers.  But she knew that her end was near, and
as early as October she had made her will, in which her wishes as to the
succession and government of Castile were clearly laid down.  There was
no mention of Columbus in this will, which afterwards greatly mortified
him; but it is possible that the poor Queen had by this time, even
against her wish, come to share the opinions of her advisers that the
rule of Columbus in the West Indies had not brought the most humane and
happy results possible to the people there.

During October and November her life thus beat itself away in a
succession of duties faithfully performed, tasks duly finished,
preparations for the great change duly made.  She died, as she would have
wished to die, surrounded by friends who loved and admired her, and
fortified by the last rites of the Church for her journey into the
unknown.  Date, November 26, 1504, in the fifty-fourth year of her age.

Columbus had evidently received the news from a public source, and felt
mortified that Diego should not have written him a special letter.


     Letter written by CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS to DON DIEGO, his Son,
     December 3, 1504.

     "VERY DEAR SON,--I wrote you at length day before yesterday and sent
     it by Francisco Pinelo, and with this letter I send you a very full
     memorandum.  I am very much astonished not to receive a letter from
     you or from any one else, and this astonishment is shared by all who
     know me.  Every one here has letters, and I, who have more reason to
     expect them, have none.  Great care should be taken about this
     matter.  The memorandum of which I have spoken above says enough,
     and on this account I do not speak more at length here.  Your
     brother and your uncle and Carbajal are going yonder.  You will
     learn from them what is not said here.  May our Lord have you in His
     Holy keeping.

     "Done in Seville, December 3.

     "Your father who loves you more than himself.

                                                    .S.
                                                  .S.A.S.
                                                    XMY
                                                 Xpo FERENS."


     Document of COLUMBUS addressed to his Son, DIEGO, and intended to
     accompany the preceding letter.

     "A memorandum for you, my very dear son, Don Diego, of what occurs
     to me at the present time which must be done:--The principal thing
     is, affectionately and with great devotion to commend the soul of
     the Queen, our Lady, to God.  Her life was always Catholic and Holy
     and ready for all the things of His holy service, and for this
     reason it must be believed that she is in His holy glory and beyond
     the desires of this rough and wearisome world.  Then the next thing
     is to be watchful and exert one's self in the service of the King,
     our Lord, and to strive to keep him from being troubled.  His
     Highness is the head of Christendom.  See the proverb which says
     that when the head aches, all the members ache.  So that all good
     Christians should entreat that he may have long life and health: and
     those of us who are obliged to serve him more than others must join
     in this supplication with great earnestness and diligence.  This
     reason prompts me now with my severe illness to write you what I am
     writing here, that his Highness may dispose matters for his service:
     and for the better fulfilment I am sending your brother there, who,
     although he is a child in days, is not a child in understanding; and
     I am sending your uncle and Carbajal, so that if this, my writing,
     is not sufficient, they, together with yourself, can furnish verbal
     evidence.  In my opinion there is nothing so necessary for the
     service of his Highness as the disposition and remedying of the
     affair of the Indies.

     "His Highness must now have there more than 40,000 or 50,000 gold
     pieces.  I learned when I was there that the Governor had no desire
     to send it to him.  It is believed among the other people as well
     that there will be 150,000 pesos more, and the mines are very rich
     and productive.  Most of the people there are common and ignorant,
     and care very little for the circumstances.  The Governor is very
     much hated by all of them, and it is to be feared that they may at
     some time rebel.  If this should occur, which God forbid, the remedy
     for the matter would then be difficult: and so it would be if
     injustice were used toward them, either here or in other places,
     with the great fame of the gold.  My opinion is that his Highness
     should investigate this affair quickly and by means of a person who
     is interested and who can go there with 150 or 200 people well
     equipped, and remain there until it is well settled and without
     suspicion, which cannot be done in less than three months: and that
     an endeavour be made to raise two or three forces there.  The gold
     there is exposed to great risk, as there are very few people to
     protect it.  I say that there is a proverb here which says that the
     presence of the owner makes the horse fat.  Here and wherever I may
     be, I shall serve their Highnesses with joy, until my soul leaves
     this body.

     "Above I said that his Highness is the head of the Christians, and
     that it is necessary for him to occupy himself in preserving them
     and their lands.  For this reason people say that he cannot thus
     provide a good government for all these Indies, and that they are
     being lost and do not yield a profit, neither are they being handled
     in a reasonable manner.  In my opinion it would serve him to intrust
     this matter to some one who is distressed over the bad treatment of
     his subjects.

     "I wrote a very long letter to his Highness as soon as I arrived
     here, fully stating the evils which require a prompt and efficient
     remedy at once.  I have received no reply, nor have I seen any
     provision made in the matter.  Some vessels are detained in San
     Lucar by the weather.  I have told these gentlemen of the Board of
     Trade that they must order them held until the King, our Lord, makes
     provision in the matter, either by some person with other people,
     or by writing.  This is very necessary and I know what I say.  It is
     necessary that the authorities should order all the ports searched
     diligently, to see that no one goes yonder to the Indies without
     licence.  I have already said that there is a great deal of gold
     collected in straw houses without any means of defence, and there
     are many disorderly people in the country, and that the Governor is
     hated, and that little punishment is inflicted and has been
     inflicted upon those who have committed crimes and have come out
     with their treasonable conduct approved.

     "If his Highness decides to make some provision, it must be done at
     once, so that these vessels may not be injured.

     "I have heard that three Bishops are to be elected and sent to
     Espanola.  If it pleases his Highness to hear me before concluding
     this matter, I will tell in what manner God our Lord may be well
     served and his Highness served and satisfied.

     "I have given lengthy consideration to the provision for Espanola:"


Yes, the Queen is in His Holy Glory, and beyond the desires of this rough
and wearisome world; but we are not; we are still in a world where fifty
thousand gold pieces can be of use to us, and where a word spoken in
season, even in such a season of darkness, may have its effect with the
King.  A strange time to talk to the King about gold; and perhaps Diego
was wiser and kinder than his father thought in not immediately taking
this strange document to King Ferdinand.


     Letter written by CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS to DON DIEGO, his Son,
     December 13, 1504

     "VERY DEAR SON,--It is now eight days since your uncle and your
     brother and Carbajal left here together, to kiss the royal hands of
     his Highness, and to give an account of the voyage, and also to aid
     you in the negotiation of whatever may prove to be necessary there.

     "Don Ferdinand took from here 150 ducats to be expended at his
     discretion.  He will have to spend some of it, but he will give you
     what he has remaining.  He also carries a letter of credit for these
     merchants.  You will see that it is very necessary to be careful in
     dealing with them, because I had trouble there with the Governor, as
     every one told me that I had there 11,000 or 12,000 castellanos, and
     I had only 4000.  He wished to charge me with things for which I am
     not indebted, and I, confiding in the promise of their Highnesses,
     who ordered everything restored to me, decided to leave these
     charges in the hope of calling him to account for them.  If any one
     has money there, they do not dare ask for it, on account of his
     haughtiness.  I very well know that after my departure he must have
     received more than 5000 castellanos.  If it were possible for you to
     obtain from his Highness an authoritative letter to the Governor,
     ordering him to send the money without delay and a full account of
     what belongs to me, by the person I might send there with my power
     of attorney, it would be well; because he will not give it in any
     other manner, neither to my friend Diaz or Velasquez, and they dare
     not even speak of it to him.  Carbajal will very well know how this
     must be done.  Let him see this letter.  The 150 ducats which Luis
     de Soria sent you when I came are paid according to his desire.

     "I wrote you at length and sent the letter by Don Ferdinand, also a
     memorandum.  Now that I have thought over the matter further, I say
     that, since at the time of my departure their Highnesses said over
     their signature and verbally, that they would give me all that
     belongs to me, according to my privileges--that the claim for the
     third or the tenth and eighth mentioned in the memorandum must be
     relinquished, and instead the chapter of their letter must be shown
     where they write what I have said, and all that belongs to me must
     be required, as you have it in writing in the Book of Privileges, in
     which is also set forth the reason for my receiving the third,
     eighth, and tenth; as there is always an opportunity to reduce the
     sum desired by a person, although his Highness says in his letter
     that he wishes to give me all that belongs to me.  Carbajal will
     understand me very well if he sees this letter, and every one else
     as well, as it is very clear.  I also wrote to his Highness and
     finally reminded him that he must provide at once for this affair of
     the Indies, that the people there may not be disturbed, and also
     reminding him of the promise stated above.  You ought to see the
     letter.

     "With this letter I send you another letter of credit for the said
     merchants.  I have already explained to you the reasons why expenses
     should be moderated.  Show your uncle due respect, and treat your
     brother as an elder brother should treat a younger.  You have no
     other brother, and praised be our Lord, he is such a one as you need
     very much.  He has proved and proves to be very intelligent.  Honour
     Carbajal and Jeronimo and Diego Mendez.  Commend me to them all.  I
     do not write them as there is nothing to write and this messenger is
     in haste.  It is frequently rumoured here that the Queen, whom God
     has, has left an order that I be restored to the possession of the
     Indies.  On arrival, the notary of the fleet will send you the
     records and the original of the case of the Porras brothers.  I have
     received no news from your uncle and brother since they left.  The
     water has been so high here that the river entered the city.

     "If Agostin Italian and Francisco de Grimaldo do not wish to give
     you the money you need, look for others there who are willing to
     give it to you.  On the arrival here of your signature I will at
     once pay them all that you have received: for at present there is
     not a person here by whom I can send you money.

     "Done to-day, Friday, December 13, 1504

     "Your father who loves you more than himself.

                                                    .S.
                                                  .S.A.S.
                                                    XMY
                                                 Xpo FERENS."


     Letter written by CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS to his Son, DON DIEGO,
     December 21, 1504.

     "VERY DEAR SON, The Lord Adelantado and your brother and Carbajal
     left here sixteen days ago to go to the Court.  They have not
     written me since.  Don Ferdinand carried 150 ducats.  He must spend
     what is necessary, and he carries a letter, that the merchants may
     furnish you with money.  I have sent you another letter since, with
     the endorsement of Francisco de Ribarol, by Zamora, the courier, and
     told you that if you had made provision for yourself by means of my
     letter, not to use that of Francisco de Ribarol.  I say the same now
     in regard to another letter which I send you with this one, for
     Francisco Doria, which letter I send you for greater security that
     you may not fail to be provided with money.  I have already told you
     how necessary it is to be careful in the expenditure of the money,
     until their Highnesses give us law and justice.  I also told you
     that I had spent 1200 castellanos in bringing these people to
     Castile, of which his Highness owes me the greater part, and I wrote
     him in regard to it asking him to order the account settled.

     "If possible I should like to receive letters here each day.  I
     complain of Diego Mendez and of Jeronimo, as they do not write me:
     and then of the others who do not write when they arrive there.  We
     must strive to learn whether the Queen, whom God has in His keeping,
     said anything about me in her will, and we must hurry the Lord
     Bishop of Palencia, who caused the possession of the Indies by their
     Highnesses and my remaining in Castile, for I was already on my way
     to leave it.  And the Lord Chamberlain of his Highness must also be
     hurried.  If by chance the affair comes to discussion, you must
     strive to have them see the writing which is in the Book of
     Privileges, which shows the reason why the third, eighth, and tenth
     are owing me, as I told you in another letter.

     "I have written to the Holy Father in regard to my voyage, as he
     complained of me because I did not write him.  I send you a copy of
     the letter.  I would like to have the King, our Lord, or the Lord
     Bishop of Palencia see it before I send the letter, in order to
     avoid false representations.

     "Camacho has told a thousand falsehoods about me.  To my regret I
     ordered him arrested.  He is in the church.  He says that after the
     Holidays are past, he will go there if he is able.  If I owe him, he
     must show by what reason; for I make oath that I do not know it, nor
     is it true.

     "If without importunity a licence can be procured for me to go on
     mule-back, I will try to leave for the Court after January, and I
     will even go without this licence.  But haste must be made that the
     loss of the Indies, which is now imminent, may not take place.  May
     our Lord have you in His keeping.

     "Done to-day, December 21.

     "Your father who loves you more than himself.

                                                    .S.
                                                  .S.A.S.
                                                    XMY
                                                 Xpo FERENS."


     "This tenth which they give me is not the tenth which was promised
     me.  The Privileges tell what it is, and there is also due me the
     tenth of the profit derived from merchandise and from all other
     things, of which I have received nothing.  Carbajal understands me
     well.  Also remind Carbajal to obtain a letter from his Highness for
     the Governor, directing him to send his accounts and the money I
     have there, at once.  And it would be well that a Repostero of his
     Highness should go there to receive this money, as there must be a
     large amount due me.  I will strive to have these gentlemen of the
     Board of Trade send also to say to the Governor that he must send my
     share together with the gold belonging to their Highnesses.  But the
     remedy for the other matter must not be neglected there on this
     account.  I say that 7000 or 8000 pesos must have passed to my
     credit there, which sum has been received since I left, besides the
     other money which was not given to me.

     "To my very dear son Don Diego at the Court."


All this struggling for the due payment of eighths and tenths makes
wearisome reading, and we need not follow the Admiral into his
distinctions between one kind of tenth and another.  There is something
to be said on his side, it must be remembered; the man had not received
what was due to him; and although he was not in actual poverty, his only
property in this world consisted of these very thirds and eighths and
tenths.  But if we are inclined to think poorly of the Admiral for his
dismal pertinacity, what are we to think of the people who took advantage
of their high position to ignore consistently the just claims made upon
them?

There is no end to the Admiral's letter-writing at this time.
Fortunately for us his letter to the Pope has been lost, or else we
should have to insert it here; and we have had quite enough of his
theological stupors.  As for the Queen's will, there was no mention of
the Admiral in it; and her only reference to the Indies showed that she
had begun to realise some of the disasters following his rule there, for
the provisions that are concerned with the New World refer exclusively to
the treatment of the natives, to whose succour, long after they were past
succour, the hand of Isabella was stretched out from the grave.  The
licence to travel on mule-back which the Admiral asked for was made
necessary by a law which had been passed forbidding the use of mules for
this purpose throughout Spain.  There had been a scarcity of horses for
mounting the royal cavalry, and it was thought that the breeding of
horses had been neglected on account of the greater cheapness and utility
of mules.  It was to encourage the use and breeding of horses that an
interdict was laid on the use of mules, and only the very highest persons
in the land were allowed to employ them.


Letter written by CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS to his Son, DON DIEGO,
December 29, 1504.

     "VERY DEAR SON,--I wrote you at length and sent it by Don Ferdinand,
     who left to go yonder twenty-three days ago to-day, with the Lord
     Adelantado and Carbajal, from whom I have since heard nothing.
     Sixteen days ago to-day I wrote you and sent it by Zamora, the
     courier, and I sent you a letter of credit for these merchants
     endorsed by Francisco de Ribarol, telling them to give you the money
     you might ask for.  And then, about eight days ago, I sent you by
     another courier a letter endorsed by Francisco Soria, and these
     letters are directed to Pantaleon and Agostin Italian, that they may
     give it to you.  And with these letters goes a copy of a letter
     which I wrote to the Holy Father in regard to the affairs of the
     Indies, that he might not complain of me any more.  I sent this copy
     for his Highness to see, or the Lord Bishop of Palencia, so as to
     avoid false representations.  The payment of the people who went
     with me has been delayed.  I have provided for them here what I have
     been able.  They are poor and obliged to go in order to earn a
     living.  They decided to go yonder.  They have been told here that
     they will be dealt with as favourably as possible, and this is
     right, although among them there are some who merit punishment more
     than favours.  This is said of the rebels.  I gave these people a
     letter for the Lord Bishop of Palencia.  Read it, and if it is
     necessary for them to go and petition his Highness, urge your uncle
     and brother and Carbajal to read it also, so that you can all help
     them as much as possible.  It is right and a work of mercy, for no
     one ever earned money with so many dangers and hardships and no one
     has ever rendered such great service as these people.  It is said
     that Camacho and Master Bernal wish to go there--two creatures for
     whom God works few miracles: but if they go, it will be to do harm
     rather than good.  They can do little because the truth always
     prevails, as it did in Espanola, from which wicked people by means
     of falsehoods have prevented any profit being received up to the
     present time.  It is said that this Master Bernal was the beginning
     of the treason.  He was taken and accused of many misdemeanours,
     for each one of which he deserved to be quartered.  At the request
     of your uncle and of others he was pardoned, on condition that if he
     ever said the least word against me and my state the pardon should
     be revoked and he should be under condemnation.  I send you a copy
     of the case in this letter.  I send you a legal document about
     Camacho.  For more than eight days he has not left the church on
     account of his rash statements and falsehoods.  He has a will made
     by Terreros, and other relatives of the latter have another will of
     more recent date, which renders the first will null, as far as the
     inheritance is concerned: and I am entreated to enforce the latter
     will, so that Camacho will be obliged to restore what he has
     received.  I shall order a legal document drawn up and served upon
     him, because I believe it is a work of mercy to punish him, as he is
     so unbridled in his speech that some one must punish him without the
     rod: and it will not be so much against the conscience of the
     chastiser, and will injure him more.  Diego Mendez knows Master
     Bernal and his works very well.  The Governor wished to imprison him
     at Espanola and left him to my consideration.  It is said that he
     killed two men there with medicines in revenge for something of less
     account than three beans.  I would be glad of the licence to travel
     on muleback and of a good mule, if they can be obtained without
     difficulty.  Consult all about our affairs, and tell them that I do
     not write them in particular on account of the great pain I feel
     when writing.  I do not say that they must do the same, but that
     each one must write me and very often, for I feel great sorrow that
     all the world should have letters from there each day, and I have
     nothing, when I have so many people there.  Commend me to the Lord
     Adelantado in his favour, and give my regards to your brother and to
     all the others.

     "Done at Seville, December 29.

     "Your father who loves you more than himself.

                                                    .S.
                                                  .S.A.S.
                                                    XMY
                                                 Xpo FERENS."


"I say further that if our affairs are to be settled according to
conscience, that the chapter of the letter which their Highnesses wrote
me when I departed, in which they say they will order you placed in
possession, must be shown; and the writing must also be shown which is in
the Book of Privileges, which shows how in reason and in justice the
third and eighth and the tenth are mine.  There will always be
opportunity to make reductions from this amount."

Columbus's requests were not all for himself; nothing could be more
sincere or generous than the spirit in which he always strove to secure
the just payment of his mariners.

Otherwise he is still concerned with the favour shown to those who were
treasonable to him.  Camacho was still hiding in a church, probably from
the wrath of Bartholomew Columbus; but Christopher has more subtle ways
of punishment.  A legal document, he considers, will be better than a
rod; "it will not be so much against the conscience of the chastiser, and
will injure him (the chastised) more."


     Letter written by CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS to DON DIEGO, his Son,
     January 18, 1505.

     "VERY DEAR SON,--I wrote you at length by the courier who will
     arrive there to-day, and sent you a letter for the Lord Chamberlain.
     I intended to inclose in it a copy of that chapter of the letter
     from their Highnesses in which they say they will order you placed
     in possession; but I forgot to do it here.  Zamora, the courier,
     came.  I read your letter and also those of your uncle and brother
     and Carbajal, and felt great pleasure in learning that they had
     arrived well, as I had been very anxious about them.  Diego Mendez
     will leave here in three or four days with the order of payment
     prepared.  He will take a long statement of everything and I will
     write to Juan Velasquez.  I desire his friendship and service.  I
     believe that he is a very honourable gentleman.  If the Lord Bishop
     of Palencia has come, or comes, tell him how much pleased I have
     been with his prosperity, and that if I go there I must stop with
     his Worship even if he does not wish it, and that we must return to
     our first fraternal love.  And that he could not refuse it because
     my service will force him to have it thus.  I said that the letter
     for the Holy Father was sent that his Worship might see it if he was
     there, and also the Lord Archbishop of Seville, as the King might
     not have opportunity to read it.  I have already told you that the
     petition to their Highnesses must be for the fulfilment of what they
     wrote me about the possession and of the rest which was promised me.
     I said that this chapter of the letter must be shown them and said
     that it must not be delayed, and that this is advisable for an
     infinite number of reasons.  His Highness may believe that, however
     much he gives me, the increase of his exalted dominions and revenue
     will be in the proportion of 100 to 1, and that there is no
     comparison between what has been done and what is to be done.  The
     sending of a Bishop to Espanola must be delayed until I speak to his
     Highness.  It must not be as in the other cases when it was thought
     to mend matters and they were spoiled.  There have been some cold
     days here and they have caused me great fatigue and fatigue me now.
     Commend me to the favour of the Lord Adelantado.  May our Lord guard
     and bless you and your brother.  Give my regards to Carbajal and
     Jeronimo.  Diego Mendez will carry a full pouch there.  I believe
     that the affair of which you wrote can be very easily managed.  The
     vessels from the Indies have not arrived from Lisbon.  They brought
     a great deal of gold, and none for me.  So great a mockery was never
     seen, for I left there 60,000 pesos smelted.  His Highness should
     not allow so great an affair to be ruined, as is now taking place.
     He now sends to the Governor a new provision.  I do not know what it
     is about.  I expect letters each day.  Be very careful about
     expenditures, for it is necessary.

     "Done January 18.
     "Your father who loves you more than himself.


There is playful reference here to Fonseca, with whom Columbus was
evidently now reconciled; and he was to be buttonholed and made to read
the Admiral's letter to the Pope.  Diego Mendez is about to start, and is
to make a "long statement"; and in the meantime the Admiral will write as
many long letters as he has time for.  Was there no friend at hand, I
wonder, with wit enough to tell the Admiral that every word he wrote
about his grievances was sealing his doom, so far as the King was
concerned?  No human being could have endured with patience this
continuous heavy firing at long range to which the Admiral subjected his
friends at Court; every post that arrived was loaded with a shrapnel of
grievances, the dull echo of which must have made the ears of those who
heard it echo with weariness.  Things were evidently humming in Espanola;
large cargoes of negroes had been sent out to take the place of the dead
natives, and under the harsh driving of Ovando the mines were producing
heavily.  The vessels that arrived from the Indies brought a great deal
of gold; "but none for me."


     Letter written by CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS to his Son, DON DIEGO,
     February 5, 1505.

     "VERY DEAR SON,--Diego Mendez left here Monday, the 3rd of this
     month.  After his departure I talked with Amerigo Vespucci, the
     bearer of this letter, who is going yonder, where he is called in
     regard to matters of navigation.  He was always desirous of pleasing
     me.  He is a very honourable man.  Fortune has been adverse to him
     as it has been to many others.  His labours have not profited him as
     much as reason demands.  He goes for me, and is very desirous of
     doing something to benefit me if it is in his power.  I do not know
     of anything in which I can instruct him to my benefit, because I do
     not know what is wanted of him there.  He is going with the
     determination to do everything for me in his power.  See what he can
     do to profit me there, and strive to have him do it; for he will do
     everything, and will speak and will place it in operation: and it
     must all be done secretly so that there may be no suspicion.

     "I have told him all that could be told regarding this matter, and
     have informed him of the payment which has been made to me and is
     being made.  This letter is for the Lord Adelantado also, that he
     may see how Amerigo Vespucci can be useful, and advise him about it.
     His Highness may believe that his ships went to the best and richest
     of the Indies, and if anything remains to be learned more than has
     been told, I will give the information yonder verbally, because it
     is impossible to give it in writing.  May our Lord have you in his
     Holy keeping.

     "Done in Seville, February 5.

     "Your father who loves you more than himself.


This letter has a significance which raises it out of the ruck of this
complaining correspondence.  Amerigo Vespucci had just returned from his
long voyage in the West, when he had navigated along an immense stretch
of the coast of America, both north and south, and had laid the
foundations of a fame which was, for a time at least, to eclipse that of
Columbus.  Probably neither of the two men realised it at this interview,
or Columbus would hardly have felt so cordially towards the man who was
destined to rob him of so much glory.  As a matter of fact the practical
Spaniards were now judging entirely by results; and a year or two later,
when the fame of Columbus had sunk to insignificance, he was merely
referred to as the discoverer of certain islands, while Vespucci, who
after all had only followed in his lead, was hailed as the discoverer of
a great continent.  Vespucci has been unjustly blamed for this state of
affairs, although he could no more control the public estimate of his
services than Columbus could.  He was a more practical man than Columbus,
and he made a much better impression on really wise and intelligent men;
and his discoveries were immediately associated with trade and colonial
development, while Columbus had little to show for his discoveries during
his lifetime but a handful of gold dust and a few cargoes of slaves.  At
any rate it was a graceful act on the part of Vespucci, whose star was in
the ascendant, to go and seek out the Admiral, whose day was fast verging
to night; it was one of those disinterested actions that live and have a
value of their own, and that shine out happily amid the surrounding murk
and confusion.


     Letter signed by CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS to DON DIEGO, his Son,
     February 25, 1505.

     "VERY DEAR SON,--The Licientiate de Zea is a person whom I desire to
     honour.  He has in his charge two men who are under prosecution at
     the hands of justice, as shown by the information which is inclosed
     in this letter.  See that Diego Mendez places the said petition with
     the others, that they may be given to his Highness during Holy Week
     for pardon.  If the pardon is granted, it is well, and if not, look
     for some other manner of obtaining it.  May our Lord have you in His
     Holy keeping.  Done in Seville, February 25, 1505.  I wrote you and
     sent it by Amerigo Vespucci.  See that he sends you the letter
     unless you have already received it.

     "Your father.
                    Xpo FERENS.//"


This is the last letter of Columbus known to us otherwise an entirely
unimportant document, dealing with the most transient affairs.  With it
we gladly bring to an end this exposure of a greedy and querulous period,
which speaks so eloquently for itself that the less we say and comment on
it the better.

In the month of May the Admiral was well enough at last to undertake the
journey to Segovia.  He travelled on a mule, and was accompanied by his
brother Bartholomew and his son Ferdinand.  When he reached the Court he
found the King civil and outwardly attentive to his recitals, but
apparently content with a show of civility and outward attention.
Columbus was becoming really a nuisance; that is the melancholy truth.
The King had his own affairs to attend to; he was already meditating a
second marriage, and thinking of the young bride he was to bring home to
the vacant place of Isabella; and the very iteration of Columbus's
complaints and demands had made them lose all significance for the King.
He waved them aside with polite and empty promises, as people do the
demands of importunate children; and finally, to appease the Admiral and
to get rid of the intolerable nuisance of his applications, he referred
the whole question, first to Archbishop DEA, and then to the body of
councillors which had been appointed to interpret Queen Isabella's will.
The whole question at issue was whether or not the original agreement
with Columbus, which had been made before his discoveries, should be
carried out.  The King, who had foolishly subscribed to it simply as a
matter of form, never believing that anything much could come of it, was
determined that it should not be carried out, as it would give Columbus a
wealth and power to which no mere subject of a crown was entitled.  The
Admiral held fast to his privileges; the only thing that he would consent
to submit to arbitration was the question of his revenues; but his titles
and territorial authorities he absolutely stuck to.  Of course the
council did exactly what the King had done.  They talked about the thing
a great deal, but they did nothing.  Columbus was an invalid and broken
man, who might die any day, and it was obviously to their interest to
gain time by discussion and delay--a cruel game for our Christopher, who
knew his days on earth to be numbered, and who struggled in that web of
time in which mortals try to hurry the events of the present and delay
the events of the future.  Meanwhile Philip of Austria and his wife
Juana, Isabella's daughter, had arrived from Flanders to assume the crown
of Castile, which Isabella had bequeathed to them.  Columbus saw a chance
for himself in this coming change, and he sent Bartholomew as an envoy to
greet the new Sovereigns, and to enlist their services on the Admiral's
behalf.  Bartholomew was very well received, but he was too late to be of
use to the Admiral, whom he never saw again; and this is our farewell to
Bartholomew, who passes out of our narrative here.  He went to Rome after
Christopher's death on a mission to the Pope concerning some fresh
voyages of discovery; and in 1508 he made, so far as we know, his one
excursion into romance, when he assisted at the production of an
illegitimate little girl--his only descendant.  He returned to Espanola
under the governorship of his nephew Diego, and died there in 1514
--stern, valiant, brotherly soul, whose devotion to Christopher must be
for ever remembered and honoured with the name of the Admiral.


From Segovia Columbus followed the Court to Salamanca and thence to
Valladolid, where his increasing illness kept him a prisoner after the
Court had left to greet Philip and Juana.  He had been in attendance upon
it for nearly a year, and without any results: and now, as his infirmity
increased, he turned to the settling of his own affairs, and drawing up
of wills and codicils--all very elaborate and precise.  In these
occupations his worldly affairs were duly rounded off; and on May 19,
1506, having finally ratified a will which he had made in Segovia a year
before, in which the descent of his honours was entailed upon Diego and
his heirs, or failing him Ferdinand and his heirs, or failing him
Bartholomew and his heirs, he turned to the settlement of his soul.

His illness had increased gradually but surely, and he must have known
that he was dying.  He was not without friends, among them the faithful
Diego Mendez, his son Ferdinand, and a few others.  His lodging was in a
small house in an unimportant street of Valladolid, now called the "Calle
de Colon"; the house, .No. 7, still standing, and to be seen by curious
eyes.  As the end approached, the Admiral, who was being attended by
Franciscan monks, had himself clothed in a Franciscan habit; and so, on
the 20th May 1506, he lay upon his bed, breathing out his life.

               .  .  .  And as strange thoughts
               Grow with a certain humming in my ears,
               About the life before I lived this life,
               And this life too, Popes, Cardinals, and priests,
               Your tall pale mother with her talking eyes
               And new-found agate urns fresh as day .  .  .

.  .  .  we do not know what his thoughts were, as the shadows grew
deeper about him, as the sounds of the world, the noises from the sunny
street, grew fainter, and the images and sounds of memory clearer and
louder.  Perhaps as he lay there with closed eyes he remembered things
long forgotten, as dying people do; sounds and smells of the Vico Dritto
di Ponticelli, and the feel of the hot paving-stones down which his
childish feet used to run to the sea; noises of the sea also, the
drowning swish of waters and sudden roar of breakers sounding to
anxiously strained ears in the still night; bright sunlit pictures of
faraway tropical shores, with handsome olive figures glistening in the
sun; the sight of strange faces, the sound of strange speech, the smell
of a strange land; the glitter of gold; the sudden death-shriek breaking
the stillness of some sylvan glade; the sight of blood on the grass
.  .  .  The Admiral's face undergoes a change; there is a stir in the
room; some one signs to the priest Gaspar, who brings forth his sacred
wafer and holy oils and administers the last sacraments.  The wrinkled
eyelids flutter open, the sea-worn voice feebly frames the responses;
the dying eyes are fixed on the crucifix; and--"In manus tuas Domine
commendo spiritum meum."  The Admiral is dead.

He was in his fifty-sixth year, already an old man in body and mind; and
his death went entirely unmarked except by his immediate circle of
friends.  Even Peter Martyr, who was in Valladolid just before and just
after it, and who was writing a series of letters to various
correspondents giving all the news of his day, never thought it worth
while to mention that Christopher Columbus was dead.  His life flickered
out in the completest obscurity.  It is not even known where he was first
buried; but probably it was in the Franciscan convent at Valladolid.
This, however, was only a temporary resting-place; and a few years later
his body was formally interred in the choir of the monastery of Las
Cuevas at Seville, there to lie for thirty years surrounded by continual
chauntings.  After that it was translated to the cathedral in San
Domingo; rested there for 250 years, and then, on the cession of that
part of the island to France, the body was removed to Cuba.  But the
Admiral was by this time nothing but a box of bones and dust, as also
were brother Bartholomew and son Diego, and Diego's son, all collected
together in that place.  There were various examinations of the
bone-boxes; one, supposed to be the Admiral's, was taken to Cuba and
solemnly buried there; and lately, after the conquest of the island in
the Spanish-American War, this box of bones was elaborately conveyed to
Seville, where it now rests.

But in the meanwhile the Chapter of the cathedral in San Domingo had made
new discoveries and examinations; had found another box of bones, which
bore to them authentic signs that the dust it contained was the Admiral's
and not his grandson's; and in spite of the Academy of History at Madrid,
it is indeed far from unlikely that the Admiral's dust does not lie in
Spain or Cuba, but in San Domingo still.  Whole books have been written
about these boxes of bones; learned societies have argued about them,
experts have examined the bones and the boxes with microscopes; and
meantime the dust of Columbus, if we take the view that an error was
committed in the transference to Cuba, is not even collected all in one
box.  A sacrilegious official acquired some of it when the boxes were
opened, and distributed it among various curiosity-hunters, who have
preserved it in caskets of crystal and silver.  Thus a bit of him is worn
by an American lady in a crystal locket; a pinch of him lies
in a glass vial in a New York mansion; other pinches in the Lennox
Library, New York, in the Vatican, and in the University of Pavia.  In
such places, if the Admiral should fail to appear at the first note of
their trumpets, must the Angels of the Resurrection make search.




CHAPTER X

THE MAN COLUMBUS

It is not in any leaden box or crystal vase that we must search for the
true remains of Christopher Columbus.  Through these pages we have
traced, so far as has been possible, the course of his life, and followed
him in what he did; all of which is but preparation for our search for
the true man, and just estimate of what he was.  We have seen, dimly,
what his youth was; that he came of poor people who were of no importance
to the world at large; that he earned his living as a working man; that
he became possessed of an Idea; that he fought manfully and diligently
until he had realised it; and that then he found himself in a position
beyond his powers to deal with, not being a strong enough swimmer to hold
his own in the rapid tide of events which he himself had set flowing; and
we have seen him sinking at last in that tide, weighed down by the very
things for which he had bargained and stipulated.  If these pages had
been devoted to a critical examination of the historical documents on
which his life-story is based we should also have found that he
continually told lies about himself, and misrepresented facts when the
truth proved inconvenient to him; that he was vain and boastful to a
degree that can only excite our compassion.  He was naturally and
sincerely pious, and drew from his religion much strength and spiritual
nourishment; but he was also capable of hypocrisy, and of using the
self-same religion as a cloak for his greed and cruelty.  What is the
final image that remains in our minds of such a man?  To answer this
question we must examine his life in three dimensions.  There was its
great outline of rise, zenith, and decline; there was its outward
history in minute detail, and its conduct in varying circumstances; and
there was the inner life of the man's soul, which was perhaps simpler
than some of us think.  And first, as to his life as a single thing.  It
rose in poverty, it reached a brief and dazzling zenith of glory, it set
in clouds and darkness; the fame of it suffered a long night of eclipse,
from which it was rescued and raised again to a height of glory which
unfortunately was in sufficiently founded on fact; and as a reaction
from this, it has been in danger of becoming entirely discredited, and
the man himself denounced as a fraud.  The reason for these surprising
changes is that in those fifty-five years granted to Columbus for the
making of his life he did not consistently listen to that inner voice
which alone can hold a man on any constructive path.  He listened to it
at intervals, and he drew his inspiration from it; but he shut his ears
when it had served him, when it had brought him what he wanted.  In his
moments of success he guided himself by outward things; and thus he was
at one moment a seer and ready to be a martyr, and at the next moment he
was an opportunist, watching to see which way the wind would blow, and
ready to trim his sails in the necessary direction.  Such conduct of a
man's life does not make for single light or for true greatness; rather
for dim, confused lights, and lofty heights obscured in cloud.

If we examine his life in detail we find this alternating principle of
conduct revealed throughout it.  He was by nature clever, kind-hearted,
rather large-souled, affectionate, and not very honest; all the acts
prompted by his nature bear the stamp of these qualities.  To them his
early years had probably added little except piety, sharp practice, and
that uncomfortable sense, often bred amid narrow and poor surroundings,
that one must keep a sharp look-out for oneself if one is to get a share
of the world's good things.  Something in his blood, moreover, craved for
dignity and the splendour of high-sounding titles; craved for power also,
and the fulfilment of an arrogant pride.  All these things were in his
Ligurian blood, and he breathed them in with the very air of Genoa.  His
mind was of the receptive rather than of the constructive kind, and it
was probably through those long years spent between sea voyages and brief
sojourns with his family in Genoa or Savona that he conceived that vague
Idea which, as I have tried to show, formed the impulse of his life
during its brief initiative period.  Having once received this Idea of
discovery and like all other great ideas, it was in the air at the time
and was bound to take shape in some human brain--he had all his native
and personal qualities to bring to its support.  The patience to await
its course he had learned from his humble and subordinate life.  The
ambition to work for great rewards was in his blood and race; and to
belief in himself, his curious vein of mystical piety was able to add the
support of a ready belief in divine selection.  This very time of waiting
and endurance of disappointments also helped to cultivate in his
character two separate qualities--an endurance or ability to withstand
infinite hardship and disappointment; and also a greedy pride that
promised itself great rewards for whatever should be endured.

In all active matters Columbus was what we call a lucky man.  It was luck
that brought him to Guanahani; and throughout his life this element of
good luck continually helped him.  He was lucky, that is to say, in his
relation with inanimate things; but in his relations with men he was
almost as consistently unlucky.  First of all he was probably a bad judge
of men.  His humble origin and his lack of education naturally made him
distrustful.  He trusted people whom he should have regarded with
suspicion, and he was suspicious of those whom he ought to have known he
could trust.  If people pleased him, he elevated them with absurd
rapidity to stations far beyond their power to fill, and then wondered
that they sometimes turned upon him; if they committed crimes against
him, he either sought to regain their favour by forgiving them, or else
dogged them with a nagging, sulky resentment, and expected every one else
to punish them also.  He could manage men if he were in the midst of
them; there was something winning as well as commanding about his actual
presence, and those who were devoted to him would have served him to the
death.  But when he was not on the spot all his machineries and affairs
went to pieces; he had no true organising ability; no sooner did he take
his hand off any affair for which he was responsible than it immediately
came to confusion.  All these defects are to be attributed to his lack of
education and knowledge of the world.  Mental discipline is absolutely
necessary for a man who would discipline others; and knowledge of the
world is essential for one who would successfully deal with men, and
distinguish those whom he can from those whom he cannot trust.  Defects
of this nature, which sometimes seem like flaws in the man's character,
may be set down to this one disability--that he was not educated and was
not by habit a man of the world.

All his sins of misgovernment, then, may be condoned on the ground that
governing is a science, and that Columbus had never learned it.  What we
do find, however, is that the inner light that had led him across the
seas never burned clearly for him again, and was never his guide in the
later part of his life.  Its radiance was quenched by the gleam of gold;
for there is no doubt that Columbus was a victim of that baleful
influence which has caused so much misery in this world.  He was greedy
of gold for himself undoubtedly; but he was still more greedy of it for
Spain.  It was his ambition to be the means of filling the coffers of the
Spanish Sovereigns and so acquiring immense dignity and glory for
himself.  He believed that gold was in itself a very precious and
estimable thing; he knew that masses and candles could be bought for it,
and very real spiritual privileges; and as he made blunder after blunder,
and saw evil after evil heaping itself on his record in the New World, he
became the more eager and frantic to acquire such a treasure of gold that
it would wipe out the other evils of his administration.  And once
involved in that circle, there was no help for him.

The man himself was a simple man; capable, when the whole of his various
qualities were directed upon one single thing, of that greatness which is
the crown of simplicity.  Ambition was the keynote of his life; not an
unworthy keynote, by any means, if only the ambition be sound; but one
serious defect of Columbus's ambition was that it was retrospective
rather than perspective.  He may have had, before he sailed from Palos,
an ambition to be the discoverer of a New World; but I do not think he
had.  He believed there were islands or land to be discovered in the West
if only he pushed on far enough; and he was ambitious to find them and
vindicate his belief.  Afterwards, when he had read a little more, and
when he conceived the plan of pretending that he had all along meant to
discover the Indies and a new road to the East, he acted in accordance
with that pretence; he tried to make his acts appear retrospectively as
though they had been prompted by a design quite different from that by
which they had really been prompted.  When he found that his discovery
was regarded as a great scientific feat, he made haste to pretend that it
had all along been meant as such, and was in fact the outcome of an
elaborate scientific theory.  In all this there is nothing for praise or
admiration.  It indicates the presence of moral disease; but fortunately
it is functional rather than organic disease.  He was right and sound at
heart; but he spread his sails too readily to the great winds of popular
favour, and the result was instability to himself, and often danger of
shipwreck to his soul.

The ultimate test of a man's character is how he behaves in certain
circumstances when there is no great audience to watch him, and when
there is no sovereign close at hand with bounties and rewards to offer.
In a word, what matters most is a man's behaviour, not as an admiral, or
a discoverer, or a viceroy, or a courtier, but as a man.  In this respect
Columbus's character rings true.  If he was little on little occasions,
he was also great on great occasions.  The inner history of his fourth
voyage, if we could but know it and could take all the circumstances into
account, would probably reveal a degree of heroic endurance that has
never been surpassed in the history of mankind.  Put him as a man face to
face with a difficulty, with nothing but his wits to devise with and his
two hands to act with, and he is never found wanting.  And that is the
kind of man of whom discoverers are made.  The mere mathematician may
work out the facts with the greatest accuracy and prove the existence of
land at a certain point; but there is great danger that he may be knocked
down by a club on his first landing on the beach, and never bring home
any news of his discovery.  The great courtier may do well for himself
and keep smooth and politic relations with kings; the great administrator
may found a wonderful colony; but it is the man with the wits and the
hands, and some bigness of heart to tide him over daunting passages, that
wins through the first elementary risks of any great discovery.  Properly
considered, Columbus's fame should rest simply on the answer to the
single question, "Did he discover new lands as he said he would?"  That
was the greatest thing he could do, and the fact that he failed to do a
great many other things afterwards, failed the more conspicuously because
his attempts were so conspicuous, should have no effect on our estimate
of his achievement.  The fame of it could no more be destroyed by himself
than it can be destroyed by us.

True understanding of a man and estimate of his character can only be
arrived at by methods at once more comprehensive and more subtle than
those commonly employed among men.  Everything that he sees, does, and
suffers has its influence on the moulding of his character; and he must
be considered in relation to his physical environment, no less than to
his race and ancestry.  Christopher Columbus spent a great part of his
active life on the sea; it was sea-life which inspired him with his great
Idea, it was by the conquest of the sea that he realised it; it was on
the sea that all his real triumphs over circumstance and his own weaker
self were won.  The influences at work upon a man whose life is spent on
the sea are as different from those at work upon one who lives on the
fields as the environment of a gannet is different from the environment
of a skylark: and yet how often do we really attempt to make due
allowance for this great factor and try to estimate the extent of its
moulding influence?

To live within sound or sight of the sea is to be conscious of a voice or
countenance that holds you in unyielding bonds.  The voice, being
continuous, creeps into the very pulses and becomes part of the pervading
sound or silence of a man's environment; and the face, although it never
regards him, holds him with its changes and occupies his mind with its
everlasting riddle.  Its profound inattention to man is part of its power
over his imagination; for although it is so absorbed and busy, and has
regard for sun and stars and a melancholy frowning concentration upon the
foot of cliffs, it is never face to face with man: he can never come
within the focus of its great glancing vision.  It is somewhere beyond
time and space that the mighty perspective of those focal rays comes to
its point; and they are so wide and eternal in their sweep that we should
find their end, could we but trace them, in a condition far different
from that in which our finite views and ethics have place.  In the man
who lives much on the sea we always find, if he be articulate, something
of the dreamer and the mystic; that very condition of mind, indeed, which
we have traced in Columbus, which sometimes led him to such heights, and
sometimes brought him to such variance with the human code.

A face that will not look upon you can never give up its secret to you;
and the face of the sea is like the face of a picture or a statue round
which you may circle, looking at it from this point and from that, but
whose regard is fixed on something beyond and invisible to you; or it is
like the face of a person well known to you in life, a face which you
often see in various surroundings, from different angles, now
unconscious, now in animated and smiling intercourse with some one else,
but which never turns upon you the light of friendly knowledge and
recognition; in a word, it is unconscious of you, like all elemental
things.  In the legend of the Creation it is written that when God saw
the gathering together of the waters which he called the Seas, he saw
that it was good; and he perhaps had the right to say so.  But the man
who uses the sea and whose life's pathway is laid on its unstable surface
can hardly sum up his impressions of it so simply as to say that it is
good.  It is indeed to him neither good nor bad; it is utterly beyond and
outside all he knows or invents of good and bad, and can never have any
concern with his good or his bad.  It remains the pathway and territory
of powers and mysteries, thoughts and energies on a gigantic and
elemental scale; and that is why the mind of man can never grapple with
the unconsciousness of the sea or his eye meet its eye.  Yet it is the
mariner's chief associate, whether as adversary or as ally; his attitude
to things outside himself is beyond all doubt influenced by his attitude
towards it; and a true comprehension of the man Columbus must include a
recognition of this constant influence on him, and of whatever effect
lifelong association with so profound and mysterious an element may have
had on his conduct in the world of men.  Better than many documents as an
aid to our understanding of him would be intimate association with the
sea, and prolonged contemplation of that face with which he was so
familiar.  We can never know the heart of it, but we can at least look
upon the face, turned from us though it is, upon which he looked.  Cloud
shadows following a shimmer of sunlit ripples; lines and runes traced on
the surface of a blank calm; salt laughter of purple furrows with the
foam whipping off them; tides and eddies, whirls, overfalls, ripples,
breakers, seas mountains high-they are but movements and changing
expressions on an eternal countenance that once held his gaze and wonder,
as it will always hold the gaze and wonder of those who follow the sea.

So much of the man Christopher Columbus, who once was and no longer is;
perished, to the last bone and fibre of him, off the face of the earth,
and living now only by virtue of such truth as there was in him; who once
manfully, according to the light that he had, bore Christ on his
shoulders across stormy seas, and found him often, in that dim light, a
heavy and troublesome burden; who dropped light and burden together on
the shores of his discovery, and set going in that place of peace such a
conflagration as mankind is not likely to see again for many a
generation, if indeed ever again, in this much-tortured world, such
ancient peace find place.





End of Project Gutenberg's Christopher Columbus, Volume 8, by Filson Young

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS, VOLUME 8 ***

***** This file should be named 4115.txt or 4115.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/4/1/1/4115/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
