Project Gutenberg's Diary of Samuel Pepys, January 1659/1660, by Samuel Pepys

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Diary of Samuel Pepys, January 1659/1660

Author: Samuel Pepys

Release Date: November 29, 2004 [EBook #4118]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***




Produced by David Widger





                 THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A.   F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A.  LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS
                            1660 N.S. COMPLETE

                                JANUARY
                                1659-60

     [The year did not legally begin in England before the 25th March
     until the act for altering the style fixed the 1st of January as the
     first day of the year, and previous to 1752 the year extended from
     March 25th to the following March 24th.  Thus since 1752 we have
     been in the habit of putting the two dates for the months of January
     and February and March 1 to 24--in all years previous to 1752.
     Practically, however, many persons considered the year to commence
     with January 1st, as it will be seen Pepys did.  The 1st of January
     was considered as New Year's day long before Pepys's time.  The
     fiscal year has not been altered; and the national accounts are
     still reckoned from old Lady Day, which falls on the 6th of April.]

Blessed be God, at the end of the last year I was in very good health,
without any sense of my old pain, but upon taking of cold.

     [Pepys was successfully cut for the stone on March 26th, 1658.  See
     March 26th below.  Although not suffering from this cause again
     until the end of his life, there are frequent references in the
     Diary to pain whenever he caught cold.  In a letter from Pepys to
     his nephew Jackson, April 8th, 1700, there is a reference to the
     breaking out three years before his death of the wound caused by the
     cutting for the stone: "It has been my calamity for much the
     greatest part of this time to have been kept bedrid, under an evil
     so rarely known as to have had it matter of universal surprise and
     with little less general opinion of its dangerousness; namely, that
     the cicatrice of a wound occasioned upon my cutting for the stone,
     without hearing anything of it in all this time, should after more
     than 40 years' perfect cure, break out again."  At the post-mortem
     examination a nest of seven stones, weighing four and a half ounces,
     was found in the left kidney, which was entirely ulcerated.]

I lived in Axe Yard,

     [Pepys's house was on the south side of King Street, Westminster;
     it is singular that when he removed to a residence in the city, he
     should have settled close to another Axe Yard.  Fludyer Street
     stands on the site of Axe Yard, which derived its name from a great
     messuage or brewhouse on the west side of King Street, called "The
     Axe," and referred to in a document of the 23rd of Henry VIII--B.]

having my wife, and servant Jane, and no more in family than us three. My
wife .  .  .  . gave me hopes of her being with child, but on the last day
of the year .  .  .  .[the hope was belied.]

[Ed. note: . . .  . are used to denote censored passages]

The condition of the State was thus; viz. the Rump, after being disturbed
by my Lord Lambert,

     [John Lambert, major-general in the Parliamentary army.  The title
     Lord was not his by right, but it was frequently given to the
     republican officers.  He was born in 1619, at Calton Hall, in the
     parish of Kirkby-in-Malham-Dale, in the West Riding of Yorkshire.
     In 1642 he was appointed captain of horse under Fairfax, and acted
     as major-general to Cromwell in 1650 during the war in Scotland.
     After this Parliament conferred on him a grant of lands in Scotland
     worth L1000 per annum.  He refused to take the oath of allegiance to
     Cromwell, for which the Protector deprived him of his commission.
     After Cromwell's death he tried to set up a military government.
     The Commons cashiered Lambert, Desborough, and other officers,
     October 12th, 1659, but Lambert retaliated by thrusting out the
     Commons, and set out to meet Monk.  His men fell away from him, and
     he was sent to the Tower, March 3rd, 1660, but escaped.  In 1662 he
     was tried on a charge of high treason and condemned, but his life
     was spared.  It is generally stated that he passed the remainder of
     his life in the island of Guernsey, but this is proved to be
     incorrect by a MS. in the Plymouth Athenaeum, entitled "Plimmouth
     Memoirs collected by James Yonge, 1684" This will be seen from the
     following extracts quoted by Mr. R. J. King, in "Notes and Queries,"
     "1667 Lambert the arch-rebel brought to this island [St. Nicholas,
     at the entrance of Plymouth harbour]."  "1683 Easter day Lambert
     that olde rebell dyed this winter on Plimmouth Island where he had
     been prisoner 15 years and more."]

was lately returned to sit again.  The officers of the Army all forced to
yield.  Lawson

     [Sir John Lawson, the son of a poor man at Hull, entered the navy as
     a common sailor, rose to the rank of admiral, and distinguished
     himself during the Protectorate.  Though a republican, he readily
     closed with the design of restoring the King.  He was vice-admiral
     under the Earl of Sandwich, and commanded the "London" in the
     squadron which conveyed Charles II. to England.  He was mortally
     wounded in the action with the Dutch off Harwich, June, 1665.  He
     must not be confounded with another John Lawson, the Royalist, of
     Brough Hall, in Yorkshire, who was created a Baronet by Charles II,
     July 6th, 1665.]

lies still in the river, and Monk--[George Monk, born 1608, created Duke
of Albemarle, 1660, married Ann Clarges, March, 1654, died January 3rd,
1676.]--is with his army in Scotland.  Only my Lord Lambert is not yet
come into the Parliament, nor is it expected that he will without being
forced to it.  The new Common Council of the City do speak very high; and
had sent to Monk their sword-bearer, to acquaint him with their desires
for a free and full Parliament, which is at present the desires, and the
hopes, and expectation of all.  Twenty-two of the old secluded members

     ["The City sent and invited him [Monk] to dine the next day at
     Guildhall, and there he declared for the members whom the army had
     forced away in year forty-seven and forty-eight, who were known by
     the names of secluded members."--Burnet's Hist. of his Own Time,
     book i.]

having been at the House-door the last week to demand entrance, but it was
denied them; and it is believed that [neither] they nor the people will be
satisfied till the House be filled.  My own private condition very
handsome, and esteemed rich, but indeed very poor; besides my goods of my
house, and my office, which at present is somewhat uncertain.  Mr. Downing
master of my office.

     [George Downing was one of the Four Tellers of the Receipt of the
     Exchequer, and in his office Pepys was a clerk.  He was the son of
     Emmanuel Downing of the Inner Temple, afterwards of Salem,
     Massachusetts, and of Lucy, sister of Governor John Winthrop.  He is
     supposed to have been born in August, 1623.  He and his parents went
     to New England in 1638, and he was the second graduate of Harvard
     College.  He returned to England about 1645, and acted as Colonel
     Okey's chaplain before he entered into political life.  Anthony a
     Wood (who incorrectly describes him as the son of Dr. Calybute
     Downing, vicar of Hackney) calls Downing a sider with all times and
     changes: skilled in the common cant, and a preacher occasionally.
     He was sent by Cromwell to Holland in 1657, as resident there.  At
     the Restoration, he espoused the King's cause, and was knighted and
     elected M.P. for Morpeth, in 1661.  Afterwards, becoming
     Secretary to the Treasury and Commissioner of the Customs, he was in
     1663 created a Baronet of East Hatley, in Cambridgeshire, and was
     again sent Ambassador to Holland.  His grandson of the same name,
     who died in 1749, was the founder of Downing College, Cambridge.
     The title became extinct in 1764, upon the decease of Sir John
     Gerrard Downing, the last heir-male of the family.  Sir George
     Downing's character will be found in Lord Clarendon's "Life," vol.
     iii.  p. 4.  Pepys's opinion seems to be somewhat of a mixed kind.
     He died in July, 1684.]

Jan. 1st (Lord's day).  This morning (we living lately in the garret,) I
rose, put on my suit with great skirts, having not lately worn any other,
clothes but them.  Went to Mr. Gunning's

     [Peter Gunning, afterwards Master of St. John's College, Cambridge,
     and successively Bishop of Chichester and Ely.  He had continued to
     read the Liturgy at the chapel at Exeter House when the Parliament
     was most predominant, for which Cromwell often rebuked him.  Evelyn
     relates that on Christmas Day, 1657, the chapel was surrounded with
     soldiers, and the congregation taken prisoners, he and his wife
     being among them.  There are several notices of Dr. Gunning in
     Evelyn's Diary.  When he obtained the mastership of St. John's
     College upon the ejection of Dr. Tuckney, he allowed that
     Nonconformist divine a handsome annuity during his life.  He was a
     great controversialist, and a man of great reading.  Burnet says he
     "was a very honest sincere man, but of no sound judgment, and of no
     prudence in affairs" ("Hist. of his Own.  Time").  He died July 6th,
     1684, aged seventy-one.]

chapel at Exeter House, where he made a very good sermon upon these
words:--"That in the fulness of time God sent his Son, made of a woman,"
&c.; showing, that, by "made under the law," is meant his circumcision,
which is solemnized this day.  Dined at home in the garret, where my wife
dressed the remains of a turkey, and in the doing of it she burned her
hand.  I staid at home all the afternoon, looking over my accounts; then
went with my wife to my father's, and in going observed the great posts
which the City have set up at the Conduit in Fleet-street.  Supt at my,
father's, where in came Mrs. The. Turner--[Theophila Turner, daughter of
Sergeant John and Jane Turner, who married Sir Arthur Harris, Bart.  She
died 1686.]--and Madam Morrice, and supt with us.  After that my wife and
I went home with them, and so to our own home.

2nd.  In the morning before I went forth old East brought me a dozen of
bottles of sack, and I gave him a shilling for his pains.  Then I went to
Mr. Sheply,--[Shepley was a servant of Admiral Sir Edward Montagu]--who
was drawing of sack in the wine cellar to send to other places as a gift
from my Lord, and told me that my Lord had given him order to give me the
dozen of bottles.  Thence I went to the Temple to speak with Mr. Calthropp
about the L60 due to my Lord,

     [Sir Edward Montagu, born 1625, son of Sir Sidney Montagu, by
     Paulina, daughter of John Pepys of Cottenham, married Jemima,
     daughter of John Crew of Stene.  He died in action against the Dutch
     in Southwold Bay, May 28th, 1672.  The title of "My Lord" here
     applied to Montagu before he was created Earl of Sandwich is of the
     same character as that given to General Lambert.]

but missed of him, he being abroad.  Then I went to Mr. Crew's

     [John Crew, born 1598, eldest son of Sir Thomas Crew, Sergeant-at-
     Law and Speaker of the House of Commons.  He sat for Brackley in the
     Long Parliament.  Created Baron Crew of Stene, in the county of
     Northampton, at the coronation of Charles II.  He married Jemima,
     daughter and co-heir of Edward Walgrave (or Waldegrave) of Lawford,
     Essex.  His house was in Lincoln's Inn Fields.  He died December
     12th, 1679.]

and borrowed L10 of Mr. Andrewes for my own use, and so went to my office,
where there was nothing to do.  Then I walked a great while in Westminster
Hall, where I heard that Lambert was coming up to London; that my Lord
Fairfax

     [Thomas, Lord Fairfax, Generalissimo of the Parliament forces.
     After the Restoration, he retired to his country seat, where he
     lived in private till his death, 1671.  In a volume (autograph) of
     Lord Fairfax's Poems, preserved in the British Museum, 11744, f. 42,
     the following lines occur upon the 30th of January, on which day the
     King was beheaded.  It is believed that they have never been
     printed.

              "O let that day from time be bloted quitt,
               And beleef of 't in next age be waved,
               In depest silence that act concealed might,
               That so the creadet of our nation might be saved;
               But if the powre devine hath ordered this,
               His will's the law, and our must aquiess."

     These wretched verses have obviously no merit; but they are curious
     as showing that Fairfax, who had refused to act as one of Charles
     I's judges; continued long afterwards to entertain a proper horror
     for that unfortunate monarch's fate.  It has recently been pointed
     out to me, that the lines were not originally composed by Fairfax,
     being only a poor translation of the spirited lines of Statius
     (Sylvarum lib. v.  cap. ii.  l. 88)

              "Excidat illa dies aevo, ne postera credant
               Secula, nos certe taceamus; et obruta multa
               Nocte tegi propria patiamur crimina gentis."

     These verses were first applied by the President de Thou to the
     massacre of St. Bartholomew, 1572; and in our day, by Mr. Pitt, in
     his memorable speech in the House of Commons, January, 1793, after
     the murder of Louis XVI.--B.]

was in the head of the Irish brigade, but it was not certain what he would
declare for.  The House was to-day upon finishing the act for the Council
of State, which they did; and for the indemnity to the soldiers; and were
to sit again thereupon in the afternoon.  Great talk that many places have
declared for a free Parliament; and it is believed that they will be
forced to fill up the House with the old members.  From the Hall I called
at home, and so went to Mr. Crew's (my wife she was to go to her
father's), thinking to have dined, but I came too late, so Mr. Moore and I
and another gentleman went out and drank a cup of ale together in the new
market, and there I eat some bread and cheese for my dinner.  After that
Mr. Moore and I went as far as Fleet-street together and parted, he going
into the City, I to find Mr. Calthrop, but failed again of finding him, so
returned to Mr. Crew's again, and from thence went along with Mrs. Jemimah

     [Mrs. Jemimah, or Mrs. Jem, was Jemima, eldest daughter of Sir
     Edward Montagu.  At this time she and her sister, Mrs. Ann, seem to
     have been living alone with their maids in London, and Pepys's duty
     was to look after them.]

home, and there she taught me how to play at cribbage.  Then I went home,
and finding my wife gone to see Mrs. Hunt, I went to Will's,

     [Pepys constantly visited "Will's" about this time; but this could
     not be the famous coffee-house in Covent Garden, because he mentions
     visiting there for the first time, February 3rd, 1663-64.  It was
     most probably the house of William Joyce, who kept a place of
     entertainment at Westminster (see Jan. 29th).]

and there sat with Mr. Ashwell talking and singing till nine o'clock, and
so home, there, having not eaten anything but bread and cheese, my wife
cut me a slice of brawn which.  I received from my Lady;--[Jemima, wife of
Sir Edward Montagu, daughter of John Crew of Stene, afterwards Lord
Crew.]--which proves as good as ever I had any.  So to bed, and my wife
had a very bad night of it through wind and cold.

3rd.  I went out in the morning, it being a great frost, and walked to
Mrs. Turner's

     [Jane, daughter of John Pepys of South Creake, Norfolk, married to
     John Turner, Sergeant-at-law, Recorder of York; their only child,
     Theophila, frequently mentioned as The.  or Theoph., became the wife
     of Sir Arthur Harris, Bart., of Stowford, Devon, and died 1686,
     s.p.]

to stop her from coming to see me to-day, because of Mrs. Jem's corning,
thence I went to the Temple to speak with Mr. Calthrop, and walked in his
chamber an hour, but could not see him, so went to Westminster, where I
found soldiers in my office to receive money, and paid it them.  At noon
went home, where Mrs. Jem, her maid, Mr. Sheply, Hawly, and Moore dined
with me on a piece of beef and cabbage, and a collar of brawn.  We then
fell to cards till dark, and then I went home with Mrs. Jem, and meeting
Mr. Hawly got him to bear me company to Chancery Lane, where I spoke with
Mr. Calthrop, he told me that Sir James Calthrop was lately dead, but that
he would write to his Lady, that the money may be speedily paid. Thence
back to White Hall, where I understood that the Parliament had passed the
act for indemnity to the soldiers and officers that would come in, in so
many days, and that my Lord Lambert should have benefit of the said act.
They had also voted that all vacancies in the House, by the death of any
of the old members, shall be filled up; but those that are living shall
not be called in.  Thence I went home, and there found Mr. Hunt and his
wife, and Mr. Hawly, who sat with me till ten at night at cards, and so
broke up and to bed.

4th.  Early came Mr. Vanly--[Mr Vanley appears to have been Pepys's
landlord; he is mentioned again in the Diary on September 20th, 1660.]--to
me for his half-year's rent, which I had not in the house, but took his
man to the office and there paid him.  Then I went down into the Hall and
to Will's, where Hawly brought a piece of his Cheshire cheese, and we were
merry with it.  Then into the Hall again, where I met with the Clerk and
Quarter Master of my Lord's troop, and took them to the Swan' and gave
them their morning's draft,

     [It was not usual at this time to sit down to breakfast, but instead
     a morning draught was taken at a tavern.]

they being just come to town.  Mr. Jenkins shewed me two bills of exchange
for money to receive upon my Lord's and my pay.  It snowed hard all this
morning, and was very cold, and my nose was much swelled with cold.
Strange the difference of men's talk!  Some say that Lambert must of
necessity yield up; others, that he is very strong, and that the
Fifth-monarchy-men [will] stick to him, if he declares for a free
Parliament.  Chillington was sent yesterday to him with the vote of pardon
and indemnity from the Parliament.  From the Hall I came home, where I
found letters from Hinchinbroke

     [Hinchinbroke was Sir Edward Montagu's seat, from which he
     afterwards took his second title.  Hinchinbroke House, so often
     mentioned in the Diary, stood about half a mile to the westward of
     the town of Huntingdon.  It was erected late in the reign of
     Elizabeth, by Sir Henry Cromwell, on the site of a Benedictine
     nunnery, granted at the Dissolution, with all its appurtenances, to
     his father, Richard Williams, who had assumed the name of Cromwell,
     and whose grandson, Sir Oliver, was the uncle and godfather of the
     Protector.  The knight, who was renowned for, his hospitality, had
     the honour of entertaining King James at Hinchinbroke, but, getting
     into pecuniary difficulties, was obliged to sell his estates, which
     were conveyed, July 28th, 1627, to Sir Sidney Montagu of Barnwell,
     father of the first Earl of Sandwich, in whose descendant they are
     still vested.  On the morning of the 22nd January, 1830, during the
     minority of the seventh Earl, Hinchinbroke was almost entirely
     destroyed by fire, but the pictures and furniture were mostly saved,
     and the house has been rebuilt in the Elizabethan style, and the
     interior greatly improved, under the direction of Edward Blore,
     Esq., R.A.--B.]

and news of Mr. Sheply's going thither the next week.  I dined at home,
and from thence went to Will's to Shaw, who promised me to go along with
me to Atkinson's about some money, but I found him at cards with Spicer
and D. Vines, and could not get him along with me.  I was vext at this,
and went and walked in the Hall, where I heard that the Parliament spent
this day in fasting and prayer; and in the afternoon came letters from the
North, that brought certain news that my Lord Lambent his forces were all
forsaking him, and that he was left with only fifty horse, and that he did
now declare for the Parliament himself; and that my Lord Fairfax did also
rest satisfied, and had laid down his arms, and that what he had done was
only to secure the country against my Lord Lambert his raising of money,
and free quarter.  I went to Will's again, where I found them still at
cards, and Spicer had won 14s. of Shaw and Vines.  Then I spent a little
time with G. Vines and Maylard at Vines's at our viols.

     [It was usual to have a "chest of viols," which consisted of six,
     viz., two trebles, two tenors, and two basses (see note in North's
     "Memoirs of Musick," ed.  Rimbault, p. 70).  The bass viol was also
     called the 'viola da gamba', because it was held between the legs.]

So home, and from thence to Mr. Hunt's, and sat with them and Mr. Hawly at
cards till ten at night, and was much made of by them.  Home and so to
bed, but much troubled with my nose, which was much swelled.

5th.  I went to my office, where the money was again expected from the
Excise office, but none brought, but was promised to be sent this
afternoon.  I dined with Mr. Sheply, at my Lord's lodgings, upon his
turkey-pie.  And so to my office again; where the Excise money was
brought, and some of it told to soldiers till it was dark.  Then I went
home, and after writing a letter to my Lord and told him the news that the
Parliament hath this night voted that the members that were discharged
from sitting in the years 1648 and 49, were duly discharged; and that
there should be writs issued presently for the calling of others in their
places, and that Monk and Fairfax were commanded up to town, and that the
Prince's lodgings were to be provided for Monk at Whitehall. Then my wife
and I, it being a great frost, went to Mrs. Jem's, in expectation to eat a
sack-posset, but Mr. Edward--[Edward Montage, son of Sir Edward, and
afterwards Lord Hinchinbroke.]--not coming it was put off; and so I left
my wife playing at cards with her, and went myself with my lanthorn to Mr.
Fage, to consult concerning my nose, who told me it was nothing but cold,
and after that we did discourse concerning public business; and he told me
it is true the City had not time enough to do much, but they are resolved
to shake off the soldiers; and that unless there be a free Parliament
chosen, he did believe there are half the Common Council will not levy any
money by order of this Parliament. From thence I went to my father's,
where I found Mrs. Ramsey and her grandchild, a pretty girl, and staid a
while and talked with them and my mother, and then took my leave, only
heard of an invitation to go to dinner to-morrow to my cosen Thomas
Pepys.--[Thomas Pepys, probably the son of Thomas Pepys of London (born,
1595), brother of Samuel's father, John Pepys.]--I went back to Mrs. Jem,
and took my wife and Mrs. Sheply, and went home.

6th.  This morning Mr. Sheply and I did eat our breakfast at Mrs.
Harper's, (my brother John' being with me,)

     [John Pepys was born in 1641, and his brother Samuel took great
     interest in his welfare, but he did not do any great credit to his
     elder.]

upon a cold turkey-pie and a goose.  From thence I went to my office,
where we paid money to the soldiers till one o'clock, at which time we
made an end, and I went home and took my wife and went to my cosen, Thomas
Pepys, and found them just sat down to dinner, which was very good; only
the venison pasty was palpable beef, which was not handsome. After dinner
I took my leave, leaving my wife with my cozen Stradwick,--[Elizabeth,
daughter of Richard Pepys, Lord Chief Justice of Ireland, and wife of
Thomas Stradwick.]--and went to Westminster to Mr. Vines, where George and
I fiddled a good while, Dick and his wife (who was lately brought to bed)
and her sister being there, but Mr. Hudson not coming according to his
promise, I went away, and calling at my house on the wench, I took her and
the lanthorn with me to my cosen Stradwick, where, after a good supper,
there being there my father, mother, brothers, and sister, my cosen Scott
and his wife, Mr. Drawwater and his wife, and her brother, Mr. Stradwick,
we had a brave cake brought us, and in the choosing, Pall was Queen and
Mr. Stradwick was King.  After that my wife and I bid adieu and came home,
it being still a great frost.

7th.  At my office as I was receiving money of the probate of wills, in
came Mrs. Turner, Theoph., Madame Morrice, and Joyce, and after I had done
I took them home to my house and Mr. Hawly came after, and I got a dish of
steaks and a rabbit for them, while they were playing a game or two at
cards.  In the middle of our dinner a messenger from Mr. Downing came to
fetch me to him, so leaving Mr. Hawly there, I went and was forced to stay
till night in expectation of the French Embassador, who at last came, and
I had a great deal of good discourse with one of his gentlemen concerning
the reason of the difference between the zeal of the French and the
Spaniard.  After he was gone I went home, and found my friends still at
cards, and after that I went along with them to Dr. Whores (sending my
wife to Mrs. Jem's to a sack-posset), where I heard some symphony and
songs of his own making, performed by Mr. May, Harding, and Mallard.
Afterwards I put my friends into a coach, and went to Mrs. Jem's, where I
wrote a letter to my Lord by the post, and had my part of the posset which
was saved for me, and so we went home, and put in at my Lord's lodgings,
where we staid late, eating of part of his turkey-pie, and reading of
Quarles' Emblems. So home and to bed.

8th (Sunday).  In the morning I went to Mr. Gunning's, where a good
sermon, wherein he showed the life of Christ, and told us good authority
for us to believe that Christ did follow his father's trade, and was a
carpenter till thirty years of age.  From thence to my father's to dinner,
where I found my wife, who was forced to dine there, we not having one
coal of fire in the house, and it being very hard frosty weather.  In the
afternoon my father, he going to a man's to demand some money due to my
Aunt Bells my wife and I went to Mr. Mossum's, where a strange doctor made
a very good sermon.  From thence sending my wife to my father's, I went to
Mrs. Turner's, and staid a little while, and then to my father's, where I
found Mr. Sheply, and after supper went home together.  Here I heard of
the death of Mr. Palmer, and that he was to be buried at Westminster
tomorrow.

9th.  For these two or three days I have been much troubled with thoughts
how to get money to pay them that I have borrowed money of, by reason of
my money being in my uncle's hands.  I rose early this morning, and looked
over and corrected my brother John's speech, which he is to make the next
apposition,--[Declamations at St. Paul's School, in which there were
opponents and respondents.]--and after that I went towards my office, and
in my way met with W. Simons, Muddiman, and Jack Price, and went with them
to Harper's and in many sorts of talk I staid till two of the clock in the
afternoon.  I found Muddiman a good scholar, an arch rogue; and owns that
though he writes new books for the Parliament, yet he did declare that he
did it only to get money; and did talk very basely of many of them.  Among
other things, W. Simons told me how his uncle Scobel was on Saturday last
called to the bar, for entering in the journal of the House, for the year
1653, these words: "This day his Excellence the Lord General Cromwell
dissolved this House;" which words the Parliament voted a forgery, and
demanded of him how they came to be entered.  He answered that they were
his own handwriting, and that he did it by virtue of his office, and the
practice of his predecessor; and that the intent of the practice was
to--let posterity know how such and such a Parliament was dissolved,
whether by the command of the King, or by their own neglect, as the last
House of Lords was; and that to this end, he had said and writ that it was
dissolved by his Excellence the Lord G[eneral]; and that for the word
dissolved, he never at the time did hear of any other term; and desired
pardon if he would not dare to make a word himself when it was six years
after, before they came themselves to call it an interruption; but they
were so little satisfied with this answer, that they did chuse a committee
to report to the House, whether this crime of Mr. Scobell's did come
within the act of indemnity or no. Thence I went with Muddiman to the
Coffee-House, and gave 18d. to be entered of the Club.  Thence into the
Hall, where I heard for certain that Monk was coming to London, and that
Bradshaw's 2 lodgings were preparing for him.  Thence to Mrs. Jem's, and
found her in bed, and she was afraid that it would prove the small-pox.
Thence back to Westminster Hall, where I heard how Sir H. Vane--[Sir Harry
Vane the younger, an inflexible republican.  He was executed in 1662, on a
charge of conspiring the death of Charles I.]--was this day voted out of
the House, and to sit no more there; and that he would retire himself to
his house at Raby, as also all the rest of the nine officers that had
their commissions formerly taken away from them, were commanded to their
farthest houses from London during the pleasure of the Parliament.  Here I
met with the Quarter Master of my Lord's troop, and his clerk Mr. Jenings,
and took them home, and gave them a bottle of wine, and the remainder of
my collar of brawn; and so good night.  After that came in Mr. Hawly, who
told me that I was mist this day at my office, and that to-morrow I must
pay all the money that I have, at which I was put to a great loss how I
should get money to make up my cash, and so went to bed in great trouble.

10th.  Went out early, and in my way met with Greatorex,--[Ralph
Greatorex, the well-known mathematical instrument maker of his day.  He is
frequently mentioned by Pepys.]--and at an alehouse he showed me the first
sphere of wire that ever he made, and indeed it was very pleasant; thence
to Mr. Crew's, and borrowed L10, and so to my office, and was able to pay
my money.  Thence into the Hall, and meeting the Quarter Master, Jenings,
and Captain Rider, we four went to a cook's to dinner.  Thence Jenings and
I into London (it being through heat of the sun a great thaw and dirty) to
show our bills of return, and coming back drank a pint of wine at the Star
in Cheapside.  So to Westminster, overtaking Captain Okeshott in his silk
cloak, whose sword got hold of many people in walking.  Thence to the
Coffee-house, where were a great confluence of gentlemen; viz.  Mr.
Harrington, Poultny, chairman, Gold, Dr, Petty; &c., where admirable
discourse till at night.  Thence with Doling to Mother Lams, who told me
how this day Scott

     [Thomas Scott, M.P., was made Secretary of State to the Commonwealth
     on the 17th of this same January.  He signed the death warrant of
     Charles I., for which he was executed at Charing Cross, October
     16th, 1660.  He gloried in his offence, and desired to have written
     on his tombstone, "Thomas Scott who adjudged to death the late
     king."]

was made Intelligencer, and that the rest of the members that were
objected against last night, their business was to be heard this day
se'nnight.  Thence I went home and wrote a letter, and went to Harper's,
and staid there till Tom carried it to the postboy at Whitehall.  So home
to bed.

11th.  Being at Will's with Captain Barker, who hath paid me L300 this
morning at my office, in comes my father, and with him I walked, and leave
him at W. Joyce's, and went myself to Mr. Crew's, but came too late to
dine, and therefore after a game at shittle-cocks--[The game of battledore
and shuttlecock was formerly much played even in tennis courts, and was a
very violent game.]--with Mr. Walgrave and Mr. Edward, I returned to my
father, and taking him from W. Joyce's, who was not abroad himself, we
inquired of a porter, and by his direction went to an alehouse, where
after a cup or two we parted.  I went towards London, and in my way went
in to see Crowly, who was now grown a very great loon and very tame.
Thence to Mr. Steven's with a pair of silver snuffers, and bought a pair
of shears to cut silver, and so homeward again.  From home I went to see
Mrs. Jem, who was in bed, and now granted to have the small-pox.  Back
again, and went to the Coffee-house, but tarried not, and so home.

12th.  I drink my morning at Harper's with Mr. Sheply and a seaman, and so
to my office, where Captain Holland  came to see me, and appointed a
meeting in the afternoon.  Then wrote letters to Hinchinbroke and sealed
them at Will's, and after that went home, and thence to the Half Moon,
where I found the Captain and Mr. Billingsly and Newman, a barber, where
we were very merry, and had the young man that plays so well on the Welsh
harp.  Billingsly paid for all.  Thence home, and finding my letters this
day not gone by the carrier I new sealed them, but my brother Tom coming
we fell into discourse about my intention to feast the Joyces.  I sent for
a bit of meat for him from the cook's, and forgot to send my letters this
night.  So I went to bed, and in discourse broke to my wife what my
thoughts were concerning my design of getting money by, &c.

13th.  Coming in the morning to my office, I met with Mr. Fage and took
him to the Swan?  He told me how high Haselrigge, and Morly, the last
night began at my Lord Mayor's to exclaim against the City of London,
saying that they had forfeited their charter.  And how the Chamberlain of
the City did take them down, letting them know how much they were formerly
beholding to the City, &c.  He also told me that Monk's letter that came
to them by the sword-bearer was a cunning piece, and that which they did
not much trust to; but they were resolved to make no more applications to
the Parliament, nor to pay any money, unless the secluded members be
brought in, or a free Parliament chosen.  Thence to my office, where
nothing to do.  So to Will's with Mr. Pinkney, who invited me to their
feast at his Hall the next Monday.  Thence I went home and took my wife
and dined at Mr. Wades, and after that we went and visited Catan. From
thence home again, and my wife was very unwilling to let me go forth, but
with some discontent would go out if I did, and I going forth towards
Whitehall, I saw she followed me, and so I staid and took her round
through Whitehall, and so carried her home angry.  Thence I went to Mrs.
Jem, and found her up and merry, and that it did not prove the small-pox,
but only the swine-pox; so I played a game or two at cards with her.  And
so to Mr. Vines, where he and I and Mr. Hudson played half-a-dozen things,
there being there Dick's wife and her sister.  After that I went home and
found my wife gone abroad to Mr. Hunt's, and came in a little after
me.--So to bed.

14th.  Nothing to do at our office.  Thence into the Hall, and just as I
was going to dinner from Westminster Hall with Mr. Moore (with whom I had
been in the lobby to hear news, and had spoke with Sir Anthony Ashley
Cooper about my Lord's lodgings) to his house, I met with Captain Holland,
who told me that he hath brought his wife to my house, so I posted home
and got a dish of meat for them.  They staid with me all the afternoon,
and went hence in the evening.  Then I went with my wife, and left her at
market, and went myself to the Coffee-house, and heard exceeding good
argument against Mr. Harrington's assertion, that overbalance of propriety
[i.e., property] was the foundation of government.  Home, and wrote to
Hinchinbroke, and sent that and my other letter that missed of going on
Thursday last.  So to bed.

15th.  Having been exceedingly disturbed in the night with the barking of
a dog of one of our neighbours that I could not sleep for an hour or two,
I slept late, and then in the morning took physic, and so staid within all
day.  At noon my brother John came to me, and I corrected as well as I
could his Greek speech to say the Apposition, though I believe he himself
was as well able to do it as myself.  After that we went to read in the
great Officiale about the blessing of bells in the Church of Rome. After
that my wife and I in pleasant discourse till night, then I went to
supper, and after that to make an end of this week's notes in this book,
and so to bed.  It being a cold day and a great snow my physic did not
work so well as it should have done.

16th.  In the morning I went up to Mr. Crew's, and at his bedside he gave
me direction to go to-morrow with Mr. Edward to Twickenham, and likewise
did talk to me concerning things of state; and expressed his mind how just
it was that the secluded members should come to sit again.  I went from
thence, and in my way went into an alehouse and drank my morning draft
with Matthew Andrews and two or three more of his friends, coachmen.  And
of one of them I did hire a coach to carry us to-morrow to Twickenham.
From thence to my office, where nothing to do; but Mr. Downing he came and
found me all alone; and did mention to me his going back into Holland, and
did ask me whether I would go or no, but gave me little encouragement, but
bid me consider of it; and asked me whether I did not think that Mr. Hawly
could perform the work of my office alone or no.  I confess I was at a
great loss, all the day after, to bethink myself how to carry this
business.  At noon, Harry Ethall came to me and went along with Mr.
Maylard by coach as far as Salsbury Court, and there we set him down, and
we went to the Clerks, where we came a little too late, but in a closet we
had a very good dinner by Mr. Pinkny's courtesy, and after dinner we had
pretty good singing, and one, Hazard, sung alone after the old fashion,
which was very much cried up, but I did not like it.  Thence we went to
the Green Dragon, on Lambeth Hill, both the Mr. Pinkney's, Smith,
Harrison, Morrice, that sang the bass, Sheply and I, and there we sang of
all sorts of things, and I ventured with good success upon things at first
sight, and after that I played on my flageolet, and staid there till nine
o'clock, very merry and drawn on with one song after another till it came
to be so late.  After that Sheply, Harrison and myself, we went towards
Westminster on foot, and at the Golden Lion, near Charing Cross, we went
in and drank a pint of wine, and so parted, and thence home, where I found
my wife and maid a-washing. I staid up till the bell-man came by with his
bell just under my window as I was writing of this very line, and cried,
"Past one of the clock, and a cold, frosty, windy morning."  I then went
to bed, and left my wife and the maid a-washing still.

17th.  Early I went to Mr. Crew's, and having given Mr. Edward money to
give the servants, I took him into the coach that waited for us and
carried him to my house, where the coach waited for me while I and the
child went to Westminster Hall, and bought him some pictures.  In the Hall
I met Mr. Woodfine, and took him to Will's and drank with him. Thence the
child and I to the coach, where my wife was ready, and so we went towards
Twickenham.  In our way, at Kensington we understood how that my Lord
Chesterfield had killed another gentleman about half an hour before, and
was fled.

     [Philip Stanhope, second Earl of Chesterfield, ob. 1713, act. suae
     80.  We learn, from the memoir prefixed to his "Printed
     Correspondence," that he fought three duels, disarming and wounding
     his first and second antagonists, and killing the third.  The name
     of the unfortunate gentleman who fell on this occasion was Woolly.
     Lord Chesterfield, absconding, went to Breda, where he obtained the
     royal pardon from Charles II.  He acted a busy part in the eventful
     times in which he lived, and was remarkable for his steady adherence
     to the Stuarts.  Lord Chesterfield's letter to Charles II., and the
     King's answer granting the royal pardon, occur in the Correspondence
     published by General Sir John Murray, in 1829.

     "Jan. 17th, 1659.  The Earl of Chesterfield and Dr. Woolly's son of
     Hammersmith, had a quarrel about a mare of eighteen pounds price;
     the quarrel would not be reconciled, insomuch that a challenge
     passed between them.  They fought a duel on the backside of Mr.
     Colby's house at Kensington, where the Earl and he had several
     passes.  The Earl wounded him in two places, and would fain have
     then ended, but the stubbornness and pride of heart of Mr. Woolly
     would not give over, and the next pass [he] was killed on the spot.
     The Earl fled to Chelsea, and there took water and escaped.  The
     jury found it chance-medley."--Rugge's "Diurnal," Addit  MSS.,
     British Museum.--B.]

We went forward and came about one of the clock to Mr. Fuller's, but he
was out of town, so we had a dinner there, and I gave the child 40s. to
give to the two ushers.  After that we parted and went homewards, it being
market day at Brainford [Brentford].  I set my wife down and went with the
coach to Mr. Crew's, thinking to have spoke with Mr. Moore and Mrs. Jem,
he having told me the reason of his melancholy was some unkindness from
her after so great expressions of love, and how he had spoke to her
friends and had their consent, and that he would desire me to take an
occasion of speaking with her, but by no means not to heighten her
discontent or distaste whatever it be, but to make it up if I can. But he
being out of doors, I went away and went to see Mrs. Jem, who was now very
well again, and after a game or two at cards, I left her.  So I went to
the Coffee Club, and heard very good discourse; it was in answer to Mr.
Harrington's answer, who said that the state of the Roman government was
not a settled government, and so it was no wonder that the balance of
propriety [i.e., property] was in one hand, and the command in another, it
being therefore always in a posture of war; but it was carried by ballot,
that it was a steady government, though it is true by the voices it had
been carried before that it was an unsteady government; so to-morrow it is
to be proved by the opponents that the balance lay in one hand, and the
government in another.  Thence I went to Westminster, and met Shaw and
Washington,  who told me how this day Sydenham

     [Colonel William Sydenham had been an active officer during the
     Civil Wars, on the Parliament side; M.P. for Dorsetshire, Governor
     of Melcombe, and one of the Committee of Safety.  He was the elder
     brother of the celebrated physician of that name.--B.]

was voted out of the House for sitting any more this Parliament, and that
Salloway was voted out likewise and sent to the Tower, during the pleasure
of the House.  Home and wrote by the Post, and carried to Whitehall, and
coming back turned in at Harper-'s, where Jack Price was, and I drank with
him and he told me, among other, things, how much the Protector

     [Richard Cromwell, third son of Oliver Cromwell, born October 4th,
     1626, admitted a member of Lincoln's Inn, May 27th, 1647, fell into
     debt and devoted himself to hunting and field sports.  His
     succession to his father as Protector was universally accepted at
     first, but the army soon began to murmur because he was not a
     general.  Between the dissensions of various parties he fell, and
     the country was left in a state of anarchy: He went abroad early in
     the summer of 1660, and lived abroad for some years, returning to
     England in 1680.  After his fall he bore the name of John Clarke.
     Died at Cheshunt, July 12th, 1712.]

is altered, though he would seem to bear out his trouble very well, yet he
is scarce able to talk sense with a man; and how he will say that "Who
should a man trust, if he may not trust to a brother and an uncle;" and
"how much those men have to answer before God Almighty, for their playing
the knave with him as they did."  He told me also, that there was;
L100,000 offered, and would have been taken for his restitution, had not
the Parliament come in as they did again; and that he do believe that the
Protector will live to give a testimony of his valour and revenge yet
before he dies, and that the Protector will say so himself sometimes.
Thence I went home, it being late and my wife in bed.

18th.  To my office and from thence to Will's, and there Mr. Sheply
brought me letters from the carrier and so I went home.  After that to
Wilkinson's, where we had a dinner for Mr. Talbot, Adams, Pinkny and his
son, but his son did not come.  Here we were very merry, and while I was
here Mr. Fuller came thither and staid a little, while.

After that we all went to my Lord's, whither came afterwards Mr. Harrison,
and by chance seeing Mr. Butler--[Mr. Butler is usually styled by Pepys
Mons. l'Impertinent.]--coming by I called him in and so we sat drinking a
bottle of wine till night.  At which time Mistress Ann--[Probably Mrs.
(afterwards Lady) Anne Montagu, daughter of Sir Edward Montagu, and sister
to Mrs. Jem.]--came with the key of my Lord's study for some things, and
so we all broke up and after I had gone to my house and interpreted my
Lord's letter by his character--[The making of ciphers was a popular
amusement about this time.  Pepys made several for Montagu, Downing, and
others.]--I came to her again and went with her to her lodging and from
thence to Mr. Crew's, where I advised with him what to do about my Lord's
lodgings and what answer to give to Sir Ant. Cooper and so I came home and
to bed.  All the world is at a loss to think what Monk will do: the City
saying that he will be for them, and the Parliament saying he will be for
them.

19th.  This morning I was sent for to Mr. Downing, and at his bed side he
told me, that he had a kindness for me, and that he thought that he had
done me one; and that was, that he had got me to be one of the Clerks of
the Council; at which I was a little stumbled, and could not tell what to
do, whether to thank him or no; but by and by I did; but not very
heartily, for I feared that his doing of it was but only to ease himself
of the salary which he gives me.  After that Mr. Sheply staying below all
this time for me we went thence and met Mr. Pierce,

     [Pepys had two friends named Pierce, one the surgeon and the other
     the purser; he usually (but not always) distinguishes them.  The one
     here alluded to was probably the surgeon, and husband of pretty Mrs.
     Pierce.  After the Restoration James Pearse or Pierce became Surgeon
     to the Duke of York, and he was also Surgeon-General of the Fleet.]

so at the Harp and Ball drank our morning draft and so to Whitehall where
I met with Sir Ant. Cooper and did give him some answer from my Lord and
he did give us leave to keep the lodgings still.  And so we did determine
thereupon that Mr. Sheply might now go into the country and would do so
to-morrow.  Back I went by Mr. Downing's order and staid there till twelve
o'clock in expectation of one to come to read some writings, but he came
not, so I staid all alone reading the answer of the Dutch Ambassador to
our State, in answer to the reasons of my Lord's coming home, which he
gave for his coming, and did labour herein to contradict my Lord's
arguments for his coming home.  Thence to my office and so with Mr. Sheply
and Moore, to dine upon a turkey with Mrs. Jem, and after that Mr. Moore
and I went to the French Ordinary, where Mr. Downing this day feasted Sir
Arth. Haselrigge, and a great many more of the Parliament, and did stay to
put him in mind of me.  Here he gave me a note to go and invite some other
members to dinner tomorrow.  So I went to White Hall, and did stay at
Marsh's, with Simons, Luellin, and all the rest of the Clerks of the
Council, who I hear are all turned out, only the two Leighs, and they do
all tell me that my name was mentioned the last night, but that nothing
was done in it.  Hence I went and did leave some of my notes at the
lodgings of the members and so home.  To bed.

20th.  In the morning I went to Mr. Downing's bedside and gave him an
account what I had done as to his guests, land I went thence to my Lord
Widdrington who I met in the street, going to seal the patents for the
judges to-day, and so could not come to dinner.  I called upon Mr.
Calthrop about the money due to my Lord.  Here I met with Mr. Woodfine and
drank with him at the Sun in Chancery Lane and so to Westminster Hall,
where at the lobby I spoke with the rest of my guests and so to my office.
At noon went by water with Mr. Maylard and Hales to the Swan in Fish
Street at our Goal Feast, where we were very merry at our Jole of Ling,
and from thence after a great and good dinner Mr. Falconberge would go
drink a cup of ale at a place where I had like to have shot at a scholar
that lay over the house of office.  Thence calling on Mr. Stephens and
Wootton (with whom I drank) about business of my Lord's I went to the
Coffee Club where there was nothing done but choosing of a Committee for
orders.  Thence to Westminster Hall where Mrs. Lane and the rest of the
maids had their white scarfs, all having been at the burial of a young
bookseller in the Hall.

     [These stationers and booksellers, whose shops disfigured
     Westminster Hall down to a late period, were a privileged class.
     In the statutes for appointing licensers and regulating the press,
     there is a clause exempting them from the pains and penalties of
     these obnoxious laws.]

Thence to Mr. Sheply's and took him to my house and drank with him in
order to his going to-morrow.  So parted and I sat up late making up my
accounts before he go.  This day three citizens of London went to meet
Monk from the Common Council!

     "Jan. 20th.  Then there went out of the City, by desire of the Lord
     Mayor and Court of Aldermen, Alderman Fowke and Alderman Vincett,
     alias Vincent, and Mr. Broomfield, to compliment General Monk, who
     lay at Harborough Town, in Leicestershire."

     "Jan. 21st.  Because the Speaker was sick, and Lord General Monk so
     near London, and everybody thought that the City would suffer for
     their affronts to the soldiery, and because they had sent the sword-
     bearer to, the General without the Parliament's consent, and the
     three Aldermen were gone to give him the welcome to town, these four
     lines were in almost everybody's mouth:

                   "Monk under a hood, not well understood,
                    The City pull in their horns;
                    The Speaker is out, and sick of the gout,
                    And the Parliament sit upon thorns."
                    --Rugge's 'Diurnal.'--B."

21st.  Up early in finishing my accounts and writing to my Lord and from
thence to my Lord's and took leave of Mr. Sheply and possession of all the
keys and the house.  Thence to my office for some money to pay Mr. Sheply
and sent it him by the old man.  I then went to Mr. Downing who chid me
because I did not give him notice of some of his guests failed him but I
told him that I sent our porter to tell him and he was not within, but he
told me that he was within till past twelve o'clock.  So the porter or he
lied.  Thence to my office where nothing to do.  Then with Mr. Hawly, he
and I went to Mr. Crew's and dined there.  Thence into London, to Mr.
Vernon's and I received my L25 due by bill for my troopers' pay.  Then
back again to Steadman's.  At the Mitre, in Fleet street, in our way
calling on Mr. Fage, who told me how the City have some hopes of Monk.
Thence to the Mitre, where I drank a pint of wine, the house being in
fitting for Banister to come hither from Paget's. Thence to Mrs. Jem and
gave her L5.  So home and left my money and to Whitehall where Luellin and
I drank and talked together an hour at Marsh's and so up to the clerks'
room, where poor Mr. Cook, a black man, that is like to be put out of his
clerk's place, came and railed at me for endeavouring to put him out and
get myself in, when I was already in a good condition.  But I satisfied
him and after I had wrote a letter there to my Lord, wherein I gave him an
account how this day Lenthall took his chair again, and [the House]
resolved a declaration to be brought in on Monday next to satisfy the
world what they intend to do. So home and to bed.

22nd.  I went in the morning to Mr. Messum's, where I met with W. Thurburn
and sat with him in his pew.  A very eloquent sermon about the duty of all
to give good example in our lives and conversation, which I fear he
himself was most guilty of not doing.  After sermon, at the door by
appointment my wife met me, and so to my father's to dinner, where we had
not been to my shame in a fortnight before.  After dinner my father shewed
me a letter from Mr. Widdrington, of Christ's College, in Cambridge,
wherein he do express very great kindness for my brother, and my father
intends that my brother shall go to him.  To church in the afternoon to
Mr. Herring, where a lazy poor sermon.  And so home with Mrs. Turner and
sitting with her a while we went to my father's where we supt very merry,
and so home.  This day I began to put on buckles to my shoes, which I have
bought yesterday of Mr. Wotton.

23rd.  In the morning called out to carry L20 to Mr. Downing, which I did
and came back, and finding Mr. Pierce, the surgeon, I took him to the Axe
and gave him his morning draft.  Thence to my office and there did nothing
but make up my balance.  Came home and found my wife dressing of the
girl's head, by which she was made to look very pretty.  I went out and
paid Wilkinson what I did owe him, and brought a piece of beef home for
dinner.  Thence I went out and paid Waters, the vintner, and went to see
Mrs. Jem, where I found my Lady Wright, but Scott was so drunk that he
could not be seen.  Here I staid and made up Mrs. Ann's bills, and played
a game or two at cards, and thence to Westminster Hall, it being very
dark.  I paid Mrs. Michell, my bookseller, and back to Whitehall, and in
the garden, going through to the Stone Gallery--[The Stone Gallery was a
long passage between the Privy Garden and the river.  It led from the
Bowling Green to the Court of the Palace]--I fell into a ditch, it being
very dark.  At the Clerk's chamber I met with Simons and Luellin, and went
with them to Mr. Mount's chamber at the Cock Pit, where we had some rare
pot venison, and ale to abundance till almost twelve at night, and after a
song round we went home.  This day the Parliament sat late, and resolved
of the declaration to be printed for the people's satisfaction, promising
them a great many good things.

24th.  In the morning to my office, where, after I had drank my morning
draft at Will's with Ethell and Mr. Stevens, I went and told part of the
excise money till twelve o'clock, and then called on my wife and took her
to Mr. Pierces, she in the way being exceedingly troubled with a pair of
new pattens, and I vexed to go so slow, it being late.  There when we came
we found Mrs. Carrick very fine, and one Mr. Lucy, who called one another
husband and wife, and after dinner a great deal of mad stir. There was
pulling off Mrs. bride's and Mr. bridegroom's ribbons;

     [The scramble for ribbons, here mentioned by Pepys in connection
     with weddings (see also January 26th, 1660-61, and February 8th,
     1662-3), doubtless formed part of the ceremony of undressing the
     bridegroom, which, as the age became more refined, fell into disuse.
     All the old plays are silent on the custom; the earliest notice of
     which occurs in the old ballad of the wedding of Arthur O'Bradley,
     printed in the Appendix to "Robin Hood," 1795, where we read--

                   "Then got they his points and his garters,
                    And cut them in pieces like martyrs;
                    And then they all did play
                    For the honour of Arthur O'Bradley."

     Sir Winston Churchill also observes ("Divi Britannici," p. 340) that
     James I. was no more troubled at his querulous countrymen robbing
     him than a bridegroom at the losing of his points and garters.  Lady
     Fanshawe, in her "Memoirs," says, that at the nuptials of Charles
     II. and the Infanta, "the Bishop of London declared them married in
     the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; and then they
     caused the ribbons her Majesty wore to be cut in little pieces; and
     as far as they would go, every one had some."  The practice still
     survives in the form of wedding favours.

     A similar custom is still of every day's occurrence at Dieppe.  Upon
     the morrow after their marriage, the bride and bridegroom
     perambulate the streets, followed by a numerous cortege, the guests
     at the wedding festival, two and two; each individual wearing two
     bits of narrow ribbon, about two inches in length, of different
     colours, which are pinned crossways upon the breast.  These morsels
     of ribbons originally formed the garters of the bride and
     bridegroom, which had been divided amidst boisterous mirth among the
     assembled company, the moment the happy pair had been formally
     installed in the bridal bed.--Ex. inf.  Mr. William .Hughes,
     Belvedere, Jersey.--B.]

with a great deal of fooling among them that I and my wife did not like.
Mr. Lucy and several other gentlemen coming in after dinner, swearing and
singing as if they were mad, only he singing very handsomely.  There came
in afterwards Mr. Southerne, clerk to Mr. Blackburne, and with him
Lambert, lieutenant of my Lord's ship, and brought with them the
declaration that came out to-day from the Parliament, wherein they declare
for law and gospel, and for tythes; but I do not find people apt to
believe them.  After this taking leave I went to my father's, and my wife
staying there, he and I went to speak with Mr. Crumlum (in the meantime,
while it was five o'clock, he being in the school, we went to my cozen Tom
Pepys' shop, the turner in Paul's Churchyard, and drank with him a pot of
ale); he gave my father directions what to do about getting my brother an
exhibition, and spoke very well of my brother.  Thence back with my father
home, where he and I spoke privately in the little room to my sister Pall
about stealing of things as my wife's scissars and my maid's book, at
which my father was much troubled.  Hence home with my wife and so to
Whitehall, where I met with Mr. Hunt and Luellin, and drank with them at
Marsh's, and afterwards went up and wrote to my Lord by the post.  This
day the Parliament gave order that the late Committee of Safety should
come before them this day se'nnight, and all their papers, and their model
of Government that they had made, to be brought in with them.  So home and
talked with my wife about our dinner on Thursday.

25th.  Called up early to Mr. Downing; he gave me a Character, such a one
as my Lord's, to make perfect, and likewise gave me his order for L500 to
carry to Mr. Frost, which I did and so to my office, where I did do
something about the character till twelve o'clock.  Then home find found
my wife and the maid at my Lord's getting things ready against to-morrow.
I went by water to my Uncle White's' to dinner, where I met my father,
where we alone had a fine jole of Ling to dinner.  After dinner I took
leave, and coming home heard that in Cheapside there had been but a little
before a gibbet set up, and the picture of Huson

     [John Hewson, who, from a low origin, became a colonel in the
     Parliament army, and sat in judgment on the King: he escaped hanging
     by flight, and died in 1662, at Amsterdam.  A curious notice of
     Hewson occurs in Rugge's "Diurnal," December 5th, 1659, which states
     that "he was a cobbler by trade, but a very stout man, and a very
     good commander; but in regard of his former employment, they [the
     city apprentices] threw at him old shoes, and slippers, and
     turniptops, and brick-bats, stones, and tiles."  .  .  .  "At this
     time [January, 1659-60] there came forth, almost every day, jeering
     books: one was called 'Colonel Hewson's Confession; or, a Parley
     with Pluto,' about his going into London, and taking down the gates
     of Temple-Bar."  He had but one eye, which did not escape the notice
     of his enemies.--B.]

hung upon it in the middle of the street.  I called at Paul's Churchyard,
where I bought Buxtorf's Hebrew Grammar; and read a declaration of the
gentlemen of Northampton which came out this afternoon.  Thence to my
father's, where I staid with my mother a while and then to Mr. Crew's
about a picture to be sent into the country, of Mr. Thomas Crew, to my
Lord.  So [to] my Lady Wright to speak with her, but she was abroad, so
Mr. Evans, her butler, had me into his buttery, and gave me sack and a
lesson on his lute, which he played very well.  Thence I went to my Lord's
and got most things ready against tomorrow, as fires and laying the cloth,
and my wife was making of her tarts and larding of her pullets till eleven
o'clock.  This evening Mr. Downing sent for me, and gave me order to go to
Mr. Jessop for his papers concerning his dispatch to Holland which were
not ready, only his order for a ship to transport him he gave me.  To my
Lord's again and so home with my wife, tired with this day's work.

26th.  To my office for L20 to carry to Mr. Downing, which I did and back
again.  Then came Mr. Frost to pay Mr. Downing his L500, and I went to him
for the warrant and brought it Mr. Frost.  Called for some papers at
Whitehall for Mr. Downing, one of which was an Order of the Council for
L1800 per annum, to be paid monthly; and the other two, Orders to the
Commissioners of Customs, to let his goods pass free.  Home from my office
to my Lord's lodgings where my wife had got ready a very fine dinner--viz.
a dish of marrow bones; a leg of mutton; a loin of veal; a dish of fowl,
three pullets, and two dozen of larks all in a dish; a great tart, a
neat's tongue, a dish of anchovies; a dish of prawns and cheese.  My
company was my father, my uncle Fenner, his two sons, Mr. Pierce, and all
their wives, and my brother Tom.  We were as merry as I could frame myself
to be in the company, W. Joyce talking after the old rate and drinking
hard, vexed his father and mother and wife.  And I did perceive that Mrs.
Pierce her coming so gallant, that it put the two young women quite out of
courage.  When it became dark they all went away but Mr. Pierce, and W.
Joyce, and their wives and Tom, and drank a bottle of wine afterwards, so
that Will did heartily vex his father and mother by staying.  At which I
and my wife were much pleased.  Then they all went and I fell to writing
of two characters for Mr. Downing, and carried them to him at nine o'clock
at night, and he did not like them but corrected them, so that to-morrow I
am to do them anew.  To my Lord's lodging again and sat by the great log,
it being now a very good fire, with my wife, and ate a bit and so home.
The news this day is a letter that speaks absolutely Monk's concurrence
with this Parliament, and nothing else, which yet I hardly believe.  After
dinner to-day my father showed me a letter from my Uncle Robert,  in
answer to my last, concerning my money which I would have out of my Coz.
Beck's' hand, wherein Beck desires it four months longer, which I know not
how to spare.

27th.  Going to my office I met with Tom Newton, my old comrade, and took
him to the Crown in the Palace, and gave him his morning draft.  And as he
always did, did talk very high what he would do with the Parliament, that
he would have what place he would, and that he might be one of the Clerks
to the Council if he would.  Here I staid talking with him till the
offices were all shut, and then I looked in the Hall, and was told by my
bookseller, Mrs. Michell, that Mr. G. Montagu had inquired there for me.
So I went to his house, and was forced by him to dine with him, and had a
plenteous brave dinner and the greatest civility that ever I had from any
man.  Thence home and so to Mrs. Jem, and played with her at cards, and
coming home again my wife told me that Mr. Hawly had been there to speak
with me, and seemed angry that I had not been at the office that day, and
she told me she was afraid that Mr. Downing may have a mind to pick some
hole in my coat.  So I made haste to him, but found no such thing from
him, but he sent me to Mr. Sherwin's about getting Mr. Squib to come to
him tomorrow, and I carried him an answer.  So home and fell a writing the
characters for Mr. Downing, and about nine at night Mr. Hawly came, and
after he was gone I sat up till almost twelve writing, and--wrote two of
them.  In the morning up early and wrote another, my wife lying in bed and
reading to me.

28th.  I went to Mr. Downing and carried him three characters, and then to
my office and wrote another, while Mr. Frost staid telling money.  And
after I had done it Mr. Hawly came into the office and I left him and
carried it to Mr. Downing, who then told me that he was resolved to be
gone for Holland this morning.  So I to my office again, and dispatch my
business there, and came with Mr. Hawly to Mr. Downing's lodging, and took
Mr. Squib from White Hall in a coach thither with me, and there we waited
in his chamber a great while, till he came in; and in the mean time, sent
all his things to the barge that lay at Charing-Cross Stairs. Then came he
in, and took a very civil leave of me, beyond my expectation, for I was
afraid that he would have told me something of removing me from my office;
but he did not, but that he would do me any service that lay in his power.
So I went down and sent a porter to my house for my best fur cap, but he
coming too late with it I did not present it to him.  Thence I went to
Westminster Hall, and bound up my cap at Mrs. Michell's, who was much
taken with my cap, and endeavoured to overtake the coach at the Exchange
and to give it him there, but I met with one that told me that he was
gone, and so I returned and went to Heaven,

     [A place of entertainment within or adjoining Westminster Hall.  It
     is called in "Hudibras," "False Heaven, at the end of the Hall."
     There were two other alehouses near Westminster Hall, called Hell
     and Purgatory.

                   "Nor break his fast
                    In Heaven and Hell."

                              Ben Jonson's Alchemist, act v.  SC. 2.]

where Luellin and I dined on a breast of mutton all alone, discoursing of
the changes that we have seen and the happiness of them that have estates
of their own, and so parted, and I went by appointment to my office and
paid young Mr. Walton L500; it being very dark he took L300 by content. He
gave me half a piece and carried me in his coach to St. Clement's, from
whence I went to Mr. Crew's and made even with Mr. Andrews, and took in
all my notes and gave him one for all.  Then to my Lady Wright and gave
her my Lord's letter which he bade me give her privately.  So home and
then to Will's for a little news, then came home again and wrote to my
Lord, and so to Whitehall and gave them to the post-boy.  Back again home
and to bed.

29th.  In the morning I went to Mr. Gunning's, where he made an excellent
sermon upon the 2d of the Galatians, about the difference that fell
between St. Paul and St. Peter (the feast day of St. Paul being a day or
two ago), whereby he did prove, that, contrary to the doctrine of the
Roman Church, St. Paul did never own any dependance, or that he was
inferior to St. Peter, but that they were equal, only one a particular
charge of preaching to the Jews, and the other to the Gentiles.  Here I
met with Mr. Moore, and went home with him to dinner to Mr. Crew's, where
Mr. Spurrier being in town did dine with us.  From thence I went home and
spent the afternoon in casting up my accounts, and do find myself to be
worth L40 and more, which I did not think, but am afraid that I have
forgot something.  To my father's to supper, where I heard by my brother
Tom how W. Joyce would the other day have Mr. Pierce and his wife to the
tavern after they were gone from my house, and that he had so little
manners as to make Tom pay his share notwithstanding that he went upon his
account, and by my father I understand that my uncle Fenner and my aunt
were much pleased with our entertaining them.  After supper home without
going to see Mrs. Turner.

30th.  This morning, before I was up, I fell a-singing of my song, "Great,
good, and just," &c.

     [This is the beginning of the Marquis of Montrose's verses on the
     execution of Charles I., which Pepys had set to music:

         "Great, good, and just, could I but rate
          My grief and thy too rigid fate,
          I'd weep the world to such a strain
          That it should deluge once again.
          But since thy loud-tongued blood demands supplies
          More from Briareus' hands, than Argus eyes,
          I'll sing thy obsequies with trumpet sounds,
          And write thy epitaph with blood and wounds."]

and put myself thereby in mind that this was the fatal day, now ten years
since, his Majesty died.  Scull the waterman came and brought me a note
from the Hope from Mr. Hawly with direction, about his money, he tarrying
there till his master be gone.  To my office, where I received money of
the excise of Mr. Ruddyer, and after we had done went to Will's and staid
there till 3 o'clock and then I taking my L12 10s. 0d. due to me for my
last quarter's salary, I went with them by water to London to the house
where Signr. Torriano  used to be and staid there a while with Mr.
Ashwell, Spicer and Ruddier.  Then I went and paid L12 17s. 6d. due from
me to Captn. Dick Matthews according to his direction the last week in a
letter.  After that I came back by water playing on my flageolette and not
finding my wife come home again from her father's I went and sat awhile
and played at cards with Mrs. Jam, whose maid had newly got an ague and
was ill thereupon.  So homewards again, having great need to do my
business, and so pretending to meet Mr. Shott the wood monger of Whitehall
I went and eased myself at the Harp and Ball, and thence home where I sat
writing till bed-time and so to bed.  There seems now to be a general
cease of talk, it being taken for granted that Monk do resolve to stand to
the Parliament, and nothing else.  Spent a little time this night in
knocking up nails for my hat and cloaks in my chamber.

31st.  In the morning I fell to my lute till 9 o'clock.  Then to my Lord's
lodgings and set out a barrel of soap to be carried to Mrs. Ann. Here I
met with Nick Bartlet, one that had been a servant of my Lord's at sea and
at Harper's gave him his morning draft.  So to my office where I paid;
L1200 to Mr. Frost and at noon went to Will's to give one of the Excise
office a pot of ale that came to-day to tell over a bag of his that
wanted; L7 in it, which he found over in another bag.  Then home and dined
with my wife when in came Mr. Hawly newly come from shipboard from his
master, and brought me a letter of direction what to do in his lawsuit
with Squib about his house and office.  After dinner to Westminster Hall,
where all we clerks had orders to wait upon the Committee, at the Star
Chamber that is to try Colonel Jones,

     [Colonel John Jones, impeached, with General Ludlow and Miles
     Corbet, for treasonable practices in Ireland.]

and were to give an account what money we had paid him; but the Committee
did not sit to-day.  Hence to Will's, where I sat an hour or two with Mr.
Godfrey Austin, a scrivener in King Street.  Here I met and afterwards
bought the answer to General Monk's letter, which is a very good one, and
I keep it by me.  Thence to Mrs. Jem, where I found her maid in bed in a
fit of the ague, and Mrs. Jem among the people below at work and by and by
she came up hot and merry, as if they had given her wine, at which I was
troubled, but said nothing; after a game at cards, I went home and wrote
by the post and coming back called in at Harper's and drank with Mr.
Pulford, servant to Mr. Waterhouse, who tells me, that whereas my Lord
Fleetwood should have answered to the Parliament to-day, he wrote a letter
and desired a little more time, he being a great way out of town. And how
that he is quite ashamed of himself, and confesses how he had deserved
this, for his baseness to his brother.  And that he is like to pay part of
the money, paid out of the Exchequer during the Committee of Safety, out
of his own purse again, which I am glad of.  Home and to bed, leaving my
wife reading in Polixandre.

     ["Polexandre," by Louis Le Roy de Gomberville, was first published
     in 1632.  "The History of Polexander" was "done into English by W.
     Browne," and published in folio, London, 1647.  It was the earliest
     of the French heroic romances, and it appears to have been the model
     for the works of Calprenede and Mdlle. de Scuderi; see Dunlop's
     "History of Fiction" for the plot of the romance.]

I could find nothing in Mr. Downing's letter, which Hawly brought me,
concerning my office; but I could discern that Hawly had a mind that I
would get to be Clerk of the Council, I suppose that he might have the
greater salary; but I think it not safe yet to change this for a public
employment.




     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     A very fine dinner
     Gave him his morning draft
     Much troubled with thoughts how to get money
     My wife was making of her tarts and larding of her pullets
     My wife was very unwilling to let me go forth
     Put to a great loss how I should get money to make up my cash
     This day I began to put on buckles to my shoes





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Diary of Samuel Pepys, January
1659/1660, by Samuel Pepys

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***

***** This file should be named 4118.txt or 4118.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/4/1/1/4118/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
