The Project Gutenberg EBook of Diary of Samuel Pepys, August/September 1660
by Samuel Pepys

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Diary of Samuel Pepys, August/September 1660

Author: Samuel Pepys

Release Date: November 29, 2004 [EBook #4123]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***




Produced by David Widger





                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A.   F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A.  LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                           AUGUST & SEPTEMBER
                                 1660

August 1st.  Up very early, and by water to Whitehall to my Lord's, and
there up to my Lord's lodging (Win. Howe being now ill of the gout at Mr.
Pierce's), and there talked with him about the affairs of the Navy, and
how I was now to wait today at the Privy Seal.  Commissioner Pett went
with me, whom I desired to make my excuse at the office for my absence
this day.  Hence to the Privy Seal Office, where I got (by Mr. Mathews'
means) possession of the books and table, but with some expectation of
Baron's bringing of a warrant from the King to have this month.  Nothing
done this morning, Baron having spoke to Mr. Woodson and Groome (clerks to
Mr. Trumbull of the Signet) to keep all work in their hands till the
afternoon, at which time he expected to have his warrant from the King for
this month.--[The clerks of the Privy Seal took the duty of attendance for
a month by turns.]--I took at noon Mr. Harper to the Leg in King Street,
and did give him his dinner, who did still advise me much to act wholly
myself at the Privy Seal, but I told him that I could not, because I had
other business to take up my time.  In the afternoon at, the office again,
where we had many things to sign; and I went to the Council Chamber, and
there got my Lord to sign the first bill, and the rest all myself; but
received no money today.  After I had signed all, I went with Dick Scobell
and Luellin to drink at a bottle beer house in the Strand, and after
staying there a while (had sent W. Hewer home before), I took boat and
homewards went, and in Fish Street bought a Lobster, and as I had bought
it I met with Winter and Mr. Delabarr, and there with a piece of sturgeon
of theirs we went to the Sun Tavern in the street and ate them.  Late home
and to bed.

2d.  To Westminster by water with Sir W. Batten and Sir W. Pen (our
servants in another boat) to the Admiralty; and from thence I went to my
Lord's to fetch him thither, where we stayed in the morning about ordering
of money for the victuailers, and advising how to get a sum of money to
carry on the business of the Navy.  From thence dined with Mr. Blackburne
at his house with his friends (his wife being in the country and just upon
her return to London), where we were very well treated and merry.  From
thence W. Hewer and I to the office of Privy Seal, where I stayed all the
afternoon, and received about L40 for yesterday and to-day, at which my
heart rejoiced for God's blessing to me, to give me this advantage by
chance, there being of this L40 about L10 due to me for this day's work.
So great is the present profit of this office, above what it was in the
King's time; there being the last month about 300 bills; whereas in the
late King's time it was much to have 40.  With my money home by coach, it,
being the first time that I could get home before our gates were shut
since I came to the Navy office.  When I came home I found my wife not
very well of her old pain . .  .  .  which she had when we were married
first.  I went and cast up the expense that I laid out upon my former
house (because there are so many that are desirous of it, and I am, in my
mind, loth to let it go out of my hands, for fear of a turn).  I find my
layings-out to come to about L20, which with my fine will come to about
L22 to him that shall hire my house of me.--[Pepys wished to let his house
in Axe Yard now that he had apartments at the Navy Office.]--To bed.

3rd.  Up betimes this morning, and after the barber had done with me, then
to the office, where I and Sir William Pen only did meet and despatch
business.  At noon my wife and I by coach to Dr. Clerke's to dinner: I was
very much taken with his lady, a comely, proper woman, though not
handsome; but a woman of the best language I ever heard.  Here dined Mrs.
Pierce and her husband.  After dinner I took leave to go to Westminster,
where I was at the Privy Seal Office all day, signing things and taking
money, so that I could not do as I had intended, that is to return to them
and go to the Red Bull Playhouse,

     [This well-known theatre was situated in St. John's Street on the
     site of Red Bull Yard.  Pepys went there on March 23rd, 1661, when
     he expressed a very poor opinion of the place.  T. Carew, in some
     commendatory lines on Sir William.  Davenant's play, "The just
     Italian," 1630, abuses both audiences and actors:--

              "There are the men in crowded heaps that throng
               To that adulterate stage, where not a tongue
               Of th' untun'd kennel can a line repeat
               Of serious sense."

     There is a token of this house (see "Boyne's Trade Tokens," ed.
     Williamson, vol. i., 1889, p. 725).]

but I took coach and went to see whether it was done so or no, and I found
it done.  So I returned to Dr. Clerke's, where I found them and my wife,
and by and by took leave and went away home.

4th.  To White Hall, where I found my Lord gone with the King by water to
dine at the Tower with Sir J. Robinson,' Lieutenant.  I found my Lady
Jemimah--[Lady Jemima Montage, daughter of Lord Sandwich, previously
described as Mrs. Jem.]--at my Lord's, with whom I staid and dined, all
alone; after dinner to the Privy Seal Office, where I did business.  So to
a Committee of Parliament (Sir Hen[eage] Finch, Chairman), to give them an
answer to an order of theirs, "that we could not give them any account of
the Accounts of the Navy in the years 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, as they desire."
After that I went and bespoke some linen of Betty Lane in the Hall, and
after that to the Trumpet, where I sat and talked with her, &c.  At night,
it being very rainy, and it thundering and lightning exceedingly, I took
coach at the Trumpet door, taking Monsieur L'Impertinent along with me as
far as the Savoy, where he said he went to lie with Cary Dillon,

     [Colonel Cary Dillon, a friend of the Butlers, who courted the fair
     Frances; but the engagement was subsequently broken off, see
     December 31 st, 1661.]

and is still upon the mind of going (he and his whole family) to Ireland.
Having set him down I made haste home, and in the courtyard, it being very
dark, I heard a man inquire for my house, and having asked his business,
he told me that my man William (who went this morning--out of town to meet
his aunt Blackburne) was come home not very well to his mother, and so
could not come home to-night.  At which I was very sorry. I found my wife
still in pain.  To bed, having not time to write letters, and indeed
having so many to write to all places that I have no heart to go about
them.  Mrs. Shaw did die yesterday and her husband so sick that he is not
like to live.

5th.  Lord's day.  My wife being much in pain, I went this morning to Dr.
Williams (who had cured her once before of this business), in Holborn, and
he did give me an ointment which I sent home by my boy, and a plaister
which I took with me to Westminster (having called and seen my mother in
the morning as I went to the doctor), where I dined with Mr. Sheply (my
Lord dining at Kensington).  After dinner to St. Margaret's, where the
first time I ever heard Common Prayer in that Church.  I sat with Mr. Hill
in his pew; Mr. Hill that married in Axe Yard and that was aboard us in
the Hope.  Church done I went and Mr. Sheply to see W. Howe at Mr.
Pierces, where I staid singing of songs and psalms an hour or two, and
were very pleasant with Mrs. Pierce and him.  Thence to my Lord's, where I
staid and talked and drank with Mr. Sheply.  After that to Westminster
stairs, where I saw a fray between Mynheer Clinke, a Dutchman, that was at
Hartlibb's wedding, and a waterman, which made good sport.  After that I
got a Gravesend boat, that was come up to fetch some bread on this side
the bridge, and got them to carry me to the bridge, and so home, where I
found my wife.  After prayers I to bed to her, she having had a very bad
night of it.  This morning before I was up Will came home pretty well
again, he having been only weary with riding, which he is not used to.

6th.  This morning at the office, and, that being done, home to dinner all
alone, my wife being ill in pain a-bed, which I was troubled at, and not a
little impatient.  After dinner to Whitehall at the Privy Seal all the
afternoon, and at night with Mr. Man to Mr. Rawlinson's in Fenchurch
Street, where we staid till eleven o'clock at night.  So home and to bed,
my wife being all this day in great pain.  This night Mr. Man offered me
L1000 for my office of Clerk of the Acts, which made my mouth water; but
yet I dare not take it till I speak with my Lord to have his consent.

7th.  This morning to Whitehall to the Privy Seal, and took Mr. Moore and
myself and dined at my Lord's with Mr. Sheply.  While I was at dinner in
come Sam. Hartlibb  and his brother-in-law, now knighted by the King, to
request my promise of a ship for them to Holland, which I had promised to
get for them.  After dinner to the Privy Seal all the afternoon.  At
night, meeting Sam. Hartlibb, he took me by coach to Kensington, to my
Lord of Holland's; I staid in the coach while he went in about his
business.  He staying long I left the coach and walked back again before
on foot (a very pleasant walk) to Kensington, where I drank and staid very
long waiting for him.  At last he came, and after drinking at the inn we
went towards Westminster.  Here I endeavoured to have looked out Jane that
formerly lived at Dr. Williams' at Cambridge, whom I had long thought to
live at present here, but I found myself in an error, meeting one in the
place where I expected to have found her, but she proved not she though
very like her.  We went to the Bullhead, where he and I sat and drank till
11 at night, and so home on foot.  Found my wife pretty well again, and so
to bed.

8th.  We met at the office, and after that to dinner at home, and from
thence with my wife by water to Catan Sterpin, with whom and her mistress
Pye we sat discoursing of Kate's marriage to Mons. Petit, her mistress and
I giving the best advice we could for her to suspend her marriage till
Mons. Petit had got some place that may be able to maintain her, and not
for him to live upon the portion that she shall bring him. From thence to
Mr. Butler's to see his daughters, the first time that ever we made a
visit to them.  We found them very pretty, and Coll. Dillon there, a very
merry and witty companion, but methinks they live in a gaudy but very poor
condition.  From thence, my wife and I intending to see Mrs. Blackburne,
who had been a day or two again to see my wife, but my wife was not in
condition to be seen, but she not being at home my wife went to her
mother's and I to the Privy Seal.  At night from the Privy Seal, Mr.
Woodson and Mr. Jennings and I to the Sun Tavern till it was late, and
from thence to my Lord's, where my wife was come from Mrs. Blackburne's to
me, and after I had done some business with my Lord, she and I went to
Mrs. Hunt's, who would needs have us to lie at her house to-night, she
being with my wife so late at my Lord's with us, and would not let us go
home to-night.  We lay there all night very pleasantly and at ease .  .  .

9th.  Left my wife at Mrs. Hunt's and I to my Lord's, and from thence with
judge Advocate Fowler, Mr. Creed, and Mr. Sheply to the Rhenish
Wine-house, and Captain Hayward of the Plymouth, who is now ordered to
carry my Lord Winchelsea, Embassador to Constantinople.  We were very
merry, and judge Advocate did give Captain Hayward his Oath of Allegiance
and Supremacy.  Thence to my office of Privy Seal, and, having signed some
things there, with Mr. Moore and Dean Fuller to the Leg in King Street,
and, sending for my wife, we dined there very merry, and after dinner,
parted.  After dinner with my wife to Mrs. Blackburne to visit her.  She
being within I left my wife there, and I to the Privy Seal, where I
despatch some business, and from thence to Mrs. Blackburne again, who did
treat my wife and me with a great deal of civility, and did give us a fine
collation of collar of beef, &c.  Thence I, having my head full of drink
from having drunk so much Rhenish wine in the morning, and more in the
afternoon at Mrs. Blackburne's, came home and so to bed, not well, and
very ill all night.

10th.  I had a great deal of pain all night, and a great loosing upon me
so that I could not sleep.  In the morning I rose with much pain and to
the office.  I went and dined at home, and after dinner with great pain in
my back I went by water to Whitehall to the Privy Seal, and that done with
Mr. Moore and Creed to Hide Park by coach, and saw a fine foot-race three
times round the Park between an Irishman and Crow, that was once my Lord
Claypoole's footman.  (By the way I cannot forget that my Lord Claypoole
did the other day make enquiry of Mrs. Hunt, concerning my House in
Axe-yard, and did set her on work to get it of me for him, which methinks
is a very great change.)  Crow beat the other by above two miles.
Returned from Hide Park, I went to my Lord's, and took Will (who waited
for me there) by coach and went home, taking my lute home with me. It had
been all this while since I came from sea at my Lord's for him to play on.
To bed in some pain still.  For this month or two it is not imaginable how
busy my head has been, so that I have neglected to write letters to my
uncle Robert in answer to many of his, and to other friends, nor indeed
have I done anything as to my own family, and especially this month my
waiting at the Privy Seal makes me much more unable to think of anything,
because of my constant attendance there after I have done at the Navy
Office.  But blessed be God for my good chance of the Privy Seal, where I
get every day I believe about L3.  This place I got by chance, and my Lord
did give it me by chance, neither he nor I thinking it to be of the worth
that he and I find it to be.  Never since I was a man in the world was I
ever so great a stranger to public affairs as now I am, having not read a
new book or anything like it, or enquiring after any news, or what the
Parliament do, or in any wise how things go.  Many people look after my
house in Axe-yard to hire it, so that I am troubled with them, and I have
a mind to get the money to buy goods for my house at the Navy Office, and
yet I am loth to put it off because that Mr. Man bids me L1000 for my
office, which is so great a sum that I am loth to settle myself at my new
house, lest I should take Mr. Man's offer in case I found my Lord willing
to it.

11th.  I rose to-day without any pain, which makes me think that my pain
yesterday was nothing but from my drinking too much the day before.  To my
Lord this morning, who did give me order to get some things ready against
the afternoon for the Admiralty where he would meet.  To the Privy Seal,
and from thence going to my own house in Axeyard, I went in to Mrs.
Crisp's, where I met with Mr. Hartlibb; for whom I wrote a letter for my
Lord to sign for a ship for his brother and sister, who went away hence
this day to Gravesend, and from thence to Holland.  I found by discourse
with Mrs. Crisp that he is very jealous of her, for that she is yet very
kind to her old servant Meade.  Hence to my Lord's to dinner with Mr.
Sheply, so to the Privy Seal; and at night home, and then sent for the
barber, and was trimmed in the kitchen, the first time that ever I was so.
I was vexed this night that W. Hewer was out of doors till ten at night
but was pretty well satisfied again when my wife told me that he wept
because I was angry, though indeed he did give me a good reason for his
being out; but I thought it a good occasion to let him know that I do
expect his being at home.  So to bed.

12th.  Lord's day.  To my Lord, and with him to White Hall Chappell, where
Mr. Calamy preached, and made a good sermon upon these words "To whom much
is given, of him much is required."  He was very officious with his three
reverences to the King, as others do.  After sermon a brave anthem of
Captain Cooke's,

     [Henry Cooke, chorister of the Chapel Royal, adhered to the royal
     cause at the breaking out of the Civil Wars, and for his bravery
     obtained a captain's commission.  At the Restoration he received the
     appointment of Master of the Children of the Chapel Royal; he was an
     excellent musician, and three of his pupils turned out very
     distinguished musicians, viz, Pelham Humphrey, John Blow, and
     Michael Wise.  He was one of the original performers in the "Siege,
     of Rhodes."  He died July 13th, 1672,: and was buried in the
     cloisters of Westminster Abbey.  In another place, Pepys says, "a
     vain coxcomb he is, though he sings so well."]

which he himself sung, and the King was well pleased with it.  My Lord
dined at my Lord Chamberlain's, and I at his house with Mr. Sheply. After
dinner I did give Mr. Donne; who is going to sea, the key of my cabin and
direction for the putting up of my things.

After, that I went to walk, and meeting Mrs. Lane of Westminster Hall, I
took her to my Lord's, and did give her a bottle of wine in the garden,
where Mr. Fairbrother, of Cambridge, did come and found us, and drank with
us.  After that I took her to my house, where I was exceeding free in
dallying with her, and she not unfree to take it.  At night home and
called at my father's, where I found Mr. Fairbrother, but I did not stay
but went homewards and called in at Mr. Rawlinson's, whither my uncle
Wight was coming and did come, but was exceeding angry (he being a little
fuddled, and I think it was that I should see him in that case) as I never
saw him in my life, which I was somewhat troubled at.  Home and to bed.

13th.  A sitting day at our office.  After dinner to Whitehall; to the
Privy Seal, whither my father came to me, and staid talking with me a
great while, telling me that he had propounded Mr. John Pickering for Sir
Thomas Honywood's daughter, which I think he do not deserve for his own
merit: I know not what he may do for his estate.  My father and Creed and
I to the old Rhenish Winehouse, and talked and drank till night.  Then my
father home, and I to my Lord's; where he told me that he would suddenly
go into the country, and so did commend the business of his sea commission
to me in his absence.  After that home by coach, and took my L100 that I
had formerly left at Mr. Rawlinson's, home with me, which is the first
that ever I was master of at once.  To prayers, and to bed.

14th.  To the Privy Seal, and thence to my Lord's, where Mr. Pim, the
tailor, and I agreed upon making me a velvet coat.  From thence to the
Privy Seal again, where Sir Samuel Morland came in with a Baronet's grant
to pass, which the King had given him to make money of.  Here he staid
with me a great while; and told me the whole manner of his serving the
King in the time of the Protector; and how Thurloe's bad usage made him to
do it; how he discovered Sir R. Willis, and how he hath sunk his fortune
for the King; and that now the King hath given him a pension of L500 per
annum out of the Post Office for life, and the benefit of two Baronets;
all which do make me begin to think that he is not so much a fool as I
took him to be.  Home by water to the Tower, where my father, Mr.
Fairbrother, and Cooke dined with me.  After dinner in comes young Captain
Cuttance of the Speedwell, who is sent up for the gratuity given the
seamen that brought the King over.  He brought me a firkin of butter for
my wife, which is very welcome.  My father, after dinner, takes leave,
after I had given him 40s. for the last half year for my brother John at
Cambridge.  I did also make even with Mr. Fairbrother for my degree of
Master of Arts, which cost me about L9 16s.  To White Hall, and my wife
with me by water, where at the Privy Seal and elsewhere all the afternoon.
At night home with her by water, where I made good sport with having the
girl and the boy to comb my head, before I went to bed, in the kitchen.

15th.  To the office, and after dinner by water to White Hall, where I
found the King gone this morning by 5 of the clock to see a Dutch
pleasure-boat below bridge,

     [A yacht which was greatly admired, and was imitated and improved by
     Commissioner Pett, who built a yacht for the King in 1661, which was
     called the "Jenny."  Queen Elizabeth had a yacht, and one was built
     by Phineas Pett in 1604.]

where he dines, and my Lord with him.  The King do tire all his people
that are about him with early rising since he came.  To the office, all
the afternoon I staid there, and in the evening went to Westminster Hall,
where I staid at Mrs. Michell's, and with her and her husband sent for
some drink, and drank with them.  By the same token she and Mrs. Murford
and another old woman of the Hall were going a gossiping tonight.  From
thence to my Lord's, where I found him within, and he did give me
direction about his business in his absence, he intending to go into the
country to-morrow morning.  Here I lay all night in the old chamber which
I had now given up to W. Howe, with whom I did intend to lie, but he and I
fell to play with one another, so that I made him to go lie with Mr.
Sheply.  So I lay alone all night.

16th.  This morning my Lord (all things being ready) carried me by coach
to Mr. Crew's, (in the way talking how good he did hope my place would be
to me, and in general speaking that it was not the salary of any place
that did make a man rich, but the opportunity of getting money while he is
in the place) where he took leave, and went into the coach, and so for
Hinchinbroke.  My Lady Jemimah and Mr. Thomas Crew in the coach with him.
Hence to Whitehall about noon, where I met with Mr. Madge, who took me
along with him and Captain Cooke (the famous singer) and other masters of
music to dinner at an ordinary about Charing Cross where we dined, all
paying their club.  Hence to the Privy Seal, where there has been but
little work these two days.  In the evening home.

17th.  To the office, and that done home to dinner where Mr. Unthanke, my
wife's tailor, dined with us, we having nothing but a dish of sheep's
trotters.  After dinner by water to Whitehall, where a great deal of
business at the Privy Seal.  At night I and Creed and the judge-Advocate
went to Mr. Pim, the tailor's, who took us to the Half Moon, and there did
give us great store of wine and anchovies, and would pay for them all.
This night I saw Mr. Creed show many the strangest emotions to shift off
his drink I ever saw in my life.  By coach home and to bed.

18th.  This morning I took my wife towards Westminster by water, and
landed her at Whitefriars, with L5 to buy her a petticoat, and I to the
Privy Seal.  By and by comes my wife to tell me that my father has
persuaded her to buy a most fine cloth of 26s. a yard, and a rich lace,
that the petticoat will come to L5, at which I was somewhat troubled, but
she doing it very innocently, I could not be angry.  I did give her more
money, and sent her away, and I and Creed and Captain Hayward (who is now
unkindly put out of the Plymouth to make way for Captain Allen to go to
Constantinople, and put into his ship the Dover, which I know will trouble
my Lord) went and dined at the Leg in King Street, where Captain Ferrers,
my Lord's Cornet, comes to us, who after dinner took me and Creed to the
Cockpitt play,

     [The Cockpit Theatre, situated in Drury Lane, was occupied as a
     playhouse in the reign of James I.  It was occupied by Davenant and
     his company in 1658, and they remained in it until.  November 15th,
     1660, when they removed to Salisbury Court.]

the first that I have had time to see since my coming from sea, "The
Loyall Subject," where one Kinaston, a boy, acted the Duke's sister, but
made the loveliest lady that ever I saw in my life, only her voice not
very good.  After the play done, we three went to drink, and by Captain
Ferrers' means, Kinaston and another that acted Archas, the General, came
and drank with us.  Hence home by coach, and after being trimmed, leaving
my wife to look after her little bitch, which was just now a-whelping, I
to bed.

19th (Lord's day).  In the morning my wife tells me that the bitch has
whelped four young ones and is very well after it, my wife having had a
great fear that she would die thereof, the dog that got them being very
big.  This morning Sir W. Batten, Pen, and myself, went to church to the
churchwardens, to demand a pew, which at present could not be given us,
but we are resolved to have one built.  So we staid and heard Mr. Mills;'
a very, good minister.  Home to dinner, where my wife had on her new
petticoat that she bought yesterday, which indeed is a very fine cloth and
a fine lace; but that being of a light colour, and the lace all silver, it
makes no great show.  Mr. Creed and my brother Tom dined with me.  After
dinner my wife went and fetched the little puppies to us, which are very
pretty ones.  After they were gone, I went up to put my papers in order,
and finding my wife's clothes lie carelessly laid up, I was angry with
her, which I was troubled for.  After that my wife and I went and walked
in the garden, and so home to bed.

20th (Office day).  As Sir W. Pen and I were walking in the garden, a
messenger came to me from the Duke of York to fetch me to the Lord
Chancellor.  So (Mrs. Turner with her daughter The. being come to my house
to speak with me about a friend of hers to send to sea) I went with her in
her coach as far as Worcester House, but my Lord Chancellor being gone to
the House of Lords, I went thither, and (there being a law case before
them this day) got in, and there staid all the morning, seeing their
manner of sitting on woolpacks, &c., which I never did before.

     [It is said that these woolpacks were placed in the House of Lords
     for the judges to sit on, so that the fact that wool was a main
     source of our national wealth might be kept in the popular mind.
     The Lord Chancellor's seat is now called the Woolsack.]

After the House was up, I spoke to my Lord, and had order from him to come
to him at night.  This morning Mr. Creed did give me the Papers that
concern my Lord's sea commission, which he left in my hands and went to
sea this day to look after the gratuity money.

This afternoon at the Privy Seal, where reckoning with Mr. Moore, he had
got L100 for me together, which I was glad of, guessing that the profits
of this month would come to L100.

In the evening I went all alone to drink at Mr. Harper's, where I found
Mrs. Crisp's daughter, with whom and her friends I staid and drank, and so
with W. Hewer by coach to Worcester House, where I light, sending him home
with the L100 that I received to-day.  Here I staid, and saw my Lord
Chancellor come into his Great Hall, where wonderful how much company
there was to expect him at a Seal.  Before he would begin any business, he
took my papers of the state of the debts of the Fleet, and there viewed
them before all the people, and did give me his advice privately how to
order things, to get as much money as we can of the Parliament. That being
done, I went home, where I found all my things come home from sea (sent by
desire by Mr. Dun), of which I was glad, though many of my things are
quite spoilt with mould by reason of lying so long a shipboard, and my
cabin being not tight.  I spent much time to dispose of them tonight, and
so to bed.

21st.  This morning I went to White Hall with Sir W. Pen by water, who in
our passage told me how he was bred up under Sir W. Batten.  We went to
Mr. Coventry's chamber, and consulted of drawing my papers of debts of the
Navy against the afternoon for the Committee.  So to the Admiralty, where
W. Hewer and I did them, and after that he went to his Aunt's Blackburn
(who has a kinswoman dead at her house to-day, and was to be buried
to-night, by which means he staid very late out).  I to Westminster Hall,
where I met Mr. Crew and dined with him, where there dined one Mr.
Hickeman, an Oxford man, who spoke very much against the height of the now
old clergy, for putting out many of the religious fellows of Colleges, and
inveighing against them for their being drunk, which, if true, I am sorry
to hear.  After that towards Westminster, where I called on Mr. Pim, and
there found my velvet coat (the first that ever I had) done, and a velvet
mantle, which I took to the Privy Seal Office, and there locked them up,
and went to the Queen's Court, and there, after much waiting, spoke with
Colonel Birch, who read my papers, and desired some addition, which done I
returned to the Privy Seal, where little to do, and with Mr. Moore towards
London, and in our way meeting Monsieur Eschar (Mr. Montagu's man), about
the Savoy, he took us to the Brazennose Tavern, and there drank and so
parted, and I home by coach, and there, it being post-night, I wrote to my
Lord to give him notice that all things are well; that General Monk is
made Lieutenant of Ireland, which my Lord Roberts (made Deputy) do not
like of, to be Deputy to any man but the King himself.  After that to bed.

22nd.  Office, which done, Sir W. Pen took me into the garden, and there
told me how Mr. Turner do intend to petition the Duke for an allowance
extra as one of the Clerks of the Navy, which he desired me to join with
him in the furthering of, which I promised to do so that it did not
reflect upon me or to my damage to have any other added, as if I was not
able to perform my place; which he did wholly disown to be any of his
intention, but far from it.  I took Mr. Hater home with me to dinner, with
whom I did advise, who did give me the same counsel.  After dinner he and
I to the office about doing something more as to the debts of the Navy
than I had done yesterday, and so to Whitehall to the Privy Seal, and
having done there, with my father (who came to see me) to Westminster Hall
and the Parliament House to look for Col. Birch, but found him not. In the
House, after the Committee was up, I met with Mr. G. Montagu, and joyed
him in his entrance (this being his 3d day) for Dover.  Here he made me
sit all alone in the House, none but he and I, half an hour, discoursing
how things stand, and in short he told me how there was like to be many
factions at Court between Marquis Ormond, General Monk, and the Lord
Roberts, about the business of Ireland; as there is already between the
two Houses about the Act of Indemnity; and in the House of Commons,
between the Episcopalian and Presbyterian men.  Hence to my father's
(walking with Mr. Herring, the minister of St. Bride's), and took them to
the Sun Tavern, where I found George, my old drawer, come again.  From
thence by water, landed them at Blackfriars, and so home and to bed.

23rd.  By water to Doctors' Commons to Dr. Walker, to give him my Lord's
papers to view over concerning his being empowered to be Vice-Admiral
under the Duke of York.  There meeting with Mr. Pinkney, he and I to a
morning draft, and thence by water to White Hall, to the Parliament House,
where I spoke with Colonel Birch, and so to the Admiralty chamber, where
we and Mr. Coventry had a meeting about several businesses. Amongst
others, it was moved that Phineas Pett (kinsman to the Commissioner) of
Chatham, should be suspended his employment till he had answered some
articles put in against him, as that he should formerly say that the King
was a bastard and his mother a whore.  Hence to Westminster Hall, where I
met with my father Bowyer, and Mr. Spicer, and them I took to the Leg in
King Street, and did give them a dish or two of meat, and so away to the
Privy Seal, where, the King being out of town, we have had nothing to do
these two days.  To Westminster Hall, where I met with W. Symons, T.
Doling, and Mr. Booth, and with them to the Dogg, where we eat a musk
melon

     ["Melons were hardly known in England till Sir George Gardiner
     brought one from Spain, when they became in general estimation.  The
     ordinary price was five or six shillings."--Quarterly Review, vol,
     xix.]

(the first that I have eat this year), and were very merry with W. Symons,
calling him Mr. Dean, because of the Dean's lands that his uncle had left
him, which are like to be lost all.  Hence home by water, and very late at
night writing letters to my Lord to Hinchinbroke, and also to the
Vice-Admiral in the Downs, and so to bed.

24th.  Office, and thence with Sir William Batten and Sir William Pen to
the parish church to find out a place where to build a seat or a gallery
to sit in, and did find one which is to be done speedily.  Hence with them
to dinner at a tavern in Thames Street, where they were invited to a
roasted haunch of venison and other very good victuals and company. Hence
to Whitehall to the Privy Seal, but nothing to do.  At night by land to my
father's, where I found my mother not very well.  I did give her a pint of
sack.  My father came in, and Dr. T. Pepys, who talked with me in French
about looking out for a place for him.  But I found him a weak man, and
speaks the worst French that ever I heard of one that had been so long
beyond sea.  Hence into Pant's Churchyard and bought Barkley's Argenis in
Latin, and so home and to bed.  I found at home that Captain Burr had sent
me 4 dozen bottles of wine today.  The King came back to Whitehall
to-night.

25th.  This morning Mr. Turner and I by coach from our office to Whitehall
(in our way I calling on Dr. Walker for the papers I did give him the
other day, which he had perused and found that the Duke's counsel had
abated something of the former draught which Dr. Walker drew for my Lord)
to Sir G.  Carteret, where we there made up an estimate of the debts of
the Navy for the Council.  At noon I took Mr. Turner and Mr. Moore to the
Leg in King Street, and did give them a dinner, and afterward to the Sun
Tavern, and did give Mr. Turner a glass of wine, there coming to us Mr.
Fowler the apothecary (the judge's son) with a book of lute lessons which
his father had left there for me, such as he formerly did use to play when
a young man, and had the use of his hand. To the Privy Seal, and found
some business now again to do there.  To Westminster Hall for a new
half-shirt of Mrs. Lane, and so home by water. Wrote letters by the post
to my Lord and to sea.  This night W. Hewer brought me home from Mr. Pim's
my velvet coat and cap, the first that ever I had.  So to bed.

26th (Lord's day).  With Sir W.  Pen to the parish church, where we are
placed in the highest pew of all, where a stranger preached a dry and
tedious long sermon.  Dined at home.  To church again in the afternoon
with my wife; in the garden and on the leads at night, and so to supper
and to bed.

27th.  This morning comes one with a vessel of Northdown ale from Mr.
Pierce, the purser, to me, and after him another with a brave Turkey
carpet and a jar of olives from Captain Cuttance, and a pair of fine
turtle-doves from John Burr to my wife.  These things came up to-day in
our smack, and my boy Ely came along with them, and came after office was
done to see me.  I did give him half a crown because I saw that he was
ready to cry to see that he could not be entertained by me here.  In the
afternoon to the Privy Seal, where good store of work now toward the end
of the month.  From thence with Mr. Mount, Luellin, and others to the Bull
head till late, and so home, where about to o'clock Major Hart came to me,
whom I did receive with wine and anchovies, which made me so dry that I
was ill with them all night, and was fain to have the girle rise and fetch
me some drink.

28th.  At home looking over my papers and books and house as to the
fitting of it to my mind till two in the afternoon.  Some time I spent
this morning beginning to teach my wife some scale in music, and found her
apt beyond imagination.  To the Privy Seal, where great store of work
to-day.  Colonel Scroope--[Colonel Adrian Scroope, one of the persons who
sat in judgment upon Charles I.]--is this day excepted out of the Act of
Indemnity, which has been now long in coming out, but it is expected
to-morrow.  I carried home L80 from the Privy Seal, by coach, and at night
spent a little more time with my wife about her music with great content.
This day I heard my poor mother had then two days been very ill, and I
fear she will not last long.  To bed, a little troubled that I fear my boy
Will

     [Pepys refers to two Wills.  This was Will Wayneman; the other was
     William Hewer.]

is a thief and has stole some money of mine, particularly a letter that
Mr. Jenkins did leave the last week with me with half a crown in it to
send to his son.

29th (Office day).  Before I went to the office my wife and I examined my
boy Will about his stealing of things, but he denied all with the greatest
subtlety and confidence in the world.  To the office, and after office
then to the Church, where we took another view of the place where we had
resolved to build a gallery, and have set men about doing it. Home to
dinner, and there I found my wife had discovered my boy Will's theft and a
great deal more than we imagined, at which I was vexed and intend to put
him away.  To my office at the Privy Seal in the afternoon, and from
thence at night to the Bull Head, with Mount, Luellin, and others, and
hence to my father's, and he being at my uncle Fenner's, I went thither to
him, and there sent for my boy's father and talked with him about his son,
and had his promise that if I will send home his boy, he will take him
notwithstanding his indenture.  Home at night, and find that my wife had
found out more of the boy's stealing 6s. out of W. Hewer's closet, and hid
it in the house of office, at which my heart was troubled.  To bed, and
caused the boy's clothes to be brought up to my chamber.  But after we
were all a-bed, the wench (which lies in our chamber) called us to listen
of a sudden, which put my wife into such a fright that she shook every
joint of her, and a long time that I could not get her out of it.  The
noise was the boy, we did believe, got in a desperate mood out of his bed
to do himself or William [Hewer] some mischief.  But the wench went down
and got a candle lighted, and finding the boy in bed, and locking the
doors fast, with a candle burning all night, we slept well, but with a
great deal of fear.

30th.  We found all well in the morning below stairs, bu the boy in a sad
plight of seeming sorrow; but he is the most cunning rogue that ever I met
with of his age.  To White Hall, where I met with the Act of
Indemnity--[12 Car. II.  cap. II, an act of free and general pardon,
indemnity, and oblivion.]--(so long talked of and hoped for), with the Act
of Rate for Pole-money, an for judicial proceedings.  At Westminster Hall
I met with Mr. Paget the lawyer, and dined with him at Heaven. This
afternoon my wife went to Mr. Pierce's wife's child's christening, and was
urged to be godmother, but I advised her before-hand not to do it, so she
did not, but as proxy for my Lady Jemimah.  This the first day that ever I
saw my wife wear black patches since we were married!

     [The fashion of placing black patches on the face was introduced
     towards the close of the reign of Charles I., and the practice is
     ridiculed in the "Spectator."]

My Lord came to town to-day, but coming not home till very late I staid
till 10 at night, and so home on foot.  Mr. Sheply and Mr. Childe this
night at the tavern.

31st.  Early to wait upon my Lord at White Hall, and with him to the
Duke's chamber.  So to my office in Seething Lane.  Dined at home, and
after dinner to my Lord again, who told me that he is ordered to go
suddenly to sea, and did give me some orders to be drawing up against his
going.  This afternoon I agreed to let my house quite out of my hands to
Mr. Dalton (one of the wine sellers to the King, with whom I had drunk in
the old wine cellar two or three times) for L41.  At night made even at
Privy Seal for this month against tomorrow to give up possession, but we
know not to whom, though we most favour Mr. Bickerstaffe, with whom and
Mr. Matthews we drank late after office was done at the Sun, discoursing
what to do about it tomorrow against Baron, and so home and to bed.
Blessed be God all things continue well with and for me.  I pray God fit
me for a change of my fortune.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                              SEPTEMBER
                                 1660

September 1st.  This morning I took care to get a vessel to carry my
Lord's things to the Downs on Monday next, and so to White Hall to my
Lord, where he and I did look over the Commission drawn for him by the
Duke's Council, which I do not find my Lord displeased with, though short
of what Dr. Walker did formerly draw for him.  Thence to the Privy Seal to
see how things went there, and I find that Mr. Baron had by a severe
warrant from the King got possession of the office from his brother
Bickerstaffe, which is very strange, and much to our admiration, it being
against all open justice.  Mr. Moore and I and several others being
invited to-day by Mr. Goodman, a friend of his, we dined at the Bullhead
upon the best venison pasty that ever I eat of in my life, and with one
dish more, it was the best dinner I ever was at.  Here rose in discourse
at table a dispute between Mr. Moore and Dr. Clerke, the former affirming
that it was essential to a tragedy to have the argument of it true, which
the Doctor denied, and left it to me to be judge, and the cause to be
determined next Tuesday morning at the same place, upon the eating of the
remains of the pasty, and the loser to spend 10s.  All this afternoon
sending express to the fleet, to order things against my Lord's coming and
taking direction of my Lord about some rich furniture to take along with
him for the Princess!--[Mary, Princess Royal and Princess of Orange, who
died in December of this year.]--And talking of this, I hear by Mr.
Townsend, that there is the greatest preparation against the Prince de
Ligne's a coming over from the King of Spain, that ever was in England for
their Embassador.  Late home, and what with business and my boy's roguery
my mind being unquiet, I went to bed.

2nd (Sunday).  To Westminster, my Lord being gone before my coming to
chapel.  I and Mr. Sheply told out my money, and made even for my Privy
Seal fees and gratuity money, &c., to this day between my Lord and me.
After that to chappell, where Dr. Fern, a good honest sermon upon "The
Lord is my shield."  After sermon a dull anthem, and so to my Lord's (he
dining abroad) and dined with Mr. Sheply.  So, to St. Margarett's, and
heard a good sermon upon the text "Teach us the old way," or something
like it, wherein he ran over all the new tenets in policy and religion,
which have brought us into all our late divisions.  From church to Mrs.
Crisp's (having sent Win. Hewer home to tell my wife that I could not come
home to-night because of my Lord's going out early to-morrow morning),
where I sat late, and did give them a great deal of wine, it being a
farewell cup to Laud Crisp.  I drank till the daughter began to be very
loving to me and kind, and I fear is not so good as she should be.  To my
Lord's, and to bed with Mr. Sheply.

3rd.  Up and to Mr.-----, the goldsmith near the new Exchange, where I
bought my wedding ring, and there, with much ado, got him to put a gold
ring to the jewell, which the King of Sweden did give my Lord: out of
which my Lord had now taken the King's picture, and intends to make a
George of it.  This morning at my Lord's I had an opportunity to speak
with Sir George Downing, who has promised me to give me up my bond, and to
pay me for my last quarter while I was at sea, that so I may pay Mr. Moore
and Hawly.  About noon my Lord, having taken leave of the King in the
Shield Gallery (where I saw with what kindness the King did hug my Lord at
his parting), I went over with him and saw him in his coach at Lambeth,
and there took leave of him, he going to the Downs, which put me in mind
of his first voyage that ever he made, which he did begin like this from
Lambeth.  In the afternoon with Mr. Moore to my house to cast up our Privy
Seal accounts, where I found that my Lord's comes to 400 and odd pounds,
and mine to L132, out of which I do give him as good as L25 for his pains,
with which I doubt he is not satisfied, but my heart is full glad.  Thence
with him to Mr. Crew's, and did fetch as much money as did make even our
accounts between him and me.  Home, and there found Mr. Cooke come back
from my Lord for me to get him some things bought for him to be brought
after them, a toilet cap and comb case of silk, to make use of in Holland,
for he goes to the Hague, which I can do to-morrow morning.  This day my
father and my uncle Fenner, and both his sons, have been at my house to
see it, and my wife did treat them nobly with wine and anchovies.  By
reason of my Lord's going to-day I could not get the office to meet
to-day.

4th.  I did many things this morning at home before I went out, as looking
over the joiners, who are flooring my diningroom, and doing business with
Sir Williams

     ["Both Sir Williams" is a favourite expression with Pepys, meaning
     Sir William Batten and Sir William Penn.]

both at the office, and so to Whitehall, and so to the Bullhead, where we
had the remains of our pasty, where I did give my verdict against Mr.
Moore upon last Saturday's wager, where Dr. Fuller coming in do confirm me
in my verdict.  From thence to my Lord's and despatched Mr. Cooke away
with the things to my Lord.  From thence to Axe Yard to my house, where
standing at the door Mrs. Diana comes by, whom I took into my house
upstairs, and there did dally with her a great while, and found that in
Latin "Nulla puella negat."  So home by water, and there sat up late
setting my papers in order, and my money also, and teaching my wife her
music lesson, in which I take great pleasure.  So to bed.

5th.  To the office.  From thence by coach upon the desire of the
principal officers to a Master of Chancery to give Mr. Stowell his oath,
whereby he do answer that he did hear Phineas Pett say very high words
against the King a great while ago.  Coming back our coach broke, and so
Stowell and I to Mr. Rawlinson's, and after a glass of wine parted, and I
to the office, home to dinner, where (having put away my boy in the
morning) his father brought him again, but I did so clear up my boy's
roguery to his father, that he could not speak against my putting him
away, and so I did give him 10s. for the boy's clothes that I made him,
and so parted and tore his indenture.  All the afternoon with the
principal officers at Sir W. Batten's about Pett's business (where I first
saw Col. Slingsby, who has now his appointment for Comptroller), but did
bring it to no issue.  This day I saw our Dedimus to be sworn in the peace
by, which will be shortly.  In the evening my wife being a little
impatient I went along with her to buy her a necklace of pearl, which will
cost L4 10s., which I am willing to comply with her in for her
encouragement, and because I have lately got money, having now above L200
in cash beforehand in the world.  Home, and having in our way bought a
rabbit and two little lobsters, my wife and I did sup late, and so to bed.
Great news now-a-day of the Duke d'Anjou's

     [Philip, Duke of Anjou, afterwards Duke of Orleans, brother of Louis
     XIV.  (born 1640, died 1701), married the Princess Henrietta,
     youngest daughter of Charles I., who was born June 16th, 1664, at
     Exeter.  She was known as "La belle Henriette."  In May, 1670, she
     came to Dover on a political mission from Louis XIV. to her brother
     Charles II., but the visit was undertaken much against the wish of
     her husband.  Her death occurred on her return to France, and
     was attributed to poison.  It was the occasion of one of the finest
     of Bossuet's "Oraisons Funebres."]

desire to marry the Princesse Henrietta.  Hugh Peters is said to be taken,

     [Hugh Peters, born at Fowey, Cornwall, and educated at Trinity
     College, Cambridge, where he graduated M.A. 1622.  He was tried as
     one of the regicides, and executed.  A broadside, entitled "The
     Welsh Hubub, or the Unkennelling and earthing of Hugh Peters that
     crafty Fox," was printed October 3rd, 1660.]

and the Duke of Gloucester is ill, and it is said it will prove the
small-pox.

6th.  To Whitehall by water with Sir W. Batten, and in our passage told me
how Commissioner Pett did pay himself for the entertainment that he did
give the King at Chatham at his coming in, and 20s. a day all the time he
was in Holland, which I wonder at, and so I see there is a great deal of
envy between the two.  At Whitehall I met with Commissioner Pett, who told
me how Mr. Coventry and Fairbank his solicitor are falling out, one
complaining of the other for taking too great fees, which is too true.  I
find that Commissioner Pett is under great discontent, and is loth to give
too much money for his place, and so do greatly desire me to go along with
him in what we shall agree to give Mr. Coventry, which I have promised
him, but am unwilling to mix my fortune with him that is going down the
wind.  We all met this morning and afterwards at the Admiralty, where our
business is to ask provision of victuals ready for the ships in the Downs,
which we did, Mr. Gauden promising to go himself thither and see it done.
Dined Will and I at my Lord's upon a joint of meat that I sent Mrs. Sarah
for.  Afterwards to my office and sent all my books to my Lord's, in order
to send them to my house that I now dwell in.  Home and to bed.

7th.  Not office day, and in the afternoon at home all the day, it being
the first that I have been at home all day since I came hither.  Putting
my papers, books and other things in order, and writing of letters.  This
day my Lord set sail from the Downs for Holland.

8th.  All day also at home.  At night sent for by Sir W. Pen, with whom I
sat late drinking a glass of wine and discoursing, and I find him to be a
very sociable man, and an able man, and very cunning.

9th (Sunday).  In the morning with Sir W. Pen to church, and a very good
sermon of Mr. Mills.  Home to dinner, and Sir W. Pen with me to such as I
had, and it was very handsome, it being the first time that he ever saw my
wife or house since we came hither.  Afternoon to church with my wife, and
after that home, and there walked with Major Hart, who came to see me, in
the garden, who tells me that we are all like to be speedily disbanded;

     [The Trained Bands were abolished in 1663, but those of the City of
     London were specially excepted.  The officers of the Trained Bands
     were supplied by the Hon.  Artillery Company.]

and then I lose the benefit of a muster.  After supper to bed.

10th (Office day).  News of the Duke's intention to go tomorrow to the
fleet for a day or two to meet his sister.  Col. Slingsby and I to
Whitehall, thinking to proffer our service to the Duke to wait upon him,
but meeting with Sir G. Carteret he sent us in all haste back again to
hire two Catches for the present use of the Duke.  So we returned and
landed at the Bear at the Bridge foot, where we saw Southwark Fair (I
having not at all seen Bartholomew Fair), and so to the Tower wharf, where
we did hire two catches.  So to the office and found Sir W. Batten at
dinner with some friends upon a good chine of beef, on which I ate
heartily, I being very hungry.  Home, where Mr. Snow (whom afterwards we
called one another cozen) came to me to see me, and with him and one
Shelston, a simple fellow that looks after an employment (that was with me
just upon my going to sea last), to a tavern, where till late with them.
So home, having drunk too much, and so to bed.

11th.  At Sir W.  Batten's with Sir W.  Pen we drank our morning draft,
and from thence for an hour in the office and dispatch a little business.
Dined at Sir W. Batten's, and by this time I see that we are like to have
a very good correspondence and neighbourhood, but chargeable.  All the
afternoon at home looking over my carpenters.  At night I called Thos.
Hater out of the office to my house to sit and talk with me.  After he was
gone I caused the girl to wash the wainscot of our parlour, which she did
very well, which caused my wife and I good sport.  Up to my chamber to
read a little, and wrote my Diary for three or four days past.  The Duke
of York did go to-day by break of day to the Downs.  The Duke of
Gloucester ill.  The House of Parliament was to adjourn to-day.  I know
not yet whether it be done or no.  To bed.

12th (Office day).  This noon I expected to have had my cousin Snow and my
father come to dine with me, but it being very rainy they did not come.
My brother Tom came to my house with a letter from my brother John,
wherein he desires some books: Barthol.  Anatom., Rosin.  Rom. Antiq., and
Gassend.  Astronom., the last of which I did give him, and an angel--[A
gold coin varying in value at different times from 6s. 8d. to
10s.]--against my father buying of the others.  At home all the afternoon
looking after my workmen, whose laziness do much trouble me.  This day the
Parliament adjourned.

13th.  Old East comes to me in the morning with letters, and I did give
him a bottle of Northdown ale, which made the poor man almost drunk.  In
the afternoon my wife went to the burial of a child of my cozen Scott's,
and it is observable that within this month my Aunt Wight was brought to
bed of two girls, my cozen Stradwick of a girl and a boy, and my cozen
Scott of a boy, and all died.  In the afternoon to Westminster, where Mr.
Dalton was ready with his money to pay me for my house, but our writings
not being drawn it could not be done to-day.  I met with Mr. Hawly, who
was removing his things from Mr. Bowyer's, where he has lodged a great
while, and I took him and W. Bowyer to the Swan and drank, and Mr. Hawly
did give me a little black rattoon,--[Probably an Indian rattan
cane.]--painted and gilt.  Home by water.  This day the Duke of Gloucester
died of the small-pox, by the great negligence of the doctors.

14th (Office day).  I got L42 15s. appointed me by bill for my employment
of Secretary to the 4th of this month, it being the last money I shall
receive upon that score.  My wife went this afternoon to see my mother,
who I hear is very ill, at which my heart is very sad.  In the afternoon
Luellin comes to my house, and takes me out to the Mitre in Wood Street,
where Mr. Samford, W.  Symons and his wife, and Mr. Scobell, Mr. Mount and
Chetwind, where they were very merry, Luellin being drunk, and I being to
defend the ladies from his kissing them, I kissed them myself very often
with a great deal of mirth.  Parted very late, they by coach to
Westminster, and I on foot.

15th.  Met very early at our office this morning to pick out the
twenty-five ships which are to be first paid off: After that to
Westminster and dined with Mr. Dalton at his office, where we had one
great court dish, but our papers not being done we could [not] make an end
of our business till Monday next.  Mr. Dalton and I over the water to our
landlord Vanly, with whom we agree as to Dalton becoming a tenant.  Back
to Westminster, where I met with Dr. Castles, who chidd me for some errors
in our Privy-Seal business; among the rest, for letting the fees of the
six judges pass unpaid, which I know not what to say to, till I speak to
Mr. Moore. I was much troubled, for fear of being forced to pay the money
myself. Called at my father's going home, and bespoke mourning for myself,
for the death of the Duke of Gloucester.  I found my mother pretty well.
So home and to bed.

16th (Sunday).  To Dr. Hardy's church, and sat with Mr. Rawlinson and
heard a good sermon upon the occasion of the Duke's death.  His text was,
"And is there any evil in the city and the Lord hath not done it?" Home to
dinner, having some sport with Win. [Hewer], who never had been at Common
Prayer before.  After dinner I alone to Westminster, where I spent my time
walking up and down in Westminster Abbey till sermon time with Ben. Palmer
and Fetters the watchmaker, who told me that my Lord of Oxford is also
dead of the small-pox; in whom his family dies, after 600 years having
that honour in their family and name.  From thence to the Park, where I
saw how far they had proceeded in the Pell-mell, and in making a river
through the Park, which I had never seen before since it was begun.

     [This is the Mall in St. James's Park, which was made by Charles
     II., the former Mall (Pall Mall) having been built upon during the
     Commonwealth.  Charles II. also formed the canal by throwing the
     several small ponds into one.]

Thence to White Hall garden, where I saw the King in purple mourning for
his brother.

     ["The Queen-mother of France," says Ward, in his Diary, p. 177,
     "died at Agrippina, 1642, and her son Louis, 1643, for whom King
     Charles mourned in Oxford in purple, which is Prince's mourning."]

So home, and in my way met with Dinah, who spoke to me and told me she had
a desire to speak too about some business when I came to Westminster
again.  Which she spoke in such a manner that I was afraid she might tell
me something that I would not hear of our last meeting at my house at
Westminster.  Home late, being very dark.  A gentleman in the Poultry had
a great and dirty fall over a waterpipe that lay along the channel.

17th.  Office very early about casting up the debts of those twenty-five
ships which are to be paid off, which we are to present to the Committee
of Parliament.  I did give my wife L15 this morning to go to buy mourning
things for her and me, which she did.  Dined at home and Mr. Moore with
me, and afterwards to Whitehall to Mr. Dalton and drank in the Cellar,
where Mr. Vanly according to appointment was.  Thence forth to see the
Prince de Ligne, Spanish Embassador, come in to his audience, which was
done in very great state.  That being done, Dalton, Vanly, Scrivener and
some friends of theirs and I to the Axe, and signed and sealed our
writings, and hence to the Wine cellar again, where I received L41 for my
interest in my house, out of which I paid my Landlord to Michaelmas next,
and so all is even between him and me, and I freed of my poor little
house.  Home by link with my money under my arm.  So to bed after I had
looked over the things my wife had bought to-day, with which being not
very well pleased, they costing too much, I went to bed in a discontent.
Nothing yet from sea, where my Lord and the Princess are.

18th.  At home all the morning looking over my workmen in my house. After
dinner Sir W. Batten, Pen, and myself by coach to Westminster Hall, where
we met Mr. Wayte the lawyer to the Treasurer, and so we went up to the
Committee of Parliament, which are to consider of the debts of the Army
and Navy, and did give in our account of the twenty-five ships. Col. Birch
was very impertinent and troublesome.  But at last we did agree to fit the
accounts of our ships more perfectly for their view within a few days,
that they might see what a trouble it is to do what they desire.  From
thence Sir Williams both going by water home, I took Mr. Wayte to the
Rhenish winehouse, and drank with him and so parted. Thence to Mr. Crew's
and spoke with Mr. Moore about the business of paying off Baron our share
of the dividend.  So on foot home, by the way buying a hat band and other
things for my mourning to-morrow.  So home and to bed.  This day I heard
that the Duke of York, upon the news of the death of his brother
yesterday, came hither by post last night.

19th (Office day).  I put on my mourning and went to the office.  At noon
thinking to have found my wife in hers, I found that the tailor had failed
her, at which I was vexed because of an invitation that we have to a
dinner this day, but after having waited till past one o'clock I went, and
left her to put on some other clothes and come after me to the Mitre
tavern in Wood-street (a house of the greatest note in London), where I
met W. Symons, and D. Scobell, and their wives, Mr. Samford, Luellin,
Chetwind, one Mr. Vivion, and Mr. White,

     [According to Noble, Jeremiah White married Lady Frances Cromwell's
     waiting-woman, in Oliver's lifetime, and they lived together fifty
     years.  Lady Frances had two husbands, Mr. Robert Rich and Sir John
     Russell of Chippenham, the last of whom she survived fifty-two years
     dying 1721-22 The story is, that Oliver found White on his knees to
     Frances Cromwell, and that, to save himself, he pretended to have
     been soliciting her interest with her waiting-woman, whom Oliver
     compelled him to marry.  (Noble's "Life of Cromwell," vol. ii.
     pp. 151, 152.) White was born in 1629 and died 1707.]

formerly chaplin to the Lady Protectresse--[Elizabeth, wife of Oliver
Cromwell.]--(and still so, and one they say that is likely to get my Lady
Francess for his wife).  Here we were very merry and had a very good
dinner, my wife coming after me hither to us.

Among other pleasures some of us fell to handycapp,

     ["A game at cards not unlike Loo, but with this difference, the
     winner of one trick has to put in a double stake, the winner of two
     tricks a triple stake, and so on.  Thus, if six persons are playing,
     and the general stake is 1s., suppose A gains the three tricks, he
     gains 6s., and has to 'hand i' the cap,' or pool, 4s.  for the next
     deal.  Suppose A gains two tricks and B one, then A gains 4s. and B
     2s., and A has to stake 3s. and B 2s. for the next deal."--Hindley's
     Tavern Anecdotes.--M. B.]

a sport that I never knew before, which was very good.  We staid till it
was very late; it rained sadly, but we made shift to get coaches.  So home
and to bed.

20th.  At home, and at the office, and in the garden walking with both Sir
Williams all the morning.  After dinner to Whitehall to Mr. Dalton, and
with him to my house and took away all my papers that were left in my
closet, and so I have now nothing more in the house or to do with it. We
called to speak with my Landlord Beale, but he was not within but spoke
with the old woman, who takes it very ill that I did not let her have it,
but I did give her an answer.  From thence to Sir G. Downing and staid
late there (he having sent for me to come to him), which was to tell me
how my Lord Sandwich had disappointed him of a ship to bring over his
child and goods, and made great complaint thereof; but I got him to write
a letter to Lawson, which it may be may do the business for him, I writing
another also about it.  While he was writing, and his Lady and I had a
great deal of discourse in praise of Holland.  By water to the Bridge, and
so to Major Hart's lodgings in Cannon-street, who used me very kindly with
wine and good discourse, particularly upon the ill method which Colonel
Birch and the Committee use in defending of the army and the navy;
promising the Parliament to save them a great deal of money, when we judge
that it will cost the King more than if they had nothing to do with it, by
reason of their delays and scrupulous enquirys into the account of both.
So home and to bed.

21st (Office day).  There all the morning and afternoon till 4 o'clock.
Hence to Whitehall, thinking to have put up my, books at my Lord's, but am
disappointed from want of a chest which I had at Mr. Bowyer's.  Back by
water about 8 o'clock, and upon the water saw the corpse of the Duke of
Gloucester brought down Somerset House stairs, to go by water to
Westminster, to be buried to-night.  I landed at the old Swan and went to
the Hoop Tavern, and (by a former agreement) sent for Mr. Chaplin, who
with Nicholas Osborne and one Daniel came to us and we drank off two or
three quarts of wine, which was very good; the drawing of our wine causing
a great quarrel in the house between the two drawers which should draw us
the best, which caused a great deal of noise and falling out till the
master parted them, and came up to us and did give us a large account of
the liberty that he gives his servants, all alike, to draw what wine they
will to please his customers; and we did eat above 200 walnuts. About to
o'clock we broke up and so home, and in my way I called in with them at
Mr. Chaplin's, where Nicholas Osborne did give me a barrel of samphire,

     [Samphire was formerly a favourite pickle; hence the "dangerous
     trade" of the samphire gatherer ("King Lear," act iv.  sc. 6) who
     supplied the demand.  It was sold in the streets, and one of the old
     London cries was "I ha' Rock Samphier, Rock Samphier!"]

and showed me the keys of Mardyke Fort,

     [A fort four miles east of Dunkirk, probably dismantled when that
     town was sold to Louis XIV.]

which he that was commander of the fort sent him as a token when the fort
was demolished, which I was mightily pleased to see, and will get them of
him if I can.  Home, where I found my boy (my maid's brother) come out of
the country to-day, but was gone to bed and so I could not see him
to-night.  To bed.

22nd.  This morning I called up my boy, and found him a pretty,
well-looked boy, and one that I think will please me.  I went this morning
by land to Westminster along with Luellin, who came to my house this
morning to get me to go with him to Capt. Allen to speak with him for his
brother to go with him to Constantinople, but could not find him.  We
walked on to Fleet street, where at Mr. Standing's in Salsbury Court we
drank our morning draft and had a pickled herring.  Among other discourse
here he told me how the pretty woman that I always loved at the beginning
of Cheapside that sells child's coats was served by the Lady Bennett (a
famous strumpet), who by counterfeiting to fall into a swoon upon the
sight of her in her shop, became acquainted with her, and at last got her
ends of her to lie with a gentleman that had hired her to procure this
poor soul for him.  To Westminster to my Lord's, and there in the house of
office vomited up all my breakfast, my stomach being ill all this day by
reason of the last night's debauch.  Here I sent to Mr. Bowyer's for my
chest and put up my books and sent them home.  I staid here all day in my
Lord's chamber and upon the leads gazing upon Diana, who looked out of a
window upon me.  At last I went out to Mr. Harper's, and she standing over
the way at the gate, I went over to her and appointed to meet to-morrow in
the afternoon at my Lord's.  Here I bought a hanging jack. From thence by
coach home by the way at the New Exchange

     [In the Strand; built, under the auspices of James I., in 1608, out
     of the stables of Durham House, the site of the present Adelphi.
     The New Exchange stood where Coutts's banking-house now is.  "It was
     built somewhat on the model of the Royal Exchange, with cellars
     beneath, a walk above, and rows of shops over that, filled chiefly
     with milliners, sempstresses, and the like."  It was also called
     "Britain's Burse."  "He has a lodging in the Strand .  .  .  to
     watch when ladies are gone to the china houses, or to the Exchange,
     that he may meet them by chance and give them presents, some two or
     three hundred pounds worth of toys, to be laughed at"--Ben Jonson,
     The Silent Woman, act i.  sc. 1.]

I bought a pair of short black stockings, to wear over a pair of silk ones
for mourning; and here I met with The. Turner and Joyce, buying of things
to go into mourning too for the Duke, which is now the mode of all the
ladies in town), where I wrote some letters by the post to Hinchinbroke to
let them know that this day Mr. Edw. Pickering is come from my Lord, and
says that he left him well in Holland, and that he will be here within
three or four days.  To-day not well of my last night's drinking yet.  I
had the boy up to-night for his sister to teach him to put me to bed, and
I heard him read, which he did pretty well.

23rd (Lord's day).  My wife got up to put on her mourning to-day and to go
to Church this morning.  I up and set down my journall for these 5 days
past.  This morning came one from my father's with a black cloth coat,
made of my short cloak, to walk up and down in.  To church my wife and I,
with Sir W. Batten, where we heard of Mr. Mills a very good sermon upon
these words, "So run that ye may obtain."  After dinner all alone to
Westminster.  At Whitehall I met with Mr. Pierce and his wife (she newly
come forth after childbirth) both in mourning for the Duke of Gloucester.
She went with Mr. Child to Whitehall chapel and Mr. Pierce with me to the
Abbey, where I expected to hear Mr. Baxter or Mr. Rowe preach their
farewell sermon, and in Mr. Symons's pew I sat and heard Mr. Rowe. Before
sermon I laughed at the reader, who in his prayer desires of God that He
would imprint his word on the thumbs of our right hands and on the right
great toes of our right feet.  In the midst of the sermon some plaster
fell from the top of the Abbey, that made me and all the rest in our pew
afeard, and I wished myself out.  After sermon with Mr. Pierce to
Whitehall, and from thence to my Lord, but Diana did not come according to
our agreement.  So calling at my father's (where my wife had been this
afternoon but was gone home) I went home.  This afternoon, the King having
news of the Princess being come to Margate, he and the Duke of York went
down thither in barges to her.

24th (Office day).  From thence to dinner by coach with my wife to my
Cozen Scott's, and the company not being come, I went over the way to the
Barber's.  So thither again to dinner, where was my uncle Fenner and my
aunt, my father and mother, and others.  Among the rest my Cozen Rich.
Pepys,

     [Richard Pepys, eldest son of Richard Pepys, Lord Chief Justice of
     Ireland.  He went to Boston, Mass., in 1634, and returned to England
     about 1646.]

their elder brother, whom I had not seen these fourteen years, ever since
he came from New England.  It was strange for us to go a gossiping to her,
she having newly buried her child that she was brought to bed of. I rose
from table and went to the Temple church, where I had appointed Sir W.
Batten to meet him; and there at Sir Heneage Finch Sollicitor General's
chambers, before him and Sir W. Wilde,

     [William Wilde, elected Recorder on November 3rd, 1659, and
     appointed one of the commissioners sent to Breda to desire Charles
     II.  to return to England immediately.  He was knighted after the
     King's return, called to the degree of Serjeant, and created a
     baronet, all in the same year.  In 1668 he ceased to be Recorder,
     and was appointed judge of the Court of Common Pleas.  In 1673 he
     was removed to the King's Bench.  He was turned out of his office in
     1679 on account of his action in connection with the Popish Plot,
     and died November 23rd of the same year.]

Recorder of London (whom we sent for from his chamber) we were sworn
justices of peace for Middlesex, Essex, Kent, and Southampton; with which
honour I did find myself mightily pleased, though I am wholly ignorant in
the duty of a justice of peace.  From thence with Sir William to Whitehall
by water (old Mr. Smith with us) intending to speak with Secretary
Nicholas about the augmentation of our salaries, but being forth we went
to the Three Tuns tavern, where we drank awhile, and then came in Col.
Slingsby and another gentleman and sat with us.  From thence to my Lord's
to enquire whether they have had any thing from my Lord or no.  Knocking
at the door, there passed me Mons. L'Impertinent [Mr. Butler] for whom I
took a coach and went with him to a dancing meeting in Broad Street, at
the house that was formerly the glass-house, Luke Channel, Master of the
School, where I saw good dancing, but it growing late, and the room very
full of people and so very hot, I went home.

25th.  To the office, where Sir W. Batten, Colonel Slingsby, and I sat
awhile, and Sir R. Ford

     [Sir Richard Ford was one of the commissioners sent to Breda to
     desire Charles II.  to return to England immediately.]

coming to us about some business, we talked together of the interest of
this kingdom to have a peace with Spain and a war with France and Holland;
where Sir R. Ford talked like a man of great reason and experience.  And
afterwards I did send for a cup of tee'

     [That excellent and by all Physicians, approved, China drink, called
     by the Chineans Tcha, by other nations Tay alias Tee, is sold at the
     Sultaness Head Coffee-House, in Sweetings Rents, by the "Royal
     Exchange, London."  "Coffee, chocolate, and a kind of drink called
     tee, sold in almost every street in 1659."--Rugge's Diurnal.  It is
     stated in "Boyne's Trade Tokens," ed. Williamson, vol. i., 1889,
     p. 593 "that the word tea occurs on no other tokens than those
     issued from 'the Great Turk' (Morat ye Great) coffeehouse in
     Exchange Alley.  The Dutch East India Company introduced tea into
     Europe in 1610, and it is said to have been first imported into
     England from Holland about 1650.  The English "East India Company"
     purchased and presented 2 lbs. of tea to Charles II. in 1660, and 23
     lbs. in 1666.  The first order for its importation by the company
     was in 1668, and the first consignment of it, amounting to 143 lbs.,
     was received from Bantam in 1669 (see Sir George Birdwood's "Report
     on the Old Records at the India Office," 1890, p. 26).  By act 12
     Car.  II., capp.  23, 24, a duty of 8d. per gallon was imposed upon
     the infusion of tea, as well as on chocolate and sherbet.]

(a China drink) of which I never had drank before, and went away.  Then
came Col. Birch and Sir R. Browne by a former appointment, and with them
from Tower wharf in the barge belonging to our office we went to Deptford
to pay off the ship Success, which (Sir G. Carteret and Sir W. Pen coming
afterwards to us) we did, Col. Birch being a mighty busy man and one that
is the most indefatigable and forward to make himself work of any man that
ever I knew in my life.  At the Globe we had a very good dinner, and after
that to the pay again, which being finished we returned by water again,
and I from our office with Col. Slingsby by coach to Westminster (I
setting him down at his lodgings by the way) to inquire for my Lord's
coming thither (the King and the Princess

     ["The Princess Royall came from Gravesend to Whitehall by water,
     attended by a noble retinue of about one hundred persons, gentry,
     and servants, and tradesmen, and tirewomen, and others, that took
     that opportunity to advance their fortunes, by coming in with so
     excellent a Princess as without question she is."-Rugge's Diurnal.
     A broadside, entitled "Ourania, the High and Mighty Lady the
     Princess Royal of Aurange, congratulated on her most happy arrival,
     September the 25th, 1660," was printed on the 29th.]

coming up the river this afternoon as we were at our pay), and I found him
gone to Mr. Crew's, where I found him well, only had got some corns upon
his foot which was not well yet.  My Lord told me how the ship that
brought the Princess and him (The Tredagh) did knock six times upon the
Kentish Knock,

     [A shoal in the North Sea, off the Thames mouth, outside the Long
     Sand, fifteen miles N.N.E. of the North Foreland.  It measures seven
     miles north-eastward, and about two miles in breadth.  It is partly
     dry at low water.  A revolving light was set up in 1840.]

which put them in great fear for the ship; but got off well.  He told me
also how the King had knighted Vice-Admiral Lawson and Sir Richard
Stayner.  From him late and by coach home, where the plasterers being at
work in all the rooms in my house, my wife was fain to make a bed upon the
ground for her and me, and so there we lay all night.

26th.  Office day.  That done to the church, to consult about our gallery.
So home to dinner, where I found Mrs. Hunt, who brought me a letter for me
to get my Lord to sign for her husband, which I shall do for her.  At home
with the workmen all the afternoon, our house being in a most sad pickle.
In the evening to the office, where I fell a-reading of Speed's Geography
for a while.  So home thinking to have found Will at home, but he not
being come home but gone somewhere else I was very angry, and when he came
did give him a very great check for it, and so I went to bed.

27th.  To my Lord at Mr. Crew's, and there took order about some business
of his, and from thence home to my workmen all the afternoon.  In the
evening to my Lord's, and there did read over with him and Dr. Walker my
lord's new commission for sea, and advised thereupon how to have it drawn.
So home and to bed.

28th (Office day).  This morning Sir W. Batten and Col. Slingsby went with
Col. Birch and Sir Wm. Doyly to Chatham to pay off a ship there.  So only
Sir W. Pen and I left here in town.  All the afternoon among my workmen
till 10 or 11 at night, and did give them drink and very merry with them,
it being my luck to meet with a sort of drolling workmen on all occasions.
To bed.

29th.  All day at home to make an end of our dirty work of the plasterers,
and indeed my kitchen is now so handsome that I did not repent of all the
trouble that I have been put to, to have it done.  This day or yesterday,
I hear, Prince Rupert

     [This is the first mention in the Diary of this famous prince, third
     son of Frederick, Prince Palatine of the Rhine, and Elizabeth,
     daughter of James I., born December 17th, 1619.  He died at his
     house in Spring Gardens, November 29th, 1682.]

is come to Court; but welcome to nobody.

30th (Lord's day).  To our Parish church both forenoon and afternoon all
alone.  At night went to bed without prayers, my house being every where
foul above stairs.




     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     Boy up to-night for his sister to teach him to put me to bed
     Diana did not come according to our agreement
     Drink at a bottle beer house in the Strand
     Finding my wife's clothes lie carelessly laid up
     Formerly say that the King was a bastard and his mother a whore
     Hand i' the cap
     Hired her to procure this poor soul for him
     I fear is not so good as she should be
     I was angry with her, which I was troubled for
     I was exceeding free in dallying with her, and she not unfree
     Ill all this day by reason of the last night's debauch
     King do tire all his people that are about him with early rising
     Kissed them myself very often with a great deal of mirth
     My luck to meet with a sort of drolling workmen on all occasions
     Show many the strangest emotions to shift off his drink
     Upon the leads gazing upon Diana





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Diary of Samuel Pepys,
August/September 1660, by Samuel Pepys

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***

***** This file should be named 4123.txt or 4123.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/4/1/2/4123/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
