The Project Gutenberg EBook of Diary of Samuel Pepys,
October/November/December 1660, by Samuel Pepys

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Diary of Samuel Pepys, October/November/December 1660

Author: Samuel Pepys

Release Date: November 29, 2004 [EBook #4124]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***




Produced by David Widger





                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A.   F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A.  LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                      OCTOBER, NOVEMBER & DECEMBER
                                 1660

October 1st.  Early to my Lord to Whitehall, and there he did give me some
work to do for him, and so with all haste to the office.  Dined at home,
and my father by chance with me.  After dinner he and I advised about
hangings for my rooms, which are now almost fit to be hung, the painters
beginning to do their work to-day.  After dinner he and I to the Miter,
where with my uncle Wight (whom my father fetched thither), while I drank
a glass of wine privately with Mr. Mansell, a poor Reformado of the
Charles, who came to see me.  Here we staid and drank three or four pints
of wine and so parted.  I home to look after my workmen, and at night to
bed.  The Commissioners are very busy disbanding of the army, which they
say do cause great robbing.  My layings out upon my house an furniture are
so great that I fear I shall not be able to go through them without
breaking one of my bags of L100, I having but L200 yet in the world.

2nd.  With Sir Wm. Pen by water to Whitehall, being this morning visited
before I went out by my brother Tom, who told me that for his lying out of
doors a day and a night my father had forbade him to come any more into
his house, at which I was troubled, and did soundly chide him for doing
so, and upon confessing his fault I told him I would speak to my father.
At Whitehall I met with Captain Clerk, and took him to the Leg in King
Street, and did give him a dish or two of meat, and his purser that was
with him, for his old kindness to me on board.  After dinner I to
Whitehall, where I met with Mrs. Hunt, and was forced to wait upon Mr.
Scawen at a committee to speak for her husband, which I did.  After that
met with Luellin, Mr. Fage, and took them both to the Dog, and did give
them a glass of wine.  After that at Will's I met with Mr. Spicer, and
with him to the Abbey to see them at vespers.  There I found but a thin
congregation already.  So I see that religion, be it what it will, is but
a humour,

     [The four humours of the body described by the old physicians were
     supposed to exert their influence upon the mind, and in course of
     time the mind as well as the body was credited with its own
     particular humours.  The modern restricted use of the word humour
     did not become general until the eighteenth century.]

and so the esteem of it passeth as other things do.  From thence with him
to see Robin Shaw, who has been a long time ill, and I have not seen him
since I came from sea.  He is much changed, but in hopes to be well again.
From thence by coach to my father's, and discoursed with him about Tom,
and did give my advice to take him home again, which I think he will do in
prudence rather than put him upon learning the way of being worse.  So
home, and from home to Major Hart, who is just going out of town
to-morrow, and made much of me, and did give me the oaths of supremacy and
allegiance, that I may be capable of my arrears.  So home again, where my
wife tells me what she has bought to-day, namely, a bed and furniture for
her chamber, with which very well pleased I went to bed.

3d.  With Sir W. Batten and Pen by water to White Hall, where a meeting of
the Dukes of York and Albemarle, my Lord Sandwich and all the principal
officers, about the Winter Guard, but we determined of nothing. To my
Lord's, who sent a great iron chest to White Hall; and I saw it carried,
into the King's closet, where I saw most incomparable pictures. Among the
rest a book open upon a desk, which I durst have sworn was a reall book,
and back again to my Lord, and dined all alone with him, who do treat me
with a great deal of respect; and after dinner did discourse an hour with
me, and advise about some way to get himself some money to make up for all
his great expenses, saying that he believed that he might have any thing
that he would ask of the King.  This day Mr. Sheply and all my Lord's
goods came from sea, some of them laid of the Wardrobe and some brought to
my Lord's house.  From thence to our office, where we met and did
business, and so home and spent the evening looking upon the painters that
are at work in my house.  This day I heard the Duke speak of a great
design that he and my Lord of Pembroke have, and a great many others, of
sending a venture to some parts of Africa to dig for gold ore there.  They
intend to admit as many as will venture their money, and so make
themselves a company.  L250 is the lowest share for every man.  But I do
not find that my Lord do much like it.  At night Dr. Fairbrother (for so
he is lately made of the Civil Law) brought home my wife by coach, it
being rainy weather, she having been abroad today to buy more furniture
for her house.

4th.  This morning I was busy looking over papers at the office all alone,
and being visited by Lieut. Lambert of the Charles (to whom I was formerly
much beholden), I took him along with me to a little alehouse hard by our
office, whither my cozen Thomas Pepys the turner had sent for me to show
me two gentlemen that had a great desire to be known to me, one his name
is Pepys, of our family, but one that I never heard of before, and the
other a younger son of Sir Tho. Bendishes, and so we all called cozens.
After sitting awhile and drinking, my two new cozens, myself, and Lieut.
Lambert went by water to Whitehall, and from thence I and Lieut. Lambert
to Westminster Abbey, where we saw Dr. Frewen translated to the
Archbishoprick of York.  Here I saw the Bishops of Winchester, Bangor,
Rochester, Bath and Wells, and Salisbury, all in their habits, in King
Henry Seventh's chappell.  But, Lord!  at their going out, how people did
most of them look upon them as strange creatures, and few with any kind of
love or respect.  From thence at 2 to my Lord's, where we took Mr. Sheply
and Wm. Howe to the Raindeer, and had some oysters, which were very good,
the first I have eat this year.  So back to my Lord's to dinner, and after
dinner Lieut. Lambert and I did look upon my Lord's model, and he told me
many things in a ship that I desired to understand.  From thence by water
I (leaving Lieut. Lambert at Blackfriars) went home, and there by promise
met with Robert Shaw and Jack Spicer, who came to see me, and by the way I
met upon Tower Hill with Mr. Pierce the surgeon and his wife, and took
them home and did give them good wine, ale, and anchovies, and staid them
till night, and so adieu.  Then to look upon my painters that are now at
work in my house. At night to bed.

5th.  Office day; dined at home, and all the afternoon at home to see my
painters make an end of their work, which they did to-day to my content,
and I am in great joy to see my house likely once again to be clean.  At
night to bed.

6th.  Col. Slingsby and I at the office getting a catch ready for the
Prince de Ligne to carry his things away to-day, who is now going home
again.  About noon comes my cozen H. Alcock, for whom I brought a letter
for my Lord to sign to my Lord Broghill for some preferment in Ireland,
whither he is now a-going.  After him comes Mr. Creed, who brought me some
books from Holland with him, well bound and good books, which I thought he
did intend to give me, but I found that I must pay him.  He dined with me
at my house, and from thence to Whitehall together, where I was to give my
Lord an account of the stations and victualls of the fleet in order to the
choosing of a fleet fit for him to take to sea, to bring over the Queen,
but my Lord not coming in before 9 at night I staid no longer for him, but
went back again home and so to bed.

7th (Lord's day).  To White Hall on foot, calling at my father's to change
my long black cloak for a short one (long cloaks being now quite out); but
he being gone to church, I could not get one, and therefore I proceeded on
and came to my Lord before he went to chapel and so went with him, where I
heard Dr. Spurstow preach before the King a poor dry sermon; but a very
good anthem of Captn.  Cooke's afterwards.  Going out of chapel I met with
Jack Cole, my old friend (whom I had not seen a great while before), and
have promised to renew acquaintance in London together.  To my Lord's and
dined with him; he all dinner time talking French to me, and telling me
the story how the Duke of York hath got my Lord Chancellor's daughter with
child,

     [Anne Hyde, born March 12th, 1637, daughter of Edward, first Earl of
     Clarendon.  She was attached to the court of the Princess of Orange,
     daughter of Charles I., 1654, and contracted to James, Duke of York,
     at Breda, November 24th, 1659.  The marriage was avowed in London
     September 3rd, 1660.  She joined the Church of Rome in 1669, and
     died March 31st, 1671.]

and that she, do lay it to him, and that for certain he did promise her
marriage, and had signed it with his blood, but that he by stealth had got
the paper out of her cabinet.  And that the King would have him to marry
her, but that he will not.

     [The Duke of York married Anne Hyde, and he avowed the marriage
     September 3rd, so that Pepys was rather behindhand in his
     information.]

So that the thing is very bad for the Duke, and them all; but my Lord do
make light of it, as a thing that he believes is not a new thing for the
Duke to do abroad.  Discoursing concerning what if the Duke should marry
her, my Lord told me that among his father's many old sayings that he had
wrote in a book of his, this is one--that he that do get a wench with
child and marry her afterwards is as if a man should----in his hat and
then clap it on his head.  I perceive my Lord is grown a man very
indifferent in all matters of religion, and so makes nothing of these
things.  After dinner to the Abbey, where I heard them read the
church-service, but very ridiculously, that indeed I do not in myself like
it at all.  A poor cold sermon of Dr. Lamb's, one of the prebends, in his
habit, came afterwards, and so all ended, and by my troth a pitiful sorry
devotion that these men pay.  So walked home by land, and before supper I
read part of the Marian persecution in Mr. Fuller.  So to supper, prayers,
and to bed.

8th.  Office day, and my wife being gone out to buy some household stuff,
I dined all alone, and after dinner to Westminster, in my way meeting Mr.
Moore coming to me, who went back again with me calling at several places
about business, at my father's about gilded leather for my dining room, at
Mr. Crew's about money, at my Lord's about the same, but meeting not Mr.
Sheply there I went home by water, and Mr. Moore with me, who staid and
supped with me till almost 9 at night.  We love one another's discourse so
that we cannot part when we do meet.  He tells me that the profit of the
Privy Seal is much fallen, for which I am very sorry.  He gone and I to
bed.

9th.  This morning Sir W. Batten with Colonel Birch to Deptford, to pay
off two ships.  Sir W. Pen and I staid to do business, and afterwards
together to White Hall, where I went to my Lord, and found him in bed not
well, and saw in his chamber his picture,--[Lord Sandwich's portrait by
Lely, see post, 22nd of this same month.]--very well done; and am with
child

     [A figurative expression for an eager longing desire, used by Udall
     and by Spenser.  The latest authority given by Dr. Murray in the
     "New English Dictionary," is Bailey in 1725.]

till I get it copied out, which I hope to do when he is gone to sea.  To
Whitehall again, where at Mr. Coventry's chamber I met with Sir W. Pen
again, and so with him to Redriffe by water, and from thence walked over
the fields to Deptford (the first pleasant walk I have had a great while),
and in our way had a great deal of merry discourse, and find him to be a
merry fellow and pretty good natured, and sings very bawdy songs. So we
came and found our gentlemen and Mr. Prin at the pay.  About noon we dined
together, and were very merry at table telling of tales.  After dinner to
the pay of another ship till 10 at night, and so home in our barge, a
clear moonshine night, and it was 12 o'clock before we got home, where I
found my wife in bed, and part of our chambers hung to-day by the
upholster, but not being well done I was fretted, and so in a discontent
to bed.  I found Mr. Prin a good, honest, plain man, but in his discourse
not very free or pleasant.  Among all the tales that passed among us
to-day, he told us of one Damford, that, being a black man, did scald his
beard with mince-pie, and it came up again all white in that place, and
continued to his dying day.  Sir W. Pen told us a good jest about some
gentlemen blinding of the drawer, and who he catched was to pay the
reckoning, and so they got away, and the master of the house coming up to
see what his man did, his man got hold of him, thinking it to be one of
the gentlemen, and told him that he was to pay the reckoning.

10th.  Office day all the morning.  In the afternoon with the upholster
seeing him do things to my mind, and to my content he did fit my chamber
and my wife's.  At night comes Mr. Moore, and staid late with me to tell
me how Sir Hards. Waller--[Sir Hardress Waller, Knt., one of Charles I.
judges.  His sentence was commuted to imprisonment for life.]--(who only
pleads guilty), Scott, Coke, Peters, Harrison,

     [General Thomas Harrison, son of a butcher at Newcastle-under-Lyme,
     appointed by Cromwell to convey Charles I.  from Windsor to
     Whitehall, in order to his trial.  He signed the warrant for the
     execution of the King.  He was hanged, drawn, and quartered on the
     13th.]

&c. were this day arraigned at the bar at the Sessions House, there being
upon the bench the Lord Mayor, General Monk, my Lord of Sandwich, &c.;
such a bench of noblemen as had not been ever seen in England!  They all
seem to be dismayed, and will all be condemned without question.  In Sir
Orlando Bridgman's charge, he did wholly rip up the unjustness of the war
against the King from the beginning, and so it much reflects upon all the
Long Parliament, though the King had pardoned them, yet they must hereby
confess that the King do look upon them as traitors.  To-morrow they are
to plead what they have to say.  At night to bed.

11th.  In the morning to my Lord's, where I met with Mr. Creed, and with
him and Mr. Blackburne to the Rhenish wine house, where we sat drinking of
healths a great while, a thing which Mr. Blackburne formerly would not
upon any terms have done.  After we had done there Mr. Creed and I to the
Leg in King Street, to dinner, where he and I and my Will had a good udder
to dinner, and from thence to walk in St. James's Park, where we observed
the several engines at work to draw up water, with which sight I was very
much pleased.  Above all the rest, I liked best that which Mr. Greatorex
brought, which is one round thing going within all with a pair of stairs
round; round which being laid at an angle of 45 deg., do carry up the
water with a great deal of ease.  Here, in the Park, we met with Mr.
Salisbury, who took Mr. Creed and me to the Cockpitt to see "The Moore of
Venice," which was well done.  Burt acted the Moore; 'by the same token, a
very pretty lady that sat by me, called out, to see Desdemona smothered.
From thence with Mr. Creed to Hercules Pillars, where we drank and so
parted, and I went home.

12th.  Office day all the morning, and from thence with Sir W. Batten and
the rest of the officers to a venison pasty of his at the Dolphin, where
dined withal Col. Washington, Sir Edward Brett, and Major Norwood, very
noble company.  After dinner I went home, where I found Mr. Cooke, who
told me that my Lady Sandwich is come to town to-day, whereupon I went to
Westminster to see her, and found her at super, so she made me sit down
all alone with her, and after supper staid and talked with her, she
showing me most extraordinary love and kindness, and do give me good
assurance of my uncle's resolution to make me his heir.  From thence home
and to bed.

13th.  To my Lord's in the morning, where I met with Captain Cuttance, but
my Lord not being up I went out to Charing Cross, to see Major-general
Harrison hanged, drawn; and quartered; which was done there, he looking as
cheerful as any man could do in that condition.  He was presently cut
down, and his head and heart shown to the people, at which there was great
shouts of joy.  It is said, that he said that he was sure to come shortly
at the right hand of Christ to judge them that now had judged him; and
that his wife do expect his coming again.  Thus it was my chance to see
the King beheaded at White Hall, and to see the first blood shed in
revenge for the blood of the King at Charing Cross.  From thence to my
Lord's, and took Captain Cuttance and Mr. Sheply to the Sun Tavern, and
did give them some oysters.  After that I went by water home, where I was
angry with my wife for her things lying about, and in my passion kicked
the little fine basket, which I bought her in Holland, and broke it, which
troubled me after I had done it.  Within all the afternoon setting up
shelves in my study.  At night to bed.

14th (Lord's day).  Early to my Lord's, in my way meeting with Dr.
Fairbrother, who walked with me to my father's back again, and there we
drank my morning draft, my father having gone to church and my mother
asleep in bed.  Here he caused me to put my hand among a great many
honorable hands to a paper or certificate in his behalf.  To White Hall
chappell, where one Dr. Crofts made an indifferent sermon, and after it an
anthem, ill sung, which made the King laugh.  Here I first did see the
Princess Royal since she came into England.  Here I also observed, how the
Duke of York and Mrs. Palmer did talk to one another very wantonly through
the hangings that parts the King's closet and the closet where the ladies
sit.  To my Lord's, where I found my wife, and she and I did dine with my
Lady (my Lord dining with my Lord Chamberlain), who did treat my wife with
a good deal of respect.  In the evening we went home through the rain by
water in a sculler, having borrowed some coats of Mr. Sheply.  So home,
wet and dirty, and to bed.

15th.  Office all the morning.  My wife and I by water; I landed her at
Whitefriars, she went to my father's to dinner, it being my father's
wedding day, there being a very great dinner, and only the Fenners and
Joyces there.  This morning Mr. Carew

     [John Carew signed the warrant for the execution of Charles I.  He
     held the religion of the Fifth Monarchists, and was tried October
     12th, 1660.  He refused to avail himself of many opportunities of
     escape, and suffered death with much composure.]

was hanged and quartered at Charing Cross; but his quarters, by a great
favour, are not to be hanged up.  I was forced to go to my Lord's to get
him to meet the officers of the Navy this afternoon, and so could not go
along with her, but I missed my Lord, who was this day upon the bench at
the Sessions house.  So I dined there, and went to White Hall, where I met
with Sir W. Batten and Pen, who with the Comptroller, Treasurer, and Mr.
Coventry (at his chamber) made up a list of such ships as are fit to be
kept out for the winter guard, and the rest to be paid off by the
Parliament when they can get money, which I doubt will not be a great
while.  That done, I took coach, and called my wife at my father's, and so
homewards, calling at Thos. Pepys the turner's for some things that we
wanted.  And so home, where I fell to read "The Fruitless Precaution" (a
book formerly recommended by Dr. Clerke at sea to me), which I read in bed
till I had made an end of it, and do find it the best writ tale that ever
I read in my life.  After that done to sleep, which I did not very well
do, because that my wife having a stopping in her nose she snored much,
which I never did hear her do before.

16th.  This morning my brother Tom came to me, with whom I made even for
my last clothes to this day, and having eaten a dish of anchovies with him
in the morning, my wife and I did intend to go forth to see a play at the
Cockpit this afternoon, but Mr. Moore coming to me, my wife staid at home,
and he and I went out together, with whom I called at the upholsters and
several other places that I had business with, and so home with him to the
Cockpit, where, understanding that "Wit without money" was acted, I would
not stay, but went home by water, by the way reading of the other two
stories that are in the book that I read last night, which I do not like
so well as it.  Being come home, Will. told me that my Lord had a mind to
speak with me to-night; so I returned by water, and, coming there, it was
only to enquire how the ships were provided with victuals that are to go
with him to fetch over the Queen, which I gave him a good account of.  He
seemed to be in a melancholy humour, which, I was told by W. Howe, was for
that he had lately lost a great deal of money at cards, which he fears he
do too much addict himself to now-a-days.  So home by water and to bed.

17th.  Office day.  At noon came Mr. Creed to me, whom I took along with
me to the Feathers in Fish Street, where I was invited by Captain Cuttance
to dinner, a dinner made by Mr. Dawes and his brother.  We had two or
three dishes of meat well done; their great design was to get me concerned
in a business of theirs about a vessel of theirs that is in the service,
hired by the King, in which I promise to do them all the service I can.
From thence home again with Mr. Crew, where I finding Mrs. The. Turner and
her aunt Duke I would not be seen but walked in the garden till they were
gone, where Mr. Spong came to me and Mr. Creed, Mr. Spong and I went to
our music to sing, and he being gone, my wife and I went to put up my
books in order in closet, and I to give her her books.  After that to bed.

18th.  This morning, it being expected that Colonel Hacker and Axtell
should die, I went to Newgate, but found they were reprieved till
to-morrow.  So to my aunt Fenner's, where with her and my uncle I drank my
morning draft.  So to my father's, and did give orders for a pair of black
baize linings to be made me for my breeches against to-morrow morning,
which was done.  So to my Lord's, where I spoke with my Lord, and he would
have had me dine with him, but I went thence to Mr. Blackburne, where I
met my wife and my Will's father and mother (the first time that ever I
saw them), where we had a very fine dinner. Mr. Creed was also there.
This day by her high discourse I found Mrs. Blackburne to be a very high
dame and a costly one.  Home with my wife by coach.  This afternoon comes
Mr. Chaplin and N. Osborn to my house, of whom I made very much, and kept
them with me till late, and so to bed. At my coming home.  I did find that
The. Turner hath sent for a pair of doves that my wife had promised her;
and because she did not send them in the best cage, she sent them back
again with a scornful letter, with which I was angry, but yet pretty well
pleased that she was crossed.

19th.  Office in the morning.  This morning my dining-room was finished
with green serge hanging and gilt leather, which is very handsome.  This
morning Hacker and Axtell were hanged and quartered, as the rest are. This
night I sat up late to make up my accounts ready against to-morrow for my
Lord.  I found him to be above L80 in my debt, which is a good sight, and
I bless God for it.

20th.  This morning one came to me to advise with me where to make me a
window into my cellar in lieu of one which Sir W. Batten had stopped up,
and going down into my cellar to look I stepped into a great heap of----by
which I found that Mr. Turner's house of office is full and comes into my
cellar, which do trouble me, but I shall have it helped.  To my Lord's by
land, calling at several places about business, where I dined with my Lord
and Lady; when he was very merry, and did talk very high how he would have
a French cook, and a master of his horse, and his lady and child to wear
black patches; which methought was strange, but he is become a perfect
courtier; and, among other things, my Lady saying that she could get a
good merchant for her daughter Jem., he answered, that he would rather see
her with a pedlar's pack at her back, so she married a gentleman, than she
should marry a citizen.  This afternoon, going through London, and calling
at Crowe's the upholster's, in Saint Bartholomew's, I saw the limbs of
some of our new traitors set upon Aldersgate, which was a sad sight to
see; and a bloody week this and the last have been, there being ten
hanged, drawn, and quartered.  Home, and after writing a letter to my
uncle by the post, I went to bed.

21st (Lord's day).  To the Parish church in the morning, where a good
sermon by Mr. Mills.  After dinner to my Lord's, and from thence to the
Abbey, where I met Spicer and D. Vines and others of the old crew.  So
leaving my boy at the Abbey against I came back, we went to Prior's by the
Hall back door, but there being no drink to be had we went away, and so to
the Crown in the Palace Yard, I and George Vines by the way calling at
their house, where he carried me up to the top of his turret, where there
is Cooke's head set up for a traytor, and Harrison's set up on the other
side of Westminster Hall.  Here I could see them plainly, as also a very
fair prospect about London.  From the Crown to the Abbey to look for my
boy, but he was gone thence, and so he being a novice I was at a loss what
was become of him.  I called at my Lord's (where I found Mr. Adams, Mr.
Sheply's friend) and at my father's, but found him not.  So home, where I
found him, but he had found the way home well enough, of which I was glad.
So after supper, and reading of some chapters, I went to bed. This day or
two my wife has been troubled with her boils in the old place, which do
much trouble her.  Today at noon (God forgive me) I strung my lute, which
I had not touched a great while before.

22nd.  Office day; after that to dinner at home upon some ribs of roast
beef from the Cook's (which of late we have been forced to do because of
our house being always under the painters' and other people's hands, that
we could not dress it ourselves).  After dinner to my Lord's, where I
found all preparing for my Lord's going to sea to fetch the Queen
tomorrow.  At night my Lord came home, with whom I staid long, and talked
of many things.  Among others I got leave to have his picture, that was
done by Lilly,

     [Peter Lely, afterwards knighted.  He lived in the Piazza, Covent
     Garden.  This portrait was bought by Lord Braybrooke at Mr. Pepys
     Cockerell's sale in 1848, and is now at Audley End.]

copied, and talking of religion, I found him to be a perfect Sceptic, and
said that all things would not be well while there was so much preaching,
and that it would be better if nothing but Homilies were to be read in
Churches.  This afternoon (he told me) there hath been a meeting before
the King and my Lord Chancellor, of some Episcopalian and Presbyterian
Divines; but what had passed he could not tell me.  After I had done talk
with him, I went to bed with Mr. Sheply in his chamber, but could hardly
get any sleep all night, the bed being ill made and he a bad bedfellow.

23rd.  We rose early in the morning to get things ready for My Lord, and
Mr. Sheply going to put up his pistols (which were charged with bullets)
into the holsters, one of them flew off, and it pleased God that, the
mouth of the gun being downwards, it did us no hurt, but I think I never
was in more danger in my life, which put me into a great fright.  About
eight o'clock my Lord went; and going through the garden my Lord met with
Mr. William Montagu, who told him of an estate of land lately come into
the King's hands, that he had a mind my Lord should beg.  To which end my
Lord writ a letter presently to my Lord Chancellor to do it for him, which
(after leave taken of my Lord at White Hall bridge) I did carry to Warwick
House to him; and had a fair promise of him, that he would do it this day
for my Lord.  In my way thither I met the Lord Chancellor and all the
judges riding on horseback and going to Westminster Hall, it being the
first day of the term, which was the first time I ever saw any such
solemnity.  Having done there I returned to Whitehall, where meeting with
my brother Ashwell and his cozen Sam. Ashwell and Mr. Mallard, I took them
to the Leg in King Street and gave them a dish of meat for dinner and paid
for it.  From thence going to Whitehall I met with Catan Stirpin in
mourning, who told me that her mistress was lately dead of the small pox,
and that herself was now married to Monsieur Petit, as also what her
mistress had left her, which was very well.  She also took me to her
lodging at an Ironmonger's in King Street, which was but very poor, and I
found by a letter that she shewed me of her husband's to the King, that he
is a right Frenchman, and full of their own projects, he having a design
to reform the universities, and to institute schools for the learning of
all languages, to speak them naturally and not by rule, which I know will
come to nothing.  From thence to my Lord's, where I went forth by coach to
Mrs. Parker's with my Lady, and so to her house again. From thence I took
my Lord's picture, and carried it to Mr. de Cretz to be copied.  So to
White Hall, where I met Mr. Spong, and went home with him and played, and
sang, and eat with him and his mother.  After supper we looked over many
books, and instruments of his, especially his wooden jack in his chimney,
which goes with the smoke, which indeed is very pretty.  I found him to be
as ingenious and good-natured a man as ever I met with in my life, and
cannot admire him enough, he being so plain and illiterate a man as he is.
From thence by coach home and to bed, which was welcome to me after a
night's absence.

24th.  I lay and slept long to-day.  Office day.  I took occasion to be
angry with my wife before I rose about her putting up of half a crown of
mine in a paper box, which she had forgot where she had lain it.  But we
were friends again as we are always.  Then I rose to Jack Cole, who came
to see me.  Then to the office, so home to dinner, where I found Captain
Murford, who did put L3 into my hands for a friendship I had done him, but
I would not take it, but bade him keep it till he has enough to buy my
wife a necklace.  This afternoon people at work in my house to make a
light in my yard into my cellar.  To White Hall, in my way met with Mr.
Moore, who went back with me.  He tells me, among other things, that the
Duke of York is now sorry for his lying with my Lord Chancellor's
daughter, who is now brought to bed of a boy.  From Whitehall to Mr. De
Cretz, who I found about my Lord's picture.  From thence to Mr. Lilly's,
where, not finding Mr. Spong, I went to Mr. Greatorex, where I met him,
and so to an alehouse, where I bought of him a drawing-pen; and he did
show me the manner of the lamp-glasses, which carry the light a great way,
good to read in bed by, and I intend to have one of them.  So to Mr.
Lilly's with Mr. Spong, where well received, there being a club to-night
among his friends.  Among the rest Esquire Ashmole, who I found was a very
ingenious gentleman.  With him we two sang afterward in Mr. Lilly's study.
That done, we all pared; and I home by coach, taking Mr. Booker' with me,
who did tell me a great many fooleries, which may be done by nativities,
and blaming Mr. Lilly for writing to please his friends and to keep in
with the times (as he did formerly to his own dishonour), and not
according to the rules of art, by which he could not well err, as he had
done.  I set him down at Lime-street end, and so home, where I found a box
of Carpenter's tools sent by my cozen, Thomas Pepys, which I had bespoke
of him for to employ myself with sometimes.  To bed.

25th.  All day at home doing something in order to the fitting of my
house.  In the evening to Westminster about business.  So home and to bed.
This night the vault at the end of the cellar was emptied.

26th.  Office.  My father and Dr. Thomas Pepys dined at my house, the last
of whom I did almost fox with Margate ale.  My father is mightily pleased
with my ordering of my house.  I did give him money to pay several bills.
After that I to Westminster to White Hall, where I saw the Duke de
Soissons go from his audience with a very great deal of state: his own
coach all red velvet covered with gold lace, and drawn by six barbes, and
attended by twenty pages very rich in clothes.  To Westminster Hall, and
bought, among, other books, one of the Life of our Queen, which I read at
home to my wife; but it was so sillily writ, that we did nothing but laugh
at it: among other things it is dedicated to that paragon of virtue and
beauty, the Duchess of Albemarle.  Great talk as if the Duke of York do
now own the marriage between him and the Chancellor's daughter.

27th.  In London and Westminster all this day paying of money and buying
of things for my house.  In my going I went by chance by my new Lord
Mayor's house (Sir Richard Browne), by Goldsmith's Hall, which is now
fitting, and indeed is a very pretty house.  In coming back I called at
Paul's Churchyard and bought Alsted's Encyclopaedia,' which cost me 38s.
Home and to bed, my wife being much troubled with her old pain.

28th (Lord's day).  There came some pills and plaister this morning from
Dr. Williams for my wife.  I to Westminster Abbey, where with much
difficulty, going round by the cloysters, I got in; this day being a great
day for the consecrating of five Bishopps, which was done after sermon;
but I could not get into Henry the Seventh's chappell.  So I went to my
Lord's, where I dined with my Lady, and my young Lord, and Mr. Sidney, who
was sent for from Twickenham to see my Lord Mayor's show to-morrow.  Mr.
Child did also dine with us.  After dinner to White Hall chappell; my Lady
and my Lady Jemimah and I up to the King's closet (who is now gone to meet
the Queen).  So meeting with one Mr. Hill, that did know my Lady, he did
take us into the King's closet, and there we did stay all service-time,
which I did think a great honour.  We went home to my Lord's lodgings
afterwards, and there I parted with my Lady and went home, where I did
find my wife pretty well after her physic.  So to bed.

29th.  I up early, it being my Lord Mayor's day,

     [When the calendar was reformed in England by the act 24 Geo. II.
     c. 23, different provisions were made as regards those anniversaries
     which affect directly the rights of property and those which do not.
     Thus the old quarter days are still noted in our almanacs, and a
     curious survival of this is brought home to payers of income tax.
     The fiscal year still begins on old Lady-day, which now falls on
     April 6th.  All ecclesiastical fasts and feasts and other
     commemorations which did not affect the rights of property were left
     on their nominal days, such as the execution of Charles I. on
     January 30th and the restoration of Charles II. on May 29th.  The
     change of Lord Mayor's day from the 29th of October to the 9th of
     November was not made by the act for reforming the calendar (c.
     23), but by another act of the same session (c. 48), entitled "An
     Act for the Abbreviation of Michaelmas Term," by which it was
     enacted, "that from and after the said feast of St. Michael, which
     shall be in the year 1752, the said solemnity of presenting and
     swearing the mayors of the city of London, after every annual
     election into the said office, in the manner and form heretofore
     used on the 29th day of October, shall be kept and observed on the
     ninth day of November in every year, unless the same shall fall on
     a Sunday, and in that case on the day following."]

(Sir Richd. Browne), and neglecting my office I went to the Wardrobe,
where I met my Lady Sandwich and all the children; and after drinking of
some strange and incomparable good clarett of Mr. Rumball's he and Mr.
Townsend did take us, and set the young Lords at one Mr. Nevill's, a
draper in Paul's churchyard; and my Lady and my Lady Pickering and I to
one Mr. Isaacson's, a linendraper at the Key in Cheapside; where there was
a company of fine ladies, and we were very civilly treated, and had a very
good place to see the pageants, which were many, and I believe good, for
such kind of things, but in themselves but poor and absurd.  After the
ladies were placed I took Mr. Townsend and Isaacson to the next door, a
tavern, and did spend 5s. upon them.  The show being done, we got as far
as Paul's with much ado, where I left my Lady in the coach, and went on
foot with my Lady Pickering to her lodging, which was a poor one in
Blackfryars, where she never invited me to go in at all, which methought
was very strange for her to do.  So home, where I was told how my Lady
Davis is now come to our next lodgings, and has locked up the leads door
from me, which puts me into so great a disquiet that I went to bed, and
could not sleep till morning at it.

30th.  Within all the morning and dined at home, my mind being so troubled
that I could not mind nor do anything till I spoke with the Comptroller to
whom the lodgings belong.  In the afternoon, to ease my mind, I went to
the Cockpit all alone, and there saw a very fine play called "The Tamer
Tamed;" very well acted.  That being done, I went to Mr. Crew's, where I
had left my boy, and so with him and Mr. Moore (who would go a little way
with me home, as he will always do) to the Hercules Pillars to drink,
where we did read over the King's declaration in matters of religion,
which is come out to-day, which is very well penned, I think to the
satisfaction of most people.  So home, where I am told Mr. Davis's people
have broken open the bolt of my chamber door that goes upon the leads,
which I went up to see and did find it so, which did still trouble me more
and more.  And so I sent for Griffith, and got him to search their house
to see what the meaning of it might be, but can learn nothing to-night.
But I am a little pleased that I have found this out.  I hear nothing yet
of my Lord, whether he be gone for the Queen from the Downs or no; but I
believe he is, and that he is now upon coming back again.

31st Office day.  Much troubled all this morning in my mind about the
business of my walk on the leads.  I spoke of it to the Comptroller and
the rest of the principal officers, who are all unwilling to meddle in
anything that may anger my Lady Davis.  And so I am fain to give over for
the time that she do continue therein.  Dined at home, and after dinner to
Westminster Hall, where I met with Billing the quaker at Mrs. Michell's
shop, who is still of the former opinion he was of against the clergymen
of all sorts, and a cunning fellow I find him to be.  Home, and there I
had news that Sir W. Pen is resolved to ride to Sir W. Batten's country
house to-morrow, and would have me go with him, so I sat up late, getting
together my things to ride in, and was fain to cut an old pair of boots to
make leathers for those I was to wear.  This month I conclude with my mind
very heavy for the loss of the leads, as also for the greatness of my late
expenses, insomuch that I do not think that I have above L150 clear money
in the world, but I have, I believe, got a great deal of good household
stuff: I hear to-day that the Queen is landed at Dover, and will be here
on Friday next, November 2nd.  My wife has been so ill of late of her old
pain that I have not known her this fortnight almost, which is a pain to
me.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                               NOVEMBER
                                 1660

November 1st.  This morning Sir W. Pen and I were mounted early, and had
very merry discourse all the way, he being very good company.  We came to
Sir W. Batten's, where he lives like a prince, and we were made very
welcome.  Among other things he showed us my Lady's closet, where was
great store of rarities; as also a chair, which he calls King Harry's
chair, where he that sits down is catched with two irons, that come round
about him, which makes good sport.  Here dined with us two or three more
country gentle men; among the rest Mr. Christmas, my old school-fellow,
with whom I had much talk.  He did remember that I was a great Roundhead
when I was a boy, and I was much afraid that he would have remembered the
words that I said the day the King was beheaded (that, were I to preach
upon him, my text should be "The memory of the wicked shall rot"); but I
found afterwards that he did go away from school before that time.

     [Pepys might well be anxious on this point, for in October of this
     year Phieas Pett, assistant master shipwright at Chatham, was
     dismissed from his post for having when a Child spoken
     disrespectfully of the King.  See ante, August 23rd.]

He did make us good sport in imitating Mr. Case, Ash, and Nye, the
ministers, which he did very well, but a deadly drinker he is, and grown
exceeding fat.  From his house to an ale-house near the church, where we
sat and drank and were merry, and so we mounted for London again, Sir W.
Batten with us.  We called at Bow and drank there, and took leave of Mr.
Johnson of Blackwall, who dined with us and rode with us thus far.  So
home by moonlight, it being about 9 o'clock before we got home.

2nd.  Office.  Then dined at home, and by chance Mr. Holliard

     [Thomas Holliard or Hollier was appointed in 1638 surgeon for scald
     heads at St. Thomas's Hospital, and on January 25th, 1643-4, he was
     chosen surgeon in place of Edward Molins.  In 1670 his son of the
     same names was allowed to take his place during his illness.  Ward,
     in his Diary, p.  235, mentions that the porter at St. Thomas's
     Hospital told him, in 1661, of Mr. Holyard's having cut thirty for
     the stone in one year, who all lived.]

called at dinner time and dined with me, with whom I had great discourse
concerning the cure of the King's evil, which he do deny altogether any
effect at all.  In the afternoon I went forth and saw some silver bosses
put upon my new Bible, which cost me 6s. 6d.  the making, and 7s. 6d. the
silver, which, with 9s. 6d.  the book, comes in all to L1 3s. 6d. From
thence with Mr. Cooke that made them, and Mr. Stephens the silversmith to
the tavern, and did give them a pint of wine.  So to White Hall, where
when I came I saw the boats going very thick to Lambeth, and all the
stairs to be full of people.  I was told the Queen was a-coming;

     ["Nov. 2.  The Queen-mother and the Princess Henrietta came into
     London, the Queen having left this land nineteen years ago.  Her
     coming was very private, Lambeth-way, where the King, Queen, and the
     Duke of York, and the rest, took water, crossed the Thames, and all
     safely arrived at Whitehall.--"Rugge's Diurnal."]

so I got a sculler for sixpence to carry me thither and back again, but I
could not get to see the Queen; so come back, and to my Lord's, where he
was come; and I supt with him, he being very merry, telling merry stories
of the country mayors, how they entertained the King all the way as he
come along; and how the country gentlewomen did hold up their heads to be
kissed by the King, not taking his hand to kiss as they should do.  I took
leave of my Lord and Lady, and so took coach at White Hall and carried Mr.
Childe as far as the Strand, and myself got as far as Ludgate by all the
bonfires, but with a great deal of trouble; and there the coachman desired
that I would release him, for he durst not go further for the fires.  So
he would have had a shilling or 6d. for bringing of me so far; but I had
but 3d. about me and did give him it.  In Paul's church-yard I called at
Kirton's, and there they had got a mass book for me, which I bought and
cost me twelve shillings; and, when I came home, sat up late and read in
it with great pleasure to my wife, to hear that she was long ago so well
acquainted with.  So to bed.  I observed this night very few bonfires in
the City, not above three in all London, for the Queen's coming; whereby I
guess that (as I believed before) her coming do please but very few.

3d.  Saturday.  At home all the morning.  In the afternoon to White Hall,
where my Lord and Lady were gone to kiss the Queene's hand.  To
Westminster Hall, where I met with Tom Doling, and we two took Mrs. Lane
to the alehouse, where I made her angry with commending of Tom Newton and
her new sweetheart to be both too good for her, so that we parted with
much anger, which made Tom and me good sport.  So home to write letters by
the post, and so to bed.

4th (Lord's day).  In the morn to our own church, where Mr. Mills did
begin to nibble at the Common Prayer, by saying "Glory be to the Father,
&c."  after he had read the two psalms; but the people had been so little
used to it, that they could not tell what to answer.  This declaration of
the King's do give the Presbyterians some satisfaction, and a pretence to
read the Common Prayer, which they would not do before because of their
former preaching against it.  After dinner to Westminster, where I went to
my Lord's, and having spoke with him, I went to the Abbey, where the first
time that ever I heard the organs in a cathedral!  Thence to my Lord's,
where I found Mr. Pierce, the surgeon, and with him and Mr. Sheply, in our
way calling at the Bell to see the seven Flanders mares that my Lord has
bought lately, where we drank several bottles of Hull ale.  Much company I
found to come to her, and cannot wonder at it, for she is very pretty and
wanton.  Hence to my father's, where I found my mother in greater and
greater pain of the stone.  I staid long and drank with them, and so home
and to bed.  My wife seemed very pretty to-day, it being the first time I
had given her leave to wear a black patch.

5th (Office day).  Being disappointed of money, we failed of going to
Deptford to pay off the Henrietta to-day.  Dined at home, and at home all
day, and at the office at night, to make up an account of what the debts
of nineteen of the twenty-five ships that should have been paid off, is
increased since the adjournment of the Parliament, they being to sit again
to-morrow.  This 5th of November is observed exceeding well in the City;
and at night great bonfires and fireworks.  At night Mr. Moore came and
sat with me, and there I took a book and he did instruct me in many law
notions, in which I took great pleasure.  To bed.

6th.  In the morning with Sir W. Batten and Pen by water to Westminster,
where at my Lord's I met with Mr. Creed.  With him to see my Lord's
picture (now almost done), and thence to Westminster Hall, where we found
the Parliament met to-day, and thence meeting with Mr. Chetwind, I took
them to the Sun, and did give them a barrel of oysters, and had good
discourse; among other things Mr. Chetwind told me how he did fear that
this late business of the Duke of York's would prove fatal to my Lord
Chancellor.  From thence Mr. Creed and I to Wilkinson's, and dined
together, and in great haste thence to our office, where we met all, for
the sale of two ships by an inch of candle

     [The old-fashioned custom of sale by auction by inch of candle was
     continued in sales by the Admiralty to a somewhat late date.  See
     September 3rd, 1662.]

(the first time that ever I saw any of this kind), where I observed how
they do invite one another, and at last how they all do cry,--[To cry was
to bid.]--and we have much to do to tell who did cry last.  The ships were
the Indian, sold for L1,300, and the Half-moon, sold for L830. Home, and
fell a-reading of the tryalls of the late men that were hanged for the
King's death, and found good satisfaction in reading thereof. At night to
bed, and my wife and I did fall out about the dog's being put down into
the cellar, which I had a mind to have done because of his fouling the
house, and I would have my will, and so we went to bed and lay all night
in a quarrel.  This night I was troubled all night with a dream that my
wife was dead, which made me that I slept ill all night.

7th (Office day).  This day my father came to dine at my house, but being
sent for in the morning I could not stay, but went by water to my Lord,
where I dined with him, and he in a very merry humour (present Mr. Borfett
and Childe) at dinner: he, in discourse of the great opinion of the
virtue--gratitude (which he did account the greatest thing in the world to
him, and had, therefore, in his mind been often troubled in the late times
how to answer his gratitude to the King, who raised his father), did say
it was that did bring him to his obedience to the King; and did also bless
himself with his good fortune, in comparison to what it was when I was
with him in the Sound, when he durst not own his correspondence with the
King; which is a thing that I never did hear of to this day before; and I
do from this raise an opinion of him, to be one of the most secret men in
the world, which I was not so convinced of before.  After dinner he bid
all go out of the room, and did tell me how the King had promised him
L4000 per annum for ever, and had already given him a bill under his hand
(which he showed me) for L4000 that Mr. Fox is to pay him.  My Lord did
advise with me how to get this received, and to put out L3000 into safe
hands at use, and the other he will make use of for his present occasion.
This he did advise with me about with much secresy.  After all this he
called for the fiddles and books, and we two and W. Howe, and Mr. Childe,
did sing and play some psalmes of Will. Lawes's, and some songs; and so I
went away.  So I went to see my Lord's picture, which is almost done, and
do please me very well.  Hence to Whitehall to find out Mr. Fox, which I
did, and did use me very civilly, but I did not see his lady, whom I had
so long known when she was a maid, Mrs. Whittle.  From thence meeting my
father Bowyer, I took him to Mr. Harper's, and there drank with him.
Among other things in discourse he told me how my wife's brother had a
horse at grass with him, which I was troubled to hear, it being his
boldness upon my score.  Home by coach, and read late in the last night's
book of Trials, and told my wife about her brother's horse at Mr.
Bowyer's, who is also much troubled for it, and do intend to go to-morrow
to inquire the truth.  Notwithstanding this was the first day of the
King's proclamation against hackney coaches coming into the streets to
stand to be hired, yet I got one to carry me home.

     ["A Proclamation to restrain the abuses of Hackney Coaches in the
     Cities of London and Westminster and the Suburbs thereof."  This is
     printed in "Notes and Queries," First Series, vol. viii.  p. 122.
     "In April, 1663, the poor widows of hackney-coachmen petitioned for
     some relief, as the parliament had reduced the number of coaches to
     400; there were before, in and about London, more than 2,000."
     --Rugge's Diurnal.]

8th.  This morning Sir Wm. and the Treasurer and I went by barge with Sir
Wm. Doyley and Mr. Prin to Deptford, to pay off the Henrietta, and had a
good dinner.  I went to Mr. Davys's and saw his house (where I was once
before a great while ago) and I found him a very pretty man.  In the
afternoon Commissioner Pett and I went on board the yacht, which indeed is
one of the finest things that ever I saw for neatness and room in so small
a vessel.  Mr. Pett is to make one to outdo this for the honour of his
country, which I fear he will scarce better.  From thence with him as far
as Ratcliffe, where I left him going by water to London, and I (unwilling
to leave the rest of the officers) went back again to Deptford, and being
very much troubled with a sudden looseness, I went into a little alehouse
at the end of Ratcliffe, and did give a groat for a pot of ale, and there
I did .  .  .  So went forward in my walk with some men that were going
that way a great pace, and in our way we met with many merry seamen that
had got their money paid them to-day.  We sat very late doing the work
and waiting for the tide, it being moonshine we got to London before two
in the morning. So home, where I found my wife up, she shewed me her head
which was very well dressed to-day, she having been to see her father and
mother.  So to bed.

9th.  Lay long in bed this morning though an office day, because of our
going to bed late last night.  Before I went to my office Mr. Creed came
to me about business, and also Mr. Carter, my old Cambridge friend, came
to give me a visit, and I did give them a morning draught in my study. So
to the office, and from thence to dinner with Mr. Wivell at the Hoop
Tavern, where we had Mr. Shepley, Talbot, Adams, Mr. Chaplin and Osborne,
and our dinner given us by Mr. Ady and another, Mr. Wine, the King's
fishmonger.  Good sport with Mr. Talbot, who eats no sort of fish, and
there was nothing else till we sent for a neat's tongue.  From thence to
Whitehall where I found my Lord, who had an organ set up to-day in his
dining-room, but it seems an ugly one in the form of Bridewell.  Thence I
went to Sir Harry Wright's, where my Lord was busy at cards, and so I
staid below with Mrs. Carter and Evans (who did give me a lesson upon the
lute), till he came down, and having talked with him at the door about his
late business of money, I went to my father's and staid late talking with
my father about my sister Pall's coming to live with me if she would come
and be as a servant (which my wife did seem to be pretty willing to do
to-day), and he seems to take it very well, and intends to consider of it.
Home and to bed.

10th.  Up early.  Sir Wm. Batten and I to make up an account of the wages
of the officers and mariners at sea, ready to present to the Committee of
Parliament this afternoon.  Afterwards came the Treasurer and Comptroller,
and sat all the morning with us till the business was done. So we broke
up, leaving the thing to be wrote over fair and carried to Trinity House
for Sir Wm. Batten's hand.  When staying very long I found (as appointed)
the Treasurer and Comptroller at Whitehall, and so we went with a foul
copy to the Parliament house, where we met with Sir Thos. Clarges and Mr.
Spry, and after we had given them good satisfaction we parted.  The
Comptroller and I to the coffee-house, where he shewed me the state of his
case; how the King did owe him about L6000.  But I do not see great
likelihood for them to be paid, since they begin already in Parliament to
dispute the paying of the just sea-debts, which were already promised to
be paid, and will be the undoing of thousands if they be not paid.  So to
Whitehall to look but could not find Mr. Fox, and then to Mr. Moore at Mr.
Crew's, but missed of him also.  So to Paul's Churchyard, and there bought
Montelion,  which this year do not prove so good as the last was; so after
reading it I burnt it.  After reading of that and the comedy of the Rump,
which is also very silly, I went to bed. This night going home, Will and I
bought a goose.

11th (Lord's day).  This morning I went to Sir W. Batten's about going to
Deptford to-morrow, and so eating some hog's pudding of my Lady's making,
of the hog that I saw a fattening the other day at her house, he and I
went to Church into our new gallery, the first time it was used, and it
not being yet quite finished, there came after us Sir W. Pen, Mr. Davis,
and his eldest son.  There being no woman this day, we sat in the foremost
pew, and behind us our servants, and I hope it will not always be so, it
not being handsome for our servants to sit so equal with us. This day also
did Mr. Mills begin to read all the Common Prayer, which I was glad of.
Home to dinner, and then walked to Whitehall, it being very cold and foul
and rainy weather.  I found my Lord at home, and after giving him an
account of some business, I returned and went to my father's where I found
my wife, and there we supped, and Dr. Thomas Pepys, who my wife told me
after I was come home, that he had told my brother Thomas that he loved my
wife so well that if she had a child he would never marry, but leave all
that he had to my child, and after supper we walked home, my little boy
carrying a link, and Will leading my wife.  So home and to prayers and to
bed.  I should have said that before I got to my Lord's this day I went to
Mr. Fox's at Whitehall, when I first saw his lady, formerly Mrs. Elizabeth
Whittle, whom I had formerly a great opinion of, and did make an anagram
or two upon her name when I was a boy.  She proves a very fine lady, and
mother to fine children. To-day I agreed with Mr. Fox about my taking of
the; L4000 of him that the King had given my Lord.

12th.  Lay long in bed to-day.  Sir Wm. Batten went this morning to
Deptford to pay off the Wolf.  Mr. Comptroller and I sat a while at the
office to do business, and thence I went with him to his house in Lime
Street, a fine house, and where I never was before, and from thence by
coach (setting down his sister at the new Exchange) to Westminster Hall,
where first I met with Jack Spicer and agreed with him to help me to tell
money this afternoon.  Hence to De Cretz, where I saw my Lord's picture
finished, which do please me very well.  So back to the Hall, where by
appointment I met the Comptroller, and with him and three or four
Parliament men I dined at Heaven, and after dinner called at Will's on
Jack Spicer, and took him to Mr. Fox's, who saved me the labour of telling
me the money by giving me; L3000 by consent (the other L1000 I am to have
on Thursday next), which I carried by coach to the Exchequer, and put it
up in a chest in Spicer's office.  From thence walked to my father's,
where I found my wife, who had been with my father to-day, buying of a
tablecloth and a dozen of napkins of diaper the first that
ever I bought in my life.  My father and I took occasion to go forth, and
went and drank at Mr. Standing's, and there discoursed seriously about my
sister's coming to live with me, which I have much mind for her good to
have, and yet I am much afeard of her ill-nature. Coming home again, he
and I, and my wife, my mother and Pall, went all together into the little
room, and there I told her plainly what my mind was, to have her come not
as a sister in any respect, but as a servant, which she promised me that
she would, and with many thanks did weep for joy, which did give me and my
wife some content and satisfaction.  So by coach home and to bed.  The
last night I should have mentioned how my wife and I were troubled all
night with the sound of drums in our ears, which in the morning we found
to be Mr. Davys's jack,

     [The date of the origin of smoke jacks does not appear to be known,
     but the first patent taken out for an improved smoke-jack by Peter
     Clare is dated December 24th, 1770.  The smoke jack consists of a
     wind-wheel fixed in the chimney, which communicates motion by means
     of an endless band to a pulley, whence the motion is transmitted to
     the spit by gearing.  In the valuable introduction to the volume of
     "Abridgments of Specifications relating to Cooking, 1634-1866"
     (Patent Office), mention is made of an Italian work by Bartolomeo
     Scappi, published first at Rome in 1572, and afterwards reprinted at
     Venice in 1622, which gives a complete account of the kitchens of
     the time and the utensils used in them.  In the plates several
     roasting-jacks are represented, one worked by smoke or hot air and
     one by a spring.]

but not knowing the cause of its going all night, I understand to-day that
they have had a great feast to-day.

13th.  Early going to my Lord's I met with Mr. Moore, who was going to my
house, and indeed I found him to be a most careful, painful,--[Painful,
i.e.  painstaking or laborious.  Latimer speaks of the "painful
magistrates."]--and able man in business, and took him by water to the
Wardrobe, and shewed him all the house; and indeed there is a great deal
of room in it, but very ugly till my Lord hath bestowed great cost upon
it.  So to the Exchequer, and there took Spicer and his fellow clerks to
the Dog tavern, and did give them a peck of oysters, and so home to
dinner, where I found my wife making of pies and tarts to try, her oven
with, which she has never yet done, but not knowing the nature of it, did
heat it too hot, and so a little overbake her things, but knows how to do
better another time.  At home all the afternoon.  At night made up my
accounts of my sea expenses in order to my clearing off my imprest bill of
L30 which I had in my hands at the beginning of my voyage; which I intend
to shew to my Lord to-morrow.  To bed.

14th (Office day).  But this day was the first that we do begin to sit in
the afternoon, and not in the forenoon, and therefore I went into
Cheapside to Mr. Beauchamp's, the goldsmith, to look out a piece of plate
to give Mr. Fox from my Lord, for his favour about the L4,000, and did
choose a gilt tankard.  So to Paul's Churchyard and bought "Cornelianum.
dolium:"

     ["Cornelianum dolium" is a Latin comedy, by T. R., published at
     London in 1638.  Douce attributed it to Thomas Randolph (d. 1635).
     The book has a frontispiece representing the sweating tub which,
     from the name of the patient, was styled Cornelius's tub.  There is
     a description of the play in the "European Magazine," vol. xxxvii.
     (1805), p. 343]

So home to dinner, and after that to the office till late at night, and so
Sir W. Pen, the Comptroller, and I to the Dolphin, where we found Sir W.
Batten, who is seldom a night from hence, and there we did drink a great
quantity of sack and did tell many merry stories, and in good humours we
were all.  So home and to bed.

15th.  To Westminster, and it being very cold upon the water I went all
alone to the Sun and drank a draft of mulled white wine, and so to Mr. de
Cretz, whither I sent for J. Spicer (to appoint him to expect me this
afternoon at the office, with the other L1000 from Whitehall), and here we
staid and did see him give some finishing touches to my Lord's picture, so
at last it is complete to my mind, and I leave mine with him to copy out
another for himself, and took the original by a porter with me to my
Lord's, where I found my Lord within, and staid hearing him and Mr. Child
playing upon my Lord's new organ, the first time I ever heard it.  My Lord
did this day show me the King's picture, which was done in Flanders, that
the King did promise my Lord before he ever saw him, and that we did
expect to have had at sea before the King came to us; but it came but
to-day, and indeed it is the most pleasant and the most like him that ever
I saw picture in my life.  As dinner was coming on table, my wife came to
my Lord's, and I got her carried in to my Lady, who took physic to-day,
and was just now hiring of a French maid that was with her, and they could
not understand one another till my wife came to interpret.  Here I did
leave my wife to dine with my Lord, the first time he ever did take notice
of her as my wife, and did seem to have a just esteem for her.  And did
myself walk homewards (hearing that Sir W. Pen was gone before in a coach)
to overtake him and with much ado at last did in Fleet Street, and there I
went in to him, and there was Sir Arnold Brames, and we all three to Sir
W. Batten's to dinner, he having a couple of Servants married to-day; and
so there was a great number of merchants, and others of good quality on
purpose after dinner to make an offering, which, when dinner was done, we
did, and I did give ten shillings and no more, though I believe most of
the rest did give more, and did believe that I did so too.  From thence to
Whitehall again by water to Mr. Fox and by two porters carried away the
other L1000.  He was not within himself, but I had it of his kinsman, and
did give him L4. and other servants something; but whereas I did intend to
have given Mr. Fox himself a piece of plate of L50 I was demanded L100,
for the fee of the office at 6d. a pound, at which I was surprised, but,
however, I did leave it there till I speak with my Lord.  So I carried it
to the Exchequer, where at Will's I found Mr. Spicer, and so lodged it at
his office with the rest.  From thence after a pot of ale at Will's I took
boat in the dark and went for all that to the old Swan, and so to Sir Wm.
Batten's, and leaving some of the gallants at cards I went home, where I
found my wife much satisfied with my Lord's discourse and respect to her,
and so after prayers to bed.

16th.  Up early to my father's, where by appointment Mr. Moore came to me,
and he and I to the Temple, and thence to Westminster Hall to speak with
Mr. Wm. Montagu about his looking upon the title of those lands which I do
take as security for L3000 of my Lord's money.  That being done Mr. Moore
and I parted, and in the Hall I met with Mr. Fontleroy (my old
acquaintance, whom I had not seen a long time), and he and I to the Swan,
and in discourse he seems to be wise and say little, though I know things
are changed against his mind.  Thence home by water, where my father, Mr.
Snow, and Mr. Moore did dine with me.  After dinner Mr. Snow and I went up
together to discourse about the putting out of L80 to a man who lacks the
money and would give me L15 per annum for 8 years for it, which I did not
think profit enough, and so he seemed to be disappointed by my refusal of
it, but I would not now part with my money easily.  He seems to do it as a
great favour to me to offer to come in upon a way of getting of money,
which they call Bottomry,

     ["The contract of bottomry is a negotiable instrument, which may be
     put in suit by the person to whom it is transferred; it is in use in
     all countries of maritime commerce and interests.  A contract in the
     nature of a mortgage of a ship, when the owner of it borrows money
     to enable him to carry on the voyage, and pledges the keel or bottom
     of the ship as a security for the repayment.  If the ship be lost
     the lender loses his whole money; but if it returns in safety, then
     he shall receive back his principal, and also the premium stipulated
     to be paid, however it may exceed the usual or legal rate of
     interest."--Smyth's Sailor's WordBook.]

which I do not yet understand, but do believe there may be something in it
of great profit.  After we were parted I went to the office, and there we
sat all the afternoon, and at night we went to a barrel of oysters at Sir
W.  Batten's, and so home, and I to the setting of my papers in order,
which did keep me up late.  So to bed.

17th.  In the morning to Whitehall, where I inquired at the Privy Seal
Office for a form for a nobleman to make one his Chaplain.  But I
understanding that there is not any, I did draw up one, and so to my
Lord's, and there I did give him it to sign for Mr. Turner to be his first
Chaplain.  I did likewise get my Lord to sign my last sea accounts, so
that I am even to this day when I have received the balance of Mr. Creed.
I dined with my Lady and my Lady Pickering, where her son John dined with
us, who do continue a fool as he ever was since I knew him. His mother
would fain marry him to get a portion for his sister Betty but he will not
hear of it.  Hither came Major Hart this noon, who tells me that the
Regiment is now disbanded, and that there is some money coming to me for
it.  I took him to my Lord to Mr. Crew's, and from thence with Mr. Shepley
and Mr. Moore to the Devil Tavern, and there we drank.  So home and wrote
letters by the post.  Then to my lyra viall,

     [The lyre viol is a viol with extra open bass strings, holding the
     same relation to the viol as the theorbo does to the lute.  A volume
     entitled "Musick's Recreation on the Lyra Viol," was printed by John
     Playford in 1650.]

and to bed.

18th (Lord's day).  In the morning to our own church, Where Mr. Powel (a
crook legged man that went formerly with me to Paul's School), preached a
good sermon.  In the afternoon to our own church and my wife with me (the
first time that she and my Lady Batten came to sit in our new pew), and
after sermon my Lady took us home and there we supped with her and Sir W.
Batten, and Pen, and were much made of.  The first time that ever my wife
was there.  So home and to bed.

19th (Office day).  After we had done a little at the office this morning,
I went with the Treasurer in his coach to White Hall, and in our way, in
discourse, do find him a very good-natured man; and, talking of those men
who now stand condemned for murdering the King, he says that he believes
that, if the law would give leave, the King is a man of so great
compassion that he would wholly acquit them.  Going to my Lord's I met
with Mr. Shepley, and so he and I to the Sun, and I did give him a morning
draft of Muscadine.

     [Muscadine or muscadel, a rich sort of wine.  'Vinum muscatum quod
     moschi odorem referat.'

              "Quaffed off the muscadel, and threw the sops
               All in the sexton's face."

               Shakespeare, Taming of the Shrew, act iii.  SC. 2.--M. B.]

And so to see my Lord's picture at De Cretz, and he says it is very like
him, and I say so too.  After that to Westminster Hall, and there hearing
that Sir W. Batten was at the Leg in the Palace, I went thither, and there
dined with him and some of the Trinity House men who had obtained
something to-day at the House of Lords concerning the Ballast Office.
After dinner I went by water to London to the Globe in Cornhill, and there
did choose two pictures to hang up in my house, which my wife did not like
when I came home, and so I sent the picture of Paris back again. To the
office, where we sat all the afternoon till night.  So home, and there
came Mr. Beauchamp to me with the gilt tankard, and I did pay him for it
L20.  So to my musique and sat up late at it, and so to bed, leaving my
wife to sit up till 2 o'clock that she may call the wench up to wash.

20th.  About two o'clock my wife wakes me, and comes to bed, and so both
to sleep and the wench to wash.  I rose and with Will to my Lord's by
land, it being a very hard frost, the first we have had this year.  There
I staid with my Lord and Mr. Shepley, looking over my Lord's accounts and
to set matters straight between him and Shepley, and he did commit the
viewing of these accounts to me, which was a great joy to me to see that
my Lord do look upon me as one to put trust in.  Hence to the organ, where
Mr. Child and one Mr Mackworth (who plays finely upon the violin) were
playing, and so we played till dinner and then dined, where my Lord in a
very good humour and kind to me.  After dinner to the Temple, where I met
Mr. Moore and discoursed with him about the business of putting out my
Lord's L3000, and that done, Mr. Shepley and I to the new Play-house near
Lincoln's-Inn-Fields (which was formerly Gibbon's tennis-court), where the
play of "Beggar's Bush" was newly begun; and so we went in and saw it, it
was well acted: and here I saw the first time one Moone,

     [Michael Mohun, or Moone, the celebrated actor, who had borne a
     major's commission in the King's army.  The period of his death is
     uncertain, but he is known to have been dead in 1691.  Downes
     relates that an eminent poet [Lee] seeing him act Mithridates
     "vented suddenly this saying: 'Oh, Mohun, Mohun, thou little man of
     mettle, if I should write a 100, I'd write a part for thy mouth.'"
     --Roscius Anglicanus, p.  17.]

who is said to be the best actor in the world, lately come over with the
King, and indeed it is the finest play-house, I believe, that ever was in
England.  From thence, after a pot of ale with Mr. Shepley at a house hard
by, I went by link home, calling a little by the way at my father's and my
uncle Fenner's, where all pretty well, and so home, where I found the
house in a washing pickle, and my wife in a very joyful condition when I
told her that she is to see the Queen next Thursday, which puts me in mind
to say that this morning I found my Lord in bed late, he having been with
the King, Queen, and Princess, at the Cockpit

     [The Cockpit at Whitehall.  The plays at the Cockpit in Drury Lane
     were acted in the afternoon.]

all night, where.  General Monk treated them; and after supper a play,
where the King did put a great affront upon Singleton's' musique, he
bidding them stop and bade the French musique play, which, my Lord says,
do much outdo all ours.  But while my Lord was rising, I went to Mr.
Fox's, and there did leave the gilt tankard for Mrs. Fox, and then to the
counting-house to him, who hath invited me and my wife to dine with him on
Thursday next, and so to see the Queen and Princesses.

21st.  Lay long in bed.  This morning my cozen Thomas Pepys, the turner,
sent me a cupp of lignum vitae

     [A hard, compact, black-green wood, obtained from 'Guaiacum
     offcinale', from which pestles, ship-blocks, rollers, castors, &c.,
     are turned.]

for a token.  This morning my wife and I went to Paternoster Row, and
there we bought some green watered moyre for a morning wastecoate.  And
after that we went to Mr. Cade's' to choose some pictures for our house.
After that my wife went home, and I to Pope's Head, and bought me an
aggate hafted knife, which cost me 5s.  So home to dinner, and so to the
office all the afternoon, and at night to my viallin (the first time that
I have played on it since I came to this house) in my dining room, and
afterwards to my lute there, and I took much pleasure to have the
neighbours come forth into the yard to hear me.  So down to supper, and
sent for the barber, who staid so long with me that he was locked into the
house, and we were fain to call up Griffith, to let him out.  So up to
bed, leaving my wife to wash herself, and to do other things against
to-morrow to go to court.

22d.  This morning came the carpenters to make me a door at the other side
of my house, going into the entry, which I was much pleased with. At noon
my wife and I walked to the Old Exchange, and there she bought her a white
whisk

     [A gorget or neckerchief worn by women at this time.  "A woman's
     neck whisk is used both plain and laced, and is called of most a
     gorget or falling whisk, because it falleth about the shoulders."
     --Randle Hohnt (quoted by Planche).]

and put it on, and I a pair of gloves, and so we took coach for Whitehall
to Mr. Fox's, where we found Mrs. Fox within, and an alderman of London
paying L1000 or L1500 in gold upon the table for the King, which was the
most gold that ever I saw together in my life.  Mr. Fox came in presently
and did receive us with a great deal of respect; and then did take my wife
and I to the Queen's presence-chamber; where he got my wife placed behind
the Queen's chair, and I got into the crowd, and by and by the Queen and
the two Princesses came to dinner.  The Queen a very little plain old
woman, and nothing more in her presence in any respect nor garb than any
ordinary woman.  The Princess of Orange I had often seen before. The
Princess Henrietta is very pretty, but much below my expectation; and her
dressing of herself with her hair frized short up to her ears, did make
her seem so much the less to me.  But my wife standing near her with two
or three black patches on, and well dressed, did seem to me much handsomer
than she.  Dinner being done, we went to Mr. Fox's again, where many
gentlemen dined with us, and most princely dinner, all provided for me and
my friends, but I bringing none but myself and wife, he did call the
company to help to eat up so much good victuals.  At the end of dinner, my
Lord Sandwich's health was drunk in the gilt tankard that I did give to
Mrs. Fox the other day.  After dinner I had notice given me by Will my man
that my Lord did inquire for me, so I went to find him, and met him and
the Duke of York in a coach going towards Charing Cross. I endeavoured to
follow them but could not, so I returned to Mr. Fox, and after much
kindness and good discourse we parted from thence.  I took coach for my
wife and me homewards, and I light at the Maypole in the Strand, and sent
my wife home.  I to the new playhouse and saw part of the "Traitor," a
very good Tragedy; Mr. Moon did act the Traitor very well.  So to my
Lord's, and sat there with my Lady a great while talking. Among other
things, she took occasion to inquire (by Madame Dury's late discourse with
her) how I did treat my wife's father and mother.  At which I did give her
a good account, and she seemed to be very well opinioned of my wife.  From
thence to White Hall at about 9 at night, and there, with Laud the page
that went with me, we could not get out of Henry the Eighth's gallery into
the further part of the boarded gallery, where my Lord was walking with my
Lord Ormond; and we had a key of Sir S. Morland's, but all would not do;
till at last, by knocking, Mr. Harrison the door-keeper did open us the
door, and, after some talk with my Lord about getting a catch to carry my
Lord St. Albans a goods to France, I parted and went home on foot, it
being very late and dirty, and so weary to bed.

23rd.  This morning standing looking upon the workmen doing of my new door
to my house, there comes Captain Straughan the Scot (to whom the King has
given half of the money that the two ships lately sold do bring), and he
would needs take me to the Dolphin, and give me a glass of ale and a peck
of oysters, he and I.  He did talk much what he is able to advise the King
for good husbandry in his ships, as by ballasting them with lead ore and
many other tricks, but I do believe that he is a knowing man in
sea-business.  Home and dined, and in the afternoon to the office, where
till late, and that being done Mr. Creed did come to speak with me, and I
took him to the Dolphin, where there was Mr. Pierce the purser and his
wife and some friends of theirs.  So I did spend a crown upon them behind
the bar, they being akin to the people of the house, and this being the
house where Mr. Pierce was apprentice.  After they were gone Mr. Creed and
I spent an hour in looking over the account which he do intend to pass in
our office for his lending moneys, which I did advise about and approve or
disapprove of as I saw cause.  After an hour being, serious at this we
parted about 11 o'clock at night.  So I home and to bed, leaving my wife
and the maid at their linen to get up.

24th.  To my Lord's, where after I had done talking with him Mr. Townsend,
Rumball, Blackburn, Creed and Shepley and I to the Rhenish winehouse, and
there I did give them two quarts of Wormwood wine,

     [Wormwood (Artemisia absinthium) is celebrated for its intensely
     bitter, tonic, and stimulating qualities, which have caused it to be
     used in various medicinal preparations, and also in the making of
     liqueurs, as wormwood wine and creme d'absinthe.]

and so we broke up.  So we parted, and I and Mr. Creed to Westminster Hall
and looked over a book or two, and so to my Lord's, where I dined with my
lady, there being Mr. Child and Mrs. Borfett, who are never absent at
dinner there, under pretence of a wooing.  From thence I to Mr. de Cretz
and did take away my Lord's picture, which is now finished for me, and I
paid L3 10s. for it and the frame, and am well pleased with it and the
price.  So carried it home by water, Will being with me.  At home, and had
a fire made in my closet, and put my papers and books and things in order,
and that being done I fell to entering these two good songs of Mr. Lawes,
"Helpe, helpe, O helpe," and "O God of Heaven and Hell" in my song book,
to which I have got Mr. Child to set the base to the Theorbo, and that
done to bed.

25th (Lord's day).  In the forenoon I alone to our church, and after
dinner I went and ranged about to many churches, among the rest to the
Temple, where I heard Dr. Wilkins' a little (late Maister of Trinity in
Cambridge).  That being done to my father's to see my mother who is
troubled much with the stone, and that being done I went home, where I had
a letter brought me from my Lord to get a ship ready to carry the Queen's
things over to France, she being to go within five or six days. So to
supper and to bed.

26th (Office day).  To it all the morning, and dined at home where my
father come and dined with me, who seems to take much pleasure to have a
son that is neat in his house.  I being now making my new door into the
entry, which he do please himself much with.  After dinner to the office
again, and there till night.  And that being done the Comptroller and I to
the Mitre to a glass of wine, when we fell into a discourse of poetry, and
he did repeat some verses of his own making which were very good. Home,
there hear that my Lady Batten had given my wife a visit (the first that
ever she made her), which pleased me exceedingly.  So after supper to bed.

27th.  To Whitehall, where I found my Lord gone abroad to the Wardrobe,
whither he do now go every other morning, and do seem to resolve to
understand and look after the business himself.  From thence to
Westminster Hall, and in King Street there being a great stop of coaches,
there was a falling out between a drayman and my Lord Chesterfield's
coachman, and one of his footmen killed.  At the Hall I met with Mr.
Creed, and he and I to Hell to drink our morning draught, and so to my
Lord's again, where I found my wife, and she and I dined with him and my
Lady, and great company of my Lord's friends, and my Lord did show us
great respect.  Soon as dinner was done my wife took her leave, and went
with Mr. Blackburne and his wife to London to a christening of a Brother's
child of his on Tower Hill, and I to a play, "The Scorn-full Lady," and
that being done, I went homewards, and met Mr. Moore, who had been at my
house, and took him to my father's, and we three to Standing's to drink.
Here Mr. Moore told me how the House had this day voted the King to have
all the Excise for ever.  This day I do also hear that the Queen's going
to France is stopt, which do like, me well, because then the King will be
in town the next month, which is my month again at the Privy Seal.  From
thence home, where when I come I do remember that I did leave my boy
Waineman at Whitehall with order to stay there for me in the court, at
which I was much troubled, but about 11 o'clock at night the boy came home
well, and so we all to bed.

28th.  This morning went to Whitehall to my Lord's, where Major Hart did
pay me; L23 14s. 9d., due to me upon my pay in my Lord's troop at the time
of our disbanding, which is a great blessing to have without taking any
law in the world for.  But now I must put an end to any hopes of getting
any more, so that I bless God for this.  From thence with Mr. Shepley and
Pinkney to the Sun, and did give them a glass of wine and a peck of
oysters for joy of my getting this money.  So home, where I found that Mr.
Creed had sent me the L11 5s. that is due to me upon the remains of
account for my sea business, which is also so much clear money to me, and
my bill of impresse

     [For "bill of impress" In Italian 'imprestare' means "to lend."  In
     the ancient accounts of persons officially employed by the crown,
     money advanced, paid on, account, was described as "de prestito," or
     "in prestitis."--M. B.]

for L30 is also cleared, so that I am wholly clear as to the sea in all
respects.  To the office, and was there till late at night, and among the
officers do hear that they may have our salaries allowed by the Treasurer,
which do make me very glad, and praise God for it.  Home to supper, and
Mr. Hater supped with me, whom I did give order to take up my money of the
Treasurer to-morrow if it can be had.  So to bed.

29th.  In the morning seeing a great deal of foul water come into my
parlour from under the partition between me and Mr. Davis, I did step
thither to him and tell him of it, and he did seem very ready to have it
stopt, and did also tell me how thieves did attempt to rob his house last
night, which do make us all afraid.  This noon I being troubled that the
workmen that I have to do my door were called to Mr. Davis's away, I sent
for them, when Mr. Davis sent to inquire a reason of, and I did give him a
good one, that they were come on purpose to do some work with me that they
had already begun, with which he was well pleased, and I glad, being
unwilling to anger them.  In the afternoon Sir W. Batten and I met and did
sell the ship Church for L440; and we asked L391, and that being done, I
went home, and Dr. Petty came to me about Mr. Barlow's money, and I being
a little troubled to be so importuned before I had received it, and that
they would have it stopt in Mr. Fenn's hands, I did force the Doctor to go
fetch the letter of attorney that he had to receive it only to make him
same labour, which he did bring, and Mr. Hales came along with him from
the Treasury with my money for the first quarter (Michaelmas last) that
ever I received for this employment.  So I paid the Dr. L25 and had L62
10s. for myself, and L7 10s. to myself also for Will's salary, which I do
intend yet to keep for myself.  With this my heart is much rejoiced, and
do bless Almighty God that he is pleased to send so sudden and unexpected
payment of my salary so soon after my great disbursements.  So that now I
am worth L200 again.  In a great ease of mind and spirit I fell about the
auditing of Mr. Shepley's last accounts with my Lord by my Lord's desire,
and about that I sat till 12 o'clock at night, till I began to doze, and
so to bed, with my heart praising God for his mercy to us.

30th (Office day).  To the office, where Sir G. Carteret did give us an
account how Mr. Holland do intend to prevail with the Parliament to try
his project of discharging the seamen all at present by ticket, and so
promise interest to all men that will lend money upon them at eight per
cent., for so long as they are unpaid; whereby he do think to take away
the growing debt, which do now lie upon the kingdom for lack of present
money to discharge the seamen.  But this we are, troubled at as some
diminution to us.  I having two barrels of oysters at home, I caused one
of them and some wine to be brought to the inner room in the office, and
there the Principal Officers did go and eat them.  So we sat till noon,
and then to dinner, and to it again in the afternoon till night.  At home
I sent for Mr. Hater, and broke the other barrel with him, and did
afterwards sit down discoursing of sea terms to learn of him.  And he
being gone I went up and sat till twelve at night again to make an end of
my Lord's accounts, as I did the last night.  Which at last I made a good
end of, and so to bed.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                               DECEMBER
                                 1660

December 1st.  This morning, observing some things to be laid up not as
they should be by the girl, I took a broom and basted her till she cried
extremely, which made me vexed, but before I went out I left her appeased.
So to Whitehall, where I found Mr. Moore attending for me at the Privy
Seal, but nothing to do to-day.  I went to my Lord St. Albans lodgings,
and found him in bed, talking to a priest (he looked like one) that leaned
along over the side of the bed, and there I desired to know his mind about
making the catch stay longer, which I got ready for him the other day.  He
seems to be a fine civil gentleman.  To my Lord's, and did give up my
audit of his accounts, which I had been then two days about, and was well
received by my Lord.  I dined with my Lord and Lady, and we had a venison
pasty.  Mr. Shepley and I went into London, and calling upon Mr. Pinkney,
the goldsmith, he took us to the tavern, and gave us a pint of wine, and
there fell into our company old Mr. Flower and another gentleman; who tell
us how a Scotch knight was killed basely the other day at the Fleece in
Covent Garden, where there had been a great many formerly killed.  So to
Paul's Churchyard, and there I took the little man at Mr. Kirton's and Mr.
Shepley to Ringstead's at the Star, and after a pint of wine I went home,
my brains somewhat troubled with so much wine, and after a letter or two
by the post I went to bed.

2d (Lord's day).  My head not very well, and my body out of order by last
night's drinking, which is my great folly.  To church, and Mr. Mills made
a good sermon; so home to dinner.  My wife and I all alone to a leg of
mutton, the sawce of which being made sweet, I was angry at it, and eat
none, but only dined upon the marrow bone that we had beside.  To church
in the afternoon, and after sermon took Tom Fuller's Church History and
read over Henry the 8th's life in it, and so to supper and to bed.

3rd.  This morning I took a resolution to rise early in the morning, and
so I rose by candle, which I have not done all this winter, and spent my
morning in fiddling till time to go to the office, where Sir G. Carteret
did begin again discourse on Mr. Holland's proposition, which the King do
take very ill, and so Sir George in lieu of that do propose that the
seamen should have half in ready money and tickets for the other half, to
be paid in three months after, which we judge to be very practicable.
After office home to dinner, where come in my cozen Snow by chance, and I
had a very good capon to dinner.  So to the office till night, and so
home, and then come Mr. Davis, of Deptford (the first time that ever he
was at my house), and after him Mons. L'Impertinent, who is to go to
Ireland to-morrow, and so came to take his leave of me.  They both found
me under the barber's hand; but I had a bottle of good sack in the house,
and so made them very welcome.  Mr. Davis sat with me a good while after
the other was gone, talking of his hard usage and of the endeavour to put
him out of his place in the time of the late Commissioners, and he do
speak very highly of their corruption.  After he was gone I fell a reading
'Cornelianum dolium' till 11 o'clock at night with great pleasure, and
after that to bed.

4th.  To Whitehall to Sir G. Carteret's chamber, where all the officers
met, and so we went up to the Duke of York, and he took us into his
closet, and we did open to him our project of stopping the growing charge
of the fleet by paying them in hand one moyety, and the other four months
hence.  This he do like, and we returned by his order to Sir G. Carteret's
chamber, and there we did draw up this design in order to be presented to
the Parliament.  From thence I to my Lord's, and dined with him and told
him what we had done to-day.  Sir Tho. Crew dined with my Lord to-day, and
we were very merry with Mrs. Borfett, who dined there still as she has
always done lately.  After dinner Sir Tho. and my Lady to the Playhouse to
see "The Silent Woman."  I home by water, and with Mr. Hater in my chamber
all alone he and I did put this morning's design into order, which being
done I did carry it to Sir W. Batten, where I found some gentlemen with
him (Sir W. Pen among the rest pretty merry with drink) playing at cards,
and there I staid looking upon them till one o'clock in the morning, and
so Sir W. Pen and I went away, and I to bed.  This day the Parliament
voted that the bodies of Oliver, Ireton, Bradshaw, &c., should be taken up
out of their graves in the Abbey, and drawn to the gallows, and there
hanged and buried under it: which (methinks) do trouble me that a man of
so great courage as he was, should have that dishonour, though otherwise
he might deserve it enough.

5th.  This morning the Proposal which I wrote the last night I showed to
the officers this morning, and was well liked of, and I wrote it fair for
Sir. G. Carteret to show to the King, and so it is to go to the
Parliament.  I dined at home, and after dinner I went to the new Theatre
and there I saw "The Merry Wives of Windsor" acted, the humours of the
country gentleman and the French doctor very well done, but the rest but
very poorly, and Sir J. Falstaffe t as bad as any.  From thence to Mr.
Will. Montagu's chamber to have sealed some writings tonight between Sir
R. Parkhurst and myself about my Lord's L2000, but he not coming, I went
to my father's and there found my mother still ill of the stone, and had
just newly voided one, which she had let drop into the chimney, and looked
and found it to shew it me.  From thence home and to bed.

6th.  This morning some of the Commissioners of Parliament and Sir W.
Batten went to Sir G. Carteret's office here in town, and paid off the
Chesnut.  I carried my wife to White Friars and landed her there,
and myself to Whitehall to the Privy Seal, where abundance of pardons to
seal, but I was much troubled for it because that there are no fees now
coming for them to me.  Thence Mr. Moore and I alone to the Leg in King
Street, and dined together on a neat's tongue and udder.  From thence by
coach to Mr. Crew's to my Lord, who told me of his going out of town
to-morrow to settle the militia in Huntingdonshire, and did desire me to
lay up a box of some rich jewels and things that there are in it, which I
promised to do.  After much free discourse with my Lord, who tells me his
mind as to his enlarging his family, &c., and desiring me to look him out
a Master of the Horse and other servants, we parted.  From thence I walked
to Greatorex (he was not within), but there I met with Mr. Jonas Moore,

     [Jonas Moore was born at Whitley, Lancashire, February 8th, 1617,
     and was appointed by Charles I. tutor to the Duke of York.  Soon
     after the Restoration he was knighted and made Surveyor-General of
     the Ordnance.  He was famous as a mathematician, and was one of the
     founders of the Royal Society.  He died August 27th, 1679, and at
     his funeral sixty pieces of ordnance were discharged at the Tower.]

and took him to the Five Bells,' and drank a glass of wine and left him.
To the Temple, when Sir R. Parkhurst (as was intended the last night) did
seal the writings, and is to have the L2000 told to-morrow.  From, thence
by water to Parliament Stairs, and there at an alehouse to Doling (who is
suddenly to go into Ireland to venture his fortune); Simonds (who is at a
great loss for L200 present money, which I was loth to let him have,
though I could now do it, and do love him and think him honest and
sufficient, yet lothness to part with money did dissuade me from it);
Luellin (who was very drowsy from a dose that he had got the last night),
Mr. Mount and several others, among the rest one Mr. Pierce, an army man,
who did make us the best sport for songs and stories in a Scotch tone
(which he do very well) that ever I heard in my life.  I never knew so
good a companion in all my observation.  From thence to the bridge by
water, it being a most pleasant moonshine night, with a waterman who did
tell such a company of bawdy stories, how once he carried a lady from
Putney in such a night as this, and she bade him lie down by her, which he
did, and did give her content, and a great deal more roguery.  Home and
found my girl knocking at the door (it being 11 o'clock at night), her
mistress having sent her out for some trivial business, which did vex me
when I came in, and so I took occasion to go up and to bed in a pet.
Before I went forth this morning, one came to me to give me notice that
the justices of Middlesex do meet to-morrow at Hicks Hall, and that I as
one am desired to be there, but I fear I cannot be there though I much
desire it.

7th.  This morning the judge Advocate Fowler came to see me, and he and I
sat talking till it was time to go to the office.  To the office and there
staid till past 12 o'clock, and so I left the Comptroller and Surveyor and
went to Whitehall to my Lord's, where I found my Lord gone this morning to
Huntingdon, as he told me yesterday he would.  I staid and dined with my
Lady, there being Laud the page's mother' there, and dined also with us,
and seemed to have been a very pretty woman and of good discourse.  Before
dinner I examined Laud in his Latin and found him a very pretty boy and
gone a great way in Latin.  After dinner I took a box of some things of
value that my Lord had left for me to carry to the Exchequer, which I did,
and left them with my Brother Spicer, who also had this morning paid L1000
for me by appointment to Sir R. Parkhurst. So to the Privy Seal, where I
signed a deadly number of pardons, which do trouble me to get nothing by.
Home by water, and there was much pleased to see that my little room is
likely to come to be finished soon.  I fell a-reading Fuller's History of
Abbys, and my wife in Great Cyrus till twelve at night, and so to bed.

8th.  To Whitehall to the Privy Seal, and thence to Mr. Pierces the
Surgeon to tell them that I would call by and by to go to dinner.  But I
going into Westminster Hall met with Sir G. Carteret and Sir W. Pen (who
were in a great fear that we had committed a great error of L100,000 in
our late account gone into the Parliament in making it too little), and so
I was fain to send order to Mr. Pierces to come to my house; and also to
leave the key of the chest with Mr. Spicer; wherein my Lord's money is,
and went along with Sir W. Pen by water to the office, and there with Mr.
Huchinson we did find that we were in no mistake.  And so I went to dinner
with my wife and Mr. and Mrs. Pierce the Surgeon to Mr. Pierce, the Purser
(the first time that ever I was at his house) who does live very
plentifully and finely.  We had a lovely chine of beef and other good
things very complete and drank a great deal of wine, and her daughter
played after dinner upon the virginals,

     [All instruments of the harpsichord and spinet kind were styled
     virginals.]

and at night by lanthorn home again, and Mr. Pierce and his wife being
gone home I went to bed, having drunk so much wine that my head was
troubled and was not very well all night, and the wind I observed was rose
exceedingly before I went to bed.

9th (Lord's day).  Being called up early by Sir W. Batten I rose and went
to his house and he told me the ill news that he had this morning from
Woolwich, that the Assurance (formerly Captain Holland's ship, and now
Captain Stoakes's, designed for Guiny and manned and victualled), was by a
gust of wind sunk down to the bottom.  Twenty men drowned.  Sir Williams
both went by barge thither to see how things are, and I am sent to the
Duke of York to tell him, and by boat with some other company going to
Whitehall from the Old Swan.  I went to the Duke.  And first calling upon
Mr. Coventry at his chamber, I went to the Duke's bed-side, who had sat up
late last night, and lay long this morning, who was much surprised,
therewith.  This being done I went to chappell, and sat in Mr. Blagrave's
pew, and there did sing my part along with another before the King, and
with much ease.  From thence going to my Lady I met with a letter from my
Lord (which Andrew had been at my house to bring me and missed me),
commanding me to go to Mr. Denham, to get a man to go to him to-morrow to
Hinchinbroke, to contrive with him about some alterations in his house,
which I did and got Mr. Kennard.  Dined with my Lady and staid all the
afternoon with her, and had infinite of talk of all kind of things,
especially of beauty of men and women, with which she seems to be much
pleased to talk of.  From thence at night to Mr. Kennard and took him to
Mr. Denham, the Surveyor's.  Where, while we could not speak with him, his
chief man (Mr. Cooper) did give us a cup of good sack.  From thence with
Mr. Kennard to my Lady who is much pleased with him, and after a glass of
sack there; we parted, having taken order for a horse or two for him and
his servant to be gone to-morrow.  So to my father's, where I sat while
they were at supper, and I found my mother below, stairs and pretty well.
Thence home, where I hear that the Comptroller had some business with me,
and (with Giffin's lanthorn) I went to him and there staid in discourse an
hour 'till late, and among other things he showed me a design of his, by
the King's making an Order of Knights of the Seal to give an encouragement
for persons of honour to undertake the service of the sea, and he had done
it with great pains and very ingeniously.  So home and to prayers and to
bed.

10th.  Up exceedingly early to go to the Comptroller, but he not being up
and it being a very fine, bright, moonshine morning I went and walked all
alone twenty turns in Cornhill, from Gracious Street corner to the Stockes
and back again, from 6 o'clock till past 7, so long that I was weary, and
going to the Comptroller's thinking to find him ready, I found him gone,
at which I was troubled, and being weary went home, and from thence with
my wife by water to Westminster, and put her to my father Bowyer's (they
being newly come out of the country), but I could not stay there, but left
her there.  I to the Hall and there met with Col. Slingsby.  So hearing
that the Duke of York is gone down this morning, to see the ship sunk
yesterday at Woolwich, he and I returned by his coach to the office, and
after that to dinner.  After dinner he came to me again and sat with me at
my house, ands among other discourse he told me that it is expected that
the Duke will marry the Lord Chancellor's daughter at last which is likely
to be the ruin of Mr. Davis and my Lord Barkley, who have carried
themselves so high against the Chancellor; Sir Chas. Barkley swearing that
he and others had lain with her often, which all believe to be a lie.  He
and I in the evening to the Coffee House in Cornhill, the first time that
ever I was there, and I found much pleasure in it, through the diversity
of company and discourse.  Home and found my wife at my Lady Batten's, and
have made a bargain to go see the ship sunk at Woolwich, where both the
Sir Williams are still since yesterday, and I do resolve to go along with
them.  From thence home and up to bed, having first been into my study,
and to ease my mind did go to cast up how my cash stands, and I do find as
near as I can that I am worth in money clear L240, for which God be
praised.  This afternoon there was a couple of men with me with a book in
each of their hands, demanding money for pollmoney,

     [Pepys seems to have been let off very easily, for, by Act of
     Parliament 18 Car. II. cap. I (1666), servants were to pay one
     shilling in the pound of their wages, and others from one shilling
     to three shillings in the pound.]

and I overlooked the book and saw myself set down Samuel Pepys, gent. 10s.
for himself and for his servants 2s., which I did presently pay without
any dispute, but I fear I have not escaped so, and therefore I have long
ago laid by L10 for them, but I think I am not bound to discover myself.

11th.  My wife and I up very early this day, and though the weather was
very bad and the wind high, yet my Lady Batten and her maid and we two did
go by our barge to Woolwich (my Lady being very fearfull) where we found
both Sir Williams and much other company, expecting the weather to be
better, that they might go about weighing up the Assurance, which lies
there (poor ship, that I have been twice merry in, in Captn. Holland's
time,) under water, only the upper deck may be seen and the masts. Captain
Stoakes is very melancholy, and being in search for some clothes and money
of his, which he says he hath lost out of his cabin.  I did the first
office of a justice of Peace to examine a seaman thereupon, but could find
no reason to commit him.  This last tide the Kingsale was also run aboard
and lost her mainmast, by another ship, which makes us think it ominous to
the Guiny voyage, to have two of her ships spoilt before they go out.
After dinner, my Lady being very fearfull she staid and kept my wife
there, and I and another gentleman, a friend of Sir W. Pen's, went back in
the barge, very merry by the way, as far as Whitehall in her.  To the
Privy Seal, where I signed many pardons and some few things else.  From
thence Mr. Moore and I into London to a tavern near my house, and there we
drank and discoursed of ways how to put out a little money to the best
advantage, and at present he has persuaded me to put out L250 for L50 per
annum for eight years, and I think I shall do it. Thence home, where I
found the wench washing, and I up to my study, and there did make up an
even L100, and sealed it to lie by.  After that to bed.

12th.  Troubled with the absence of my wife.  This morning I went (after
the Comptroller and I had sat an hour at the office) to Whitehall to dine
with my Lady, and after dinner to the Privy Seal and sealed abundance of
pardons and little else.  From thence to the Exchequer and did give my
mother Bowyer a visit and her daughters, the first time that I have seen
them since I went last to sea.  From thence up with J. Spicer to his
office and took L100, and by coach with it as far as my father's, where I
called to see them, and my father did offer me six pieces of gold, in lieu
of six pounds that he borrowed of me the other day, but it went against me
to take it of him and therefore did not, though I was afterwards a little
troubled that I did not.  Thence home, and took out this L100 and sealed
it up with the other last night, it being the first L200 that ever I saw
together of my own in my life.  For which God be praised.  So to my Lady
Batten, and sat an hour or two, and talked with her daughter and people in
the absence of her father and mother and my wife to pass away the time.
After that home and to bed, reading myself asleep, while the wench sat
mending my breeches by my bedside.

13th.  All the day long looking upon my workmen who this day began to
paint my parlour.  Only at noon my Lady Batten and my wife came home, and
so I stepped to my Lady's, where were Sir John Lawson and Captain Holmes,
and there we dined and had very good red wine of my Lady's own making in
England.

14th.  Also all this day looking upon my workmen.  Only met with the
Comptroller at the office a little both forenoon and afternoon, and at
night step a little with him to the Coffee House where we light upon very
good company and had very good discourse concerning insects and their
having a generative faculty as well as other creatures.  This night in
discourse the Comptroller told me among other persons that were heretofore
the principal officers of the Navy, there was one Sir Peter Buck, a Clerk
of the Acts, of which to myself I was not a little proud.

15th.  All day at home looking upon my workmen, only at noon Mr. Moore
came and brought me some things to sign for the Privy Seal and dined with
me.  We had three eels that my wife and I bought this morning of a man,
that cried them about, for our dinner, and that was all I did to-day.

16th.  In the morning to church, and then dined at home.  In the afternoon
I to White Hall, where I was surprised with the news of a plot against the
King's person and my Lord Monk's; and that since last night there are
about forty taken up on suspicion; and, amongst others, it was my lot to
meet with Simon Beale, the Trumpeter, who took me and Tom Doling into the
Guard in Scotland Yard, and showed us Major-General Overton, where I heard
him deny that he is guilty of any such things; but that whereas it is said
that he is found to have brought many arms to town, he says it is only to
sell them, as he will prove by oath.  From thence with Tom Doling and
Boston and D. Vines (whom we met by the way) to Price's, and there we
drank, and in discourse I learnt a pretty trick to try whether a woman be
a maid or no, by a string going round her head to meet at the end of her
nose, which if she be not will come a great way beyond.  Thence to my
Lady's and staid with her an hour or two talking of the Duke of York and
his lady, the Chancellor's daughter, between whom, she tells me, that all
is agreed and he will marry her.  But I know not how true yet.  It rained
hard, and my Lady would have had me have the coach, but I would not, but
to my father's, where I met my wife, and there supped, and after supper by
link home and to bed.

17th.  All day looking after my workmen, only in the afternoon to the
office where both Sir Williams were come from Woolwich, and tell us that,
contrary to their expectations, the Assurance is got up, without much
damage to her body, only to the goods that she hath within her, which
argues her to be a strong, good ship.  This day my parlour is gilded,
which do please me well.

18th.  All day at home, without stirring at all, looking after my workmen.

19th.  At noon I went and dined with my Lady at Whitehall, and so back
again to the office, and after that home to my workmen.  This night Mr.
Gauden sent me a great chine of beef and half a dozen of tongues.

20th.  All day at home with my workmen, that I may get all done before
Christmas.  This day I hear that the Princess Royal has the small pox.

21st.  By water to Whitehall (leaving my wife at Whitefriars going to my
father's to buy her a muff and mantle), there I signed many things at the
Privy Seal, and carried L200 from thence to the Exchequer, and laid it up
with Mr. Hales, and afterwards took him and W.  Bowyer to the Swan and
drank with them.  They told me that this is St. Thomas's [day], and that
by an old custom, this day the Exchequer men had formerly, and do intend
this night to have a supper; which if I could I promised to come to, but
did not.  To my Lady's, and dined with her: she told me how dangerously
ill the Princess Royal is and that this morning she was said to be dead.
But she hears that she hath married herself to young Jermyn,  which is
worse than the Duke of York's marrying the Chancellor's daughter, which is
now publicly owned.  After dinner to the office all the afternoon.  At
seven at night I walked through the dirt to Whitehall to see whether my
Lord be come to town, and I found him come and at supper, and I supped
with him.  He tells me that my aunt at Brampton has voided a great stone
(the first time that ever I heard she was troubled therewith) and cannot
possibly live long, that my uncle is pretty well, but full of pain still.
After supper home and to bed.

22nd.  All the morning with my painters, who will make an end of all this
day I hope.  At noon I went to the Sun tavern; on Fish Street hill, to a
dinner of Captn. Teddimans, where was my Lord Inchiquin (who seems to be a
very fine person), Sir W. Pen, Captn. Cuttance, and one Mr. Lawrence (a
fine gentleman now going to Algiers), and other good company, where we had
a very fine dinner, good musique, and a great deal of wine.  We staid here
very late, at last Sir W. Pen and I home together, he so overcome with
wine that he could hardly go; I was forced to lead him through the streets
and he was in a very merry and kind mood.  I home (found my house clear of
the workmen and their work ended), my head troubled with wine, and I very
merry went to bed, my head akeing all night.

23rd (Lord's day).  In the morning to Church, where our pew all covered
with rosemary and baize.  A stranger made a dull sermon.  Home and found
my wife and maid with much ado had made shift to spit a great turkey sent
me this week from Charles Carter, my old colleague, now minister in
Huntingdonshire, but not at all roasted, and so I was fain to stay till
two o'clock, and after that to church with my wife, and a good sermon
there was, and so home.  All the evening at my book, and so to supper and
to bed.

24th.  In the morning to the office and Commissioner Pett (who seldom
comes there) told me that he had lately presented a piece of plate (being
a couple of flaggons) to Mr. Coventry, but he did not receive them, which
also put me upon doing the same too; and so after dinner I went and chose
a payre of candlesticks to be made ready for me at Alderman Backwell's. To
the office again in the afternoon till night, and so home, and with the
painters till 10 at night, making an end of my house and the arch before
my door, and so this night I was rid of them and all other work, and my
house was made ready against to-morrow being Christmas day.  This day the
Princess Royal died at Whitehall.

25th (Christmas day).  In the morning very much pleased to see my house
once more clear of workmen and to be clean, and indeed it is so, far
better than it was that I do not repent of my trouble that I have been at.
In the morning to church, where Mr. Mills made a very good sermon. After
that home to dinner, where my wife and I and my brother Tom (who this
morning came to see my wife's new mantle put on, which do please me very
well), to a good shoulder of mutton and a chicken.  After dinner to church
again, my wife and I, where we had a dull sermon of a stranger, which made
me sleep, and so home, and I, before and after supper, to my lute and
Fuller's History, at which I staid all alone in my chamber till 12 at
night, and so to bed.

26th.  In the morning to Alderman Backwell's for the candlesticks for Mr.
Coventry, but they being not done I went away, and so by coach to Mr.
Crew's, and there took some money of Mr. Moore's for my Lord, and so to my
Lord's, where I found Sir Thomas Bond (whom I never saw before) with a
message from the Queen about vessells for the carrying over of her goods,
and so with him to Mr. Coventry, and thence to the office (being soundly
washed going through the bridge) to Sir Wm. Batten and Pen (the last of
whom took physic to-day), and so I went up to his chamber, and there
having made an end of the business I returned to White Hall by water, and
dined with my Lady Sandwich, who at table did tell me how much fault was
laid upon Dr. Frazer and the rest of the Doctors, for the death of the
Princess!  My Lord did dine this day with Sir Henry Wright, in order to
his going to sea with the Queen.  Thence to my father Bowyer's where I met
my wife, and with her home by water.

27th.  In the morning to Alderman Backwell's again, where I found the
candlesticks done, and went along with him in his coach to my Lord's and
left the candlesticks with Mr. Shepley.  I staid in the garden talking
much with my Lord, who do show me much of his love and do communicate his
mind in most things to me, which is my great content.  Home and with my
wife to Sir W. Batten's to dinner, where much and good company.  My wife
not very well went home, I staid late there seeing them play at cards, and
so home to bed.  This afternoon there came in a strange lord to Sir
William Batten's by a mistake and enters discourse with him, so that we
could not be rid of him till Sir Arn. Breames and Mr. Bens and Sir W. Pen
fell a-drinking to him till he was drunk, and so sent him away. About the
middle of the night I was very ill--I think with eating and drinking too
much--and so I was forced to call the maid, who pleased my wife and I in
her running up and down so innocently in her smock, and vomited in the
bason, and so to sleep, and in the morning was pretty well, only got cold,
and so had pain .  .  .  .  as I used to have.

28th.  Office day.  There all the morning.  Dined at home alone with my
wife, and so staid within all the afternoon and evening; at my lute, with
great pleasure, and so to bed with great content.

29th.  Within all the morning.  Several people to speak with me; Mr.
Shepley for L100; Mr. Kennard and Warren, the merchant, about deals for my
Lord.  Captain Robert Blake lately come from the Straights about some
Florence Wine for my Lord, and with him I went to Sir W. Pen, who offering
me a barrel of oysters I took them both home to my house (having by chance
a good piece of roast beef at the fire for dinner), and there they dined
with me, and sat talking all the afternoon-good company. Thence to
Alderman Backwell's and took a brave state-plate and cupp in lieu of the
candlesticks that I had the other day and carried them by coach to my
Lord's and left them there.  And so back to my father's and saw my mother,
and so to my uncle Fenner's, whither my father came to me, and there we
talked and drank, and so away; I home with my father, he telling me what
bad wives both my cozen Joyces make to their husbands, which I much
wondered at.  After talking of my sister's coming to me next week, I went
home and to bed.

30th (Lord's day).  Lay long in bed, and being up, I went with Will to my
Lord's, calling in at many churches in my way.  There I found Mr. Shepley,
in his Venetian cap, taking physique in his chamber, and with him I sat
till dinner.  My Lord dined abroad and my Lady in her chamber, so Mr.
Hetly, Child and I dined together, and after dinner Mr. Child and I spent
some time at the lute, and so promising to prick me some lessons to my
theorbo he went away to see Henry Laws, who lies very sick.  I to the Abby
and walked there, seeing the great confusion of people that come there to
hear the organs.  So home, calling in at my father's, but staid not, my
father and mother being both forth.  At home I fell a-reading of Fuller's
Church History till it was late, and so to bed.

31st.  At the office all the morning and after that home, and not staying
to dine I went out, and in Paul's Church-yard I bought the play of "Henry
the Fourth," and so went to the new Theatre (only calling at Mr. Crew's
and eat a bit with the people there at dinner) and saw it acted; but my
expectation being too great, it did not please me, as otherwise I believe
it would; and my having a book, I believe did spoil it a little.  That
being done I went to my Lord's, where I found him private at cards with my
Lord Lauderdale and some persons of honour.  So Mr. Shepley and I over to
Harper's, and there drank a pot or two, and so parted.  My boy taking a
cat home with him from my Lord's, which Sarah had given him for my wife,
we being much troubled with mice.  At Whitehall inquiring for a coach,
there was a Frenchman with one eye that was going my way, so he and I
hired the coach between us and he set me down in Fenchurch Street. Strange
how the fellow, without asking, did tell me all what he was, and how he
had ran away from his father and come into England to serve the King, and
now going back again.  Home and to bed.




     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     Asleep, while the wench sat mending my breeches by my bedside
     Barkley swearing that he and others had lain with her often
     But I think I am not bound to discover myself
     But we were friends again as we are always
     Cure of the King's evil, which he do deny altogether
     Duke of York and Mrs. Palmer did talk to one another very wanton
     First time I had given her leave to wear a black patch
     First time that ever I heard the organs in a cathedral
     Gentlewomen did hold up their heads to be kissed by the King
     Have her come not as a sister in any respect, but as a servant
     Have not known her this fortnight almost, which is a pain to me
     He did very well, but a deadly drinker he is
     I took a broom and basted her till she cried extremely
     I was a great Roundhead when I was a boy
     I was demanded L100, for the fee of the office at 6d. a pound
     In discourse he seems to be wise and say little
     It not being handsome for our servants to sit so equal with us
     Learnt a pretty trick to try whether a woman be a maid or no
     Long cloaks being now quite out
     Sit up till 2 o'clock that she may call the wench up to wash
     Smoke jack consists of a wind-wheel fixed in the chimney
     So I took occasion to go up and to bed in a pet
     So we went to bed and lay all night in a quarrel
     The rest did give more, and did believe that I did so too
     There being ten hanged, drawn, and quartered
     Thus it was my chance to see the King beheaded at White Hall
     To see Major-general Harrison hanged, drawn; and quartered





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Diary of Samuel Pepys,
October/November/December 1660, by Samuel Pepys

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***

***** This file should be named 4124.txt or 4124.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/4/1/2/4124/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
