The Project Gutenberg EBook of Diary of Samuel Pepys,
January/February/March 1660/61, by Samuel Pepys

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Diary of Samuel Pepys, January/February/March 1660/61

Author: Samuel Pepys

Release Date: November 29, 2004 [EBook #4126]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***




Produced by David Widger





                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A.   F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

   TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A.  LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS
                            1661 N.S. COMPLETE

                        JANUARY, FEBRUARY & MARCH
                                1660-61

1660-61.  At the end of the last and the beginning of this year, I do live
in one of the houses belonging to the Navy Office, as one of the principal
officers, and have done now about half a year.  After much trouble with
workmen I am now almost settled; my family being, myself, my wife, Jane,
Will. Hewer, and Wayneman,--[Will Wayneman appears by this to have been
forgiven for his theft (see ante).  He was dismissed on July 8th,
1663.]--my girle's brother.  Myself in constant good health, and in a most
handsome and thriving condition.  Blessed be Almighty God for it. I am now
taking of my sister to come and live with me.  As to things of State.--The
King settled, and loved of all.  The Duke of York matched to my Lord
Chancellor's daughter, which do not please many.  The Queen upon her
return to France with the Princess Henrietta.  The Princess of Orange
lately dead, and we into new mourning for her.  We have been lately
frighted with a great plot, and many taken up on it, and the fright not
quite over.  The Parliament, which had done all this great good to the
King, beginning to grow factious, the King did dissolve it December 29th
last, and another likely to be chosen speedily.  I take myself now to be
worth L300 clear in money, and all my goods and all manner of debts paid,
which are none at all.

1660-61.  January 1st.  Called up this morning by Mr. Moore, who brought
me my last things for me to sign for the last month, and to my great
comfort tells me that my fees will come to L80 clear to myself, and about
L25 for him, which he hath got out of the pardons, though there be no fee
due to me at all out of them.  Then comes in my brother Thomas, and after
him my father, Dr. Thomas Pepys, my uncle Fenner and his two sons
(Anthony's' only child dying this morning, yet he was so civil to come,
and was pretty merry) to breakfast; and I had for them a barrel of
oysters, a dish of neat's tongues, and a dish of anchovies, wine of all
sorts, and Northdown ale.  We were very merry till about eleven o'clock,
and then they went away.  At noon I carried my wife by coach to my cozen,
Thomas Pepys, where we, with my father, Dr. Thomas, cozen Stradwick,
Scott, and their wives, dined.  Here I saw first his second wife, which is
a very respectfull woman, but his dinner a sorry, poor dinner for a man of
his estate, there being nothing but ordinary meat in it.  To-day the King
dined at a lord's, two doors from us.  After dinner I took my wife to
Whitehall, I sent her to Mrs. Pierces (where we should have dined today),
and I to the Privy Seal, where Mr. Moore took out all his money, and he
and I went to Mr. Pierces; in our way seeing the Duke of York bring his
Lady this day to wait upon the Queen, the first time that ever she did
since that great business; and the Queen is said to receive her now with
much respect and love; and there he cast up the fees, and I told the
money, by the same token one L100 bag, after I had told it, fell all about
the room, and I fear I have lost some of it.  That done I left my friends
and went to my Lord's, but he being not come in I lodged the money with
Mr. Shepley, and bade good night to Mr. Moore, and so returned to Mr.
Pierces, and there supped with them, and Mr. Pierce, the purser, and his
wife and mine, where we had a calf's head carboned,

     [Meat cut crosswise and broiled was said to be carboned.  Falstaff
     says in "King Henry IV.," Part L, act v., sc. 3, "Well, if Percy be
     alive, I'll pierce him.  If he do come in my way, so; if he do not,
     if I come in his willingly, let him make a carbonado of me."]

but it was raw, we could not eat it, and a good hen.  But she is such a
slut that I do not love her victualls.  After supper I sent them home by
coach, and I went to my Lord's and there played till 12 at night at cards
at Best with J. Goods and N. Osgood, and then to bed with Mr. Shepley.

2d.  Up early, and being called up to my Lord he did give me many commands
in his business.  As about taking care to write to my uncle that Mr.
Barnewell's papers should be locked up, in case he should die, he being
now suspected to be very ill.  Also about consulting with Mr. W. Montagu
for the settling of the L4000 a-year that the King had promised my Lord.
As also about getting of Mr. George Montagu to be chosen at Huntingdon
this next Parliament, &c.  That done he to White Hall stairs with much
company, and I with him; where we took water for Lambeth, and there coach
for Portsmouth.  The Queen's things were all in White Hall Court ready to
be sent away, and her Majesty ready to be gone an hour after to Hampton
Court to-night, and so to be at Ports mouth on Saturday next.  I by water
to my office, and there all the morning, and so home to dinner, where I
found Pall (my sister) was come; but I do not let her sit down at table
with me, which I do at first that she may not expect it hereafter from me.
After dinner I to Westminster by water, and there found my brother Spicer
at the Leg with all the rest of the Exchequer men (most of whom I now do
not know) at dinner.  Here I staid and drank with them, and then to Mr.
George Montagu about the business of election, and he did give me a piece
in gold; so to my Lord's and got the chest of plate brought to the
Exchequer, and my brother Spicer put it into his treasury.  So to Will's
with them to a pot of ale, and so parted.  I took a turn in the Hall, and
bought the King and Chancellor's speeches at the dissolving the Parliament
last Saturday.  So to my Lord's, and took my money I brought 'thither last
night and the silver candlesticks, and by coach left the latter at
Alderman Backwell's, I having no use for them, and the former home.  There
stood a man at our door, when I carried it in, and saw me, which made me a
little afeard.  Up to my chamber and wrote letters to Huntingdon and did
other business.  This day I lent Sir W. Batten and Captn. Rider my chine
of beef for to serve at dinner tomorrow at Trinity House, the Duke of
Albemarle being to be there and all the rest of the Brethren, it being a
great day for the reading over of their new Charter, which the King hath
newly given them.

3d.  Early in the morning to the Exchequer, where I told over what money I
had of my Lord's and my own there, which I found to be L970.  Thence to
Will's, where Spicer and I eat our dinner of a roasted leg of pork which
Will did give us, and after that to the Theatre, where was acted "Beggars'
Bush," it being very well done; and here the first time that ever I saw
women come upon the stage.

     [Downes does not give the cast of this play.  After the Restoration
     the acting of female characters by women became common.  The first
     English professional actress was Mrs. Coleman, who acted Ianthe in
     Davenant's "Siege of Rhodes," at Rutland House in 1656.]

From thence to my father's, where I found my mother gone by Bird, the
carrier, to Brampton, upon my uncle's great desire, my aunt being now in
despair of life.  So home.

4th.  Office all the morning, my wife and Pall being gone to my father's
to dress dinner for Mr. Honiwood, my mother being gone out of town. Dined
at home, and Mr. Moore with me, with whom I had been early this morning at
White Hall, at the Jewell Office,

     [Several of the Jewel Office rolls are in the British Museum.  They
     recite all the sums of money given to the King, and the particulars
     of all the plate distributed in his name, as well as gloves and
     sweetmeats.  The Museum possesses these rolls for the 4th, 9th,
     18th, 30th, and 31st Eliz.; for the 13th Charles I.; and the 23rd,
     24th, 26th, and 27th of Charles II.--B.]

to choose a piece of gilt plate for my Lord, in return of his offering to
the King (which it seems is usual at this time of year, and an Earl gives
twenty pieces in gold in a purse to the King).  I chose a gilt tankard,
weighing 31 ounces and a half, and he is allowed 30; so I paid 12s. for
the ounce and half over what he is to have; but strange it was for me to
see what a company of small fees I was called upon by a great many to pay
there, which, I perceive, is the manner that courtiers do get their
estates.  After dinner Mr. Moore and I to the Theatre, where was "The
Scornful Lady," acted very well, it being the first play that ever he saw.
Thence with him to drink a cup of ale at Hercules Pillars, and so parted.
I called to see my father, who told me by the way how Will and Mary Joyce
do live a strange life together, nothing but fighting, &c., so that
sometimes her father has a mind to have them divorced.  Thence home.

5th.  Home all the morning.  Several people came to me about business,
among others the great Tom Fuller, who came to desire a kindness for a
friend of his, who hath a mind to go to Jamaica with these two ships that
are going, which I promised to do.  So to Whitehall to my Lady, whom I
found at dinner and dined with her, and staid with her talking all the
afternoon, and thence walked to Westminster Hall.  So to Will's, and drank
with Spicer, and thence by coach home, staying a little in Paul's
Churchyard, to bespeak Ogilby's AEsop's Fables and Tully's Officys to be
bound for me.  So home and to bed.

6th (Lord's day).  My wife and I to church this morning, and so home to
dinner to a boiled leg of mutton all alone.  To church again, where,
before sermon, a long Psalm was set that lasted an hour, while the sexton
gathered his year's contribucion through the whole church.  After sermon
home, and there I went to my chamber and wrote a letter to send to Mr.
Coventry, with a piece of plate along with it, which I do preserve among
my other letters.  So to supper, and thence after prayers to bed.

7th.  This morning, news was brought to me to my bedside, that there had
been a great stir in the City this night by the Fanatiques, who had been
up and killed six or seven men, but all are fled.

     ["A great rising in the city of the Fifth-monarchy men, which did
     very much disturb the peace and liberty of the people, so that all
     the train-bands arose in arms, both in London and Westminster, as
     likewise all the king's guards; and most of the noblemen mounted,
     and put all their servants on coach horses, for the defence of his
     Majesty, and the peace of his kingdom."--Rugge's Diurnal.  The
     notorious Thomas Venner, the Fifth-monarchy man, a cooper and
     preacher to a conventicle in Swan Alley, Coleman Street, with a
     small following (about fifty in number) took arms on the 6th January
     for the avowed purpose of establishing the Millennium.  He was a
     violent enthusiast, and persuaded his followers that they were
     invulnerable.  After exciting much alarm in the City, and
     skirmishing with the Trained Bands, they marched to Caen Wood.  They
     were driven out by a party of guards, but again entered the City,
     where they were overpowered by the Trained Bands.  The men were
     brought to trial and condemned; four, however, were acquitted and
     two reprieved.  The execution of some of these men is mentioned by
     Pepys under date January 19th and 21st.  "A Relation of the
     Arraignment and Trial of those who made the late Rebellious
     Insurrections in London, 1661," is reprinted in "Somers Tracts,"
     vol. vii.  (1812), p. 469.]

My Lord Mayor and the whole City had been in arms, above 40,000.  To the
office, and after that to dinner, where my brother Tom came and dined with
me, and after dinner (leaving 12d. with the servants to buy a cake with at
night, this day being kept as Twelfth day) Tom and I and my wife to the
Theatre, and there saw "The Silent Woman."  The first time that ever I did
see it, and it is an excellent play.  Among other things here, Kinaston,
the boy; had the good turn to appear in three shapes: first, as a poor
woman in ordinary clothes, to please Morose; then in fine clothes, as a
gallant, and in them was clearly the prettiest woman in the whole house,
and lastly, as a man; and then likewise did appear the handsomest man in
the house.  From thence by link to my cozen Stradwick's, where my father
and we and Dr. Pepys, Scott, and his wife, and one Mr. Ward and his; and
after a good supper, we had an excellent cake, where the mark for the
Queen was cut, and so there was two queens, my wife and Mrs. Ward; and the
King being lost, they chose the Doctor to be King, so we made him send for
some wine, and then home, and in our way home we were in many places
strictly examined, more than in the worst of times, there being great
fears of these Fanatiques rising again: for the present I do not hear that
any of them are taken.  Home, it being a clear moonshine and after 12
o'clock at night.  Being come home we found that my people had been very
merry, and my wife tells me afterwards that she had heard that they had
got young Davis and some other neighbours with them to be merry, but no
harm.

8th.  My wife and I lay very long in bed to-day talking and pleasing one
another in discourse.  Being up, Mr. Warren came, and he and I agreed for
the deals that my Lord is to, have.  Then Will and I to Westminster, where
I dined with my Lady.  After dinner I took my Lord Hinchinbroke and Mr.
Sidney to the Theatre, and shewed them "The Widdow," an indifferent good
play, but wronged by the women being to seek in their parts.  That being
done, my Lord's coach waited for us, and so back to my Lady's, where she
made me drink of some Florence wine, and did give me two bottles for my
wife.  From thence walked to my cozen Stradwick's, and there chose a small
banquet and some other things against our entertainment on Thursday next.
Thence to Tom Pepys and bought a dozen of trenchers, and so home.  Some
talk to-day of a head of Fanatiques that do appear about Barnett, but I do
not believe it.  However, my Lord Mayor, Sir Richd. Browne, hath carried
himself very honourably, and hath caused one of their meeting-houses in
London to be pulled down.

9th.  Waked in the morning about six o'clock, by people running up and
down in Mr. Davis's house, talking that the Fanatiques were up in arms in
the City.  And so I rose and went forth; where in the street I found every
body in arms at the doors.  So I returned (though with no good courage at
all, but that I might not seem to be afeared), and got my sword and
pistol, which, however, I had no powder to charge; and went to the door,
where I found Sir R. Ford, and with him I walked up and down as far as the
Exchange, and there I left him.  In our way, the streets full of
Train-band, and great stories, what mischief these rogues have done; and I
think near a dozen have been killed this morning on both sides. Seeing the
city in this condition, the shops shut, and all things in trouble, I went
home and sat, it being office day, till noon.  So home, and dined at home,
my father with me, and after dinner he would needs have me go to my uncle
Wight's (where I have been so long absent that I am ashamed to go).  I
found him at home and his wife, and I can see they have taken my absence
ill, but all things are past and we good friends, and here I sat with my
aunt till it was late, my uncle going forth about business.  My aunt being
very fearful to be alone.  So home to my lute till late, and then to bed,
there being strict guards all night in the City, though most of the
enemies, they say, are killed or taken.  This morning my wife and Pall
went forth early, and I staid within.

10th.  There comes Mr. Hawley to me and brings me my money for the quarter
of a year's salary of my place under Downing that I was at sea. So I did
give him half, whereof he did in his nobleness give the odd 5s, to my
Jane.  So we both went forth (calling first to see how Sir W. Pen do, whom
I found very ill), and at the Hoop by the bridge we drank two pints of
wormwood and sack.  Talking of his wooing afresh of Mrs. Lane, and of his
going to serve the Bishop of London.  Thence by water to Whitehall, and
found my wife at Mrs. Hunt's.  Leaving her to dine there, I went and dined
with my Lady, and staid to talk a while with her.  After dinner Will.
comes to tell me that he had presented my piece of plate to Mr. Coventry,
who takes it very kindly, and sends me a very kind letter, and the plate
back again; of which my heart is very glad.  So to Mrs. Hunt, where I
found a Frenchman, a lodger of hers, at dinner, and just as I came in was
kissing my wife, which I did not like, though there could not be any hurt
in it.  Thence by coach to my Uncle Wight's with my wife, but they being
out of doors we went home, where, after I had put some papers in order and
entered some letters in my book which I have a mind to keep, I went with
my wife to see Sir W. Pen, who we found ill still, but he do make very
much of it.  Here we sat a great while, at last comes in Mr. Davis and his
lady (who takes it very ill that my wife never did go to see her), and so
we fell to talk.  Among other things Mr. Davis told us the particular
examinations of these Fanatiques that are taken: and in short it is this,
of all these Fanatiques that have done all this, viz., routed all the
Trainbands that they met with, put the King's life-guards to the run,
killed about twenty men, broke through the City gates twice; and all this
in the day-time, when all the City was in arms; are not in all about 31.
Whereas we did believe them (because they were seen up and down in every
place almost in the City, and had been about Highgate two or three days,
and in several other places) to be at least 500.  A thing that never was
heard of, that so few men should dare and do so much mischief.  Their word
was, "The King Jesus, and the heads upon the gates."  Few of them would
receive any quarter, but such as were taken by force and kept alive;
expecting Jesus to come here and reign in the world presently, and will
not believe yet but their work will be carried on though they do die.  The
King this day came to town.

11th.  Office day.  This day comes news, by letters from Portsmouth, that
the Princess Henrietta is fallen sick of the meazles on board the London,
after the Queen and she was under sail.  And so was forced to come back
again into Portsmouth harbour; and in their way, by negligence of the
pilot, run upon the Horse sand.  The Queen and she continue aboard, and do
not intend to come on shore till she sees what will become of the young
Princess.  This news do make people think something indeed, that three of
the Royal Family should fall sick of the same disease, one after another.
This morning likewise, we had order to see guards set in all the King's
yards; and so we do appoint who and who should go to them. Sir Wm. Batten
to Chatham, Colonel Slingsby and I to Deptford and Woolwich.  Portsmouth
being a garrison, needs none.  Dined at home, discontented that my wife do
not go neater now she has two maids.  After dinner comes in Kate Sterpin
(whom we had not seen a great while) and her husband to see us, with whom
I staid a while, and then to the office, and left them with my wife.  At
night walked to Paul's Churchyard, and bespoke some books against next
week, and from thence to the Coffeehouse, where I met Captain Morrice, the
upholster, who would fain have lent me a horse to-night to have rid with
him upon the Cityguards, with the Lord Mayor, there being some new
expectations of these rogues; but I refused by reason of my going out of
town tomorrow.  So home to bed.

12th.  With Colonel Slingsby and a friend of his, Major Waters (a deaf and
most amorous melancholy gentleman, who is under a despayr in love, as the
Colonel told me, which makes him bad company, though a most good-natured
man), by water to Redriffe, and so on foot to Deptford (our servants by
water), where we fell to choosing four captains to command the guards, and
choosing the places where to keep them, and other things in order
thereunto.  We dined at the Globe, having our messenger with us to take
care for us.  Never till now did I see the great authority of my place,
all the captains of the fleet coming cap in hand to us.  Having staid very
late there talking with the Colonel, I went home with Mr. Davis,
storekeeper (whose wife is ill and so I could not see her), and was there
most prince-like lodged, with so much respect and honour that I was at a
loss how to behave myself.

13th.  In the morning we all went to church, and sat in the pew belonging
to us, where a cold sermon of a young man that never had preached before.
Here Commissioner came with his wife and daughters, the eldest being his
wife's daughter is a very comely black woman.--[The old expression for a
brunette.]--So to the Globe to dinner, and then with Commissioner Pett to
his lodgings there (which he hath for the present while he is building the
King's yacht, which will be a pretty thing, and much beyond the
Dutchman's), and from thence with him and his wife and daughter-in-law by
coach to Greenwich Church, where a good sermon, a fine church, and a great
company of handsome women.  After sermon to Deptford again; where, at the
Commissioner's and the Globe, we staid long.  And so I to Mr. Davis's to
bed again.  But no sooner in bed, but we had an alarm, and so we rose: and
the Comptroller comes into the Yard to us; and seamen of all the ships
present repair to us, and there we armed with every one a handspike, with
which they were as fierce as could be.  At last we hear that it was only
five or six men that did ride through the guard in the town, without
stopping to the guard that was there; and, some say, shot at them.  But
all being quiet there, we caused the seamen to go on board again: And so
we all to bed (after I had sat awhile with Mr. Davis in his study, which
is filled with good books and some very good song books) I likewise to
bed.

14th.  The arms being come this morning from the Tower, we caused them to
be distributed.  I spent much time walking with Lieutenant Lambert,
walking up and down the yards, who did give me much light into things
there, and so went along with me and dined with us.  After dinner Mrs.
Pett, her husband being gone this morning with Sir W. Batten to Chatham,
lent us her coach, and carried us to Woolwich, where we did also dispose
of the arms there and settle the guards.  So to Mr. Pett's, the
shipwright, and there supped, where he did treat us very handsomely (and
strange it is to see what neat houses all the officers of the King's yards
have), his wife a proper woman, and has been handsome, and yet has a very
pretty hand.  Thence I with Mr. Ackworth to his house, where he has a very
pretty house, and a very proper lovely woman to his wife, who both sat
with me in my chamber, and they being gone, I went to bed, which was also
most neat and fine.

15th.  Up and down the yard all the morning and seeing the seamen
exercise, which they do already very handsomely.  Then to dinner at Mr.
Ackworth's, where there also dined with us one Captain Bethell, a friend
of the Comptroller's.  A good dinner and very handsome.  After that and
taking our leaves of the officers of the yard, we walked to the waterside
and in our way walked into the rope-yard, where I do look into the
tar-houses and other places, and took great notice of all the several
works belonging to the making of a cable.  So after a cup of burnt
wine--[Burnt wine was somewhat similar to mulled wine, and a favourite
drink]--at the tavern there, we took barge and went to Blackwall and
viewed the dock and the new Wet dock, which is newly made there, and a
brave new merchantman which is to be launched shortly, and they say to be
called the Royal Oak. Hence we walked to Dick-Shore, and thence to the
Towre and so home. Where I found my wife and Pall abroad, so I went to see
Sir W. Pen, and there found Mr. Coventry come to see him, and now had an
opportunity to thank him, and he did express much kindness to me.  I sat a
great while with Sir Wm. after he was gone, and had much talk with him.  I
perceive none of our officers care much for one another, but I do keep in
with them all as much as I can.  Sir W.  Pen is still very ill as when I
went. Home, where my wife not yet come home, so I went up to put my papers
in order, and then was much troubled my wife was not come, it being 10
o'clock just now striking as I write this last line.  This day I hear the
Princess is recovered again.  The King hath been this afternoon at
Deptford, to see the yacht that Commissioner Pett is building, which will
be very pretty; as also that that his brother at Woolwich is in making. By
and by comes in my boy and tells me that his mistress do lie this night at
Mrs. Hunt's, who is very ill, with which being something satisfied, I went
to bed.

16th.  This morning I went early to the Comptroller's and so with him by
coach to Whitehall, to wait upon Mr. Coventry to give him an account of
what we have done, which having done, I went away to wait upon my Lady;
but coming to her lodgings I find that she is gone this morning to Chatham
by coach, thinking to meet me there, which did trouble me exceedingly, and
I did not know what to do, being loth to follow her, and yet could not
imagine what she would do when she found me not there.  In this trouble, I
went to take a walk in Westminster Hall and by chance met with Mr. Child,
who went forth with my Lady to-day, but his horse being bad, he come back
again, which then did trouble me more, so that I did resolve to go to her;
and so by boat home and put on my boots, and so over to Southwarke to the
posthouse, and there took horse and guide to Dartford and thence to
Rochester (I having good horses and good way, come thither about
half-an-hour after daylight, which was before 6 o'clock and I set forth
after two), where I found my Lady and her daughter Jem., and Mrs. Browne'
and five servants, all at a great loss, not finding me here, but at my
coming she was overjoyed.  The sport was how she had intended to have kept
herself unknown, and how the Captain (whom she had sent for) of the
Charles had forsoothed

     [To forsooth is to address in a polite and ceremonious manner.
     "Your city-mannerly word forsooth, use it not too often in any
     case."--Ben Jonson's Poetaster, act iv., sc.  1.]

her, though he knew her well and she him.  In fine we supped merry and so
to bed, there coming several of the Charles's men to see me before, I got
to bed.  The page lay with me.

17th.  Up, and breakfast with my Lady.  Then come Captains Cuttance and
Blake to carry her in the barge on board; and so we went through Ham
Creeke to the Soverayne (a goodly sight all the way to see the brave ships
that lie here) first, which is a most noble ship.  I never saw her before.
My Lady Sandwich, my Lady Jemimah, Mrs. Browne, Mrs. Grace, and Mary and
the page, my lady's servants and myself, all went into the lanthorn
together.  From thence to the Charles, where my lady took great pleasure
to see all the rooms, and to hear me tell her how things are when my Lord
is there.  After we had seen all, then the officers of the ship had
prepared a handsome breakfast for her, and while she was pledging my
Lord's health they give her five guns.  That done, we went off, and then
they give us thirteen guns more.  I confess it was a great pleasure to
myself to see the ship that I begun my good fortune in.  From thence on
board the Newcastle, to show my Lady the difference between a great and a
small ship.  Among these ships I did give away L7.  So back again and went
on shore at Chatham, where I had ordered the coach to wait for us.  Here I
heard that Sir William Batten and his lady (who I knew were here, and did
endeavour to avoyd) were now gone this morning to London.  So we took
coach, and I went into the coach, and went through the town, without
making stop at our inn, but left J. Goods to pay the reckoning.  So I rode
with my lady in the coach, and the page on the horse that I should have
rid on--he desiring it.  It begun to be dark before we could come to
Dartford, and to rain hard, and the horses to fayle, which was our great
care to prevent, for fear of my Lord's displeasure, so here we sat up for
to-night, as also Captains Cuttance and Blake, who came along with us.  We
sat and talked till supper, and at supper my Lady and I entered into a
great dispute concerning what were best for a man to do with his
estate--whether to make his elder son heir, which my Lady is for, and I
against, but rather to make all equall.  This discourse took us much time,
till it was time to go to bed; but we being merry, we bade my Lady
goodnight, and intended to have gone to the Post-house to drink, and hear
a pretty girl play of the cittern (and indeed we should have lain there,
but by a mistake we did not), but it was late, and we could not hear her,
and the guard came to examine what we were; so we returned to our Inn and
to bed, the page and I in one bed, and the two captains in another, all in
one chamber, where we had very good mirth with our most abominable
lodging.

18th.  The Captains went with me to the post-house about 9 o'clock, and
after a morning draft I took horse and guide for London; and through some
rain, and a great wind in my face, I got to London at eleven o'clock.  At
home found all well, but the monkey loose, which did anger me, and so I
did strike her till she was almost dead, that they might make her fast
again, which did still trouble me more.  In the afternoon we met at the
office and sat till night, and then I to see my father who I found well,
and took him to Standing's' to drink a cup of ale.  He told me my aunt at
Brampton is yet alive and my mother well there.  In comes Will Joyce to us
drunk, and in a talking vapouring humour of his state, and I know not
what, which did vex me cruelly.  After him Mr. Hollier had learned at my
father's that I was here (where I had appointed to meet him) and so he did
give me some things to take for prevention.  Will Joyce not letting us
talk as I would I left my father and him and took Mr. Hollier to the
Greyhound, where he did advise me above all things, both as to the stone
and the decay of my memory (of which I now complain to him), to avoid
drinking often, which I am resolved, if I can, to leave off.  Hence home,
and took home with me from the bookseller's Ogilby's AEsop, which he had
bound for me, and indeed I am very much pleased with the book.  Home and
to bed.

19th.  To the Comptroller's, and with him by coach to White Hall; in our
way meeting Venner  and Pritchard upon a sledge, who with two more Fifth
Monarchy men were hanged to-day, and the two first drawn and quartered.
Where we walked up and down, and at last found Sir G. Carteret, whom I had
not seen a great while, and did discourse with him about our assisting the
Commissioners in paying off the Fleet, which we think to decline.  Here
the Treasurer did tell me that he did suspect Thos. Hater to be an
informer of them in this work, which we do take to be a diminution of us,
which do trouble me, and I do intend to find out the truth.  Hence to my
Lady, who told me how Mr. Hetley is dead of the small-pox going to
Portsmouth with my Lord.  My Lady went forth to dinner to her father's,
and so I went to the Leg in King Street and had a rabbit for myself and my
Will, and after dinner I sent him home and myself went to the Theatre,
where I saw "The Lost Lady," which do not please me much. Here I was
troubled to be seen by four of our office clerks, which sat in the
half-crown box and I in the 1s. 6d.  From thence by link, and bought two
mouse traps of Thomas Pepys, the Turner, and so went and drank a cup of
ale with him, and so home and wrote by post to Portsmouth to my Lord and
so to bed.

20th (Lord's day).  To Church in the morning.  Dined at home.  My wife and
I to Church in the afternoon, and that being done we went to see my uncle
and aunt Wight.  There I left my wife and came back, and sat with Sir W.
Pen, who is not yet well again.  Thence back again to my wife and supped
there, and were very merry and so home, and after prayers to write down my
journall for the last five days, and so to bed.

21st.  This morning Sir W. Batten, the Comptroller and I to Westminster,
to the Commissioners for paying off the Army and Navy, where the Duke of
Albemarle was; and we sat with our hats on, and did discourse about paying
off the ships and do find that they do intend to undertake it without our
help; and we are glad of it, for it is a work that will much displease the
poor seamen, and so we are glad to have no hand in it. From thence to the
Exchequer, and took L200 and carried it home, and so to the office till
night, and then to see Sir W. Pen, whither came my Lady Batten and her
daughter, and then I sent for my wife, and so we sat talking till it was
late.  So home to supper and then to bed, having eat no dinner to-day.  It
is strange what weather we have had all this winter; no cold at all; but
the ways are dusty, and the flyes fly up and down, and the rose-bushes are
full of leaves, such a time of the year as was never known in this world
before here.  This day many more of the Fifth Monarchy men were hanged.

22nd.  To the Comptroller's house, where I read over his proposals to the
Lord Admiral for the regulating of the officers of the Navy, in which he
hath taken much pains, only he do seem to have too good opinion of them
himself.  From thence in his coach to Mercer's Chappell, and so up to the
great hall, where we met with the King's Councell for Trade, upon some
proposals of theirs for settling convoys for the whole English trade, and
that by having 33 ships (four fourth-rates, nineteen fifths, ten sixths)
settled by the King for that purpose, which indeed was argued very finely
by many persons of honour and merchants that were there.  It pleased me
much now to come in this condition to this place, where I was once a
petitioner for my exhibition in Paul's School; and also where Sir G.
Downing (my late master) was chairman, and so but equally concerned with
me.  From thence home, and after a little dinner my wife and I by coach
into London, and bought some glasses, and then to Whitehall to see Mrs.
Fox, but she not within, my wife to my mother Bowyer, and I met with Dr.
Thomas Fuller, and took him to the Dog, where he tells me of his last and
great book that is coming out: that is, his History of all the Families in
England;' and could tell me more of my own, than I knew myself.  And also
to what perfection he hath now brought the art of memory; that he did
lately to four eminently great scholars dictate together in Latin, upon
different subjects of their proposing, faster than they were able to
write, till they were tired; and by the way in discourse tells me that the
best way of beginning a sentence, if a man should be out and forget his
last sentence (which he never was), that then his last refuge is to begin
with an Utcunque.  From thence I to Mr. Bowyer's, and there sat a while,
and so to Mr. Fox's, and sat with them a very little while, and then by
coach home, and so to see Sir Win. Pen, where we found Mrs. Martha Batten
and two handsome ladies more, and so we staid supper and were very merry,
and so home to bed.

23rd.  To the office all the morning.  My wife and people at home busy to
get things ready for tomorrow's dinner.  At noon, without dinner, went
into the City, and there meeting with Greatorex, we went and drank a pot
of ale.  He told me that he was upon a design to go to Teneriffe to try
experiments there.  With him to Gresham Colledge

     [Gresham College occupied the house of Sir Thomas Gresham, in
     Bishopsgate Street, from 1596, when Lady Gresham, Sir Thomas's
     widow, died.  The meeting which Pepys attended was an early one of
     the Royal Society, which was incorporated by royal charter in 1663.]

(where I never was before), and saw the manner of the house, and found
great company of persons of honour there; thence to my bookseller's, and
for books, and to Stevens, the silversmith, to make clean some plate
against to-morrow, and so home, by the way paying many little debts for
wine and pictures, &c., which is my great pleasure.  Home and found all
things in a hurry of business, Slater, our messenger, being here as my
cook till very late.  I in my chamber all the evening looking over my
Osborn's works and new Emanuel Thesaurus Patriarchae.  So late to bed,
having ate nothing to-day but a piece of bread and cheese at the ale-house
with Greatorex, and some bread and butter at home.

24th.  At home all day.  There dined with me Sir William Batten and his
lady and daughter, Sir W. Pen, Mr. Fox (his lady being ill could not
come), and Captain Cuttance; the first dinner I have made since I came
hither.  This cost me above L5, and merry we were--only my chimney smokes.
In the afternoon Mr. Hater bringing me my last quarter's salary, which I
received of him, and so I have now Mr. Barlow's money in my hands.  The
company all go away, and by and by Sir Wms. both and my Lady Batten and
his daughter come again and supped with me and talked till late, and so to
bed, being glad that the trouble is over.

25th.  At the office all the morning.  Dined at home and Mr. Hater with
me, and so I did make even with him for the last quarter.  After dinner he
and I to look upon the instructions of my Lord Northumberland's, but we
were interrupted by Mr. Salisbury's coming in, who came to see me and to
show me my Lord's picture in little, of his doing.  And truly it is
strange to what a perfection he is come in a year's time.  From thence to
Paul's Churchyard about books, and so back again home.  This night comes
two cages, which I bought this evening for my canary birds, which Captain
Rooth this day sent me.  So to bed.

26th.  Within all the morning.  About noon comes one that had formerly
known me and I him, but I know not his name, to borrow L5 of me, but I had
the wit to deny him.  There dined with me this day both the Pierces' and
their wives, and Captain Cuttance, and Lieutenant Lambert, with whom we
made ourselves very merry by taking away his ribbans and garters, having
made him to confess that he is lately married.  The company being gone I
went to my lute till night, and so to bed.

27th (Lord's day).  Before I rose, letters come to me from Portsmouth,
telling me that the Princess is now well, and my Lord Sandwich set sail
with the Queen and her yesterday from thence for France.  To church,
leaving my wife sick . . . .  at home, a poor dull sermon of a stranger.
Home, and at dinner was very angry at my people's eating a fine pudding
(made me by Slater, the cook, last Thursday) without my wife's leave. To
church again, a good sermon of Mr. Mills, and after sermon Sir W. Pen and
I an hour in the garden talking, and he did answer me to many things, I
asked Mr. Coventry's opinion of me, and Sir W. Batten's of my Lord
Sandwich, which do both please me.  Then to Sir W. Batten's, where very
merry, and here I met the Comptroller and his lady and daughter (the first
time I ever saw them) and Mrs. Turner, who and her husband supped with us
here (I having fetched my wife thither), and after supper we fell to
oysters, and then Mr. Turner went and fetched some strong waters, and so
being very merry we parted, and home to bed.  This day the parson read a
proclamation at church, for the keeping of Wednesday next, the 30th of
January, a fast for the murther of the late King.

28th.  At the office all the morning; dined at home, and after dinner to
Fleet Street, with my sword to Mr. Brigden (lately made Captain of the
Auxiliaries) to be refreshed, and with him to an ale-house, where I met
Mr. Davenport; and after some talk of Cromwell, Ireton and Bradshaw's
bodies being taken out of their graves to-day,

     ["The bodies of Oliver Cromwell, Henry Ireton, John Bradshaw, and
     Thomas Pride, were dug up out of their graves to be hanged at
     Tyburn, and buried under the gallows.  Cromwell's vault having been
     opened, the people crowded very much to see him."--Rugge's Diurnal.]

I went to Mr. Crew's and thence to the Theatre, where I saw again "The
Lost Lady," which do now please me better than before; and here I sitting
behind in a dark place, a lady spit backward upon me by a mistake, not
seeing me, but after seeing her to be a very pretty lady, I was not
troubled at it at all.  Thence to Mr. Crew's, and there met Mr. Moore, who
came lately to me, and went with me to my father's, and with him to
Standing's, whither came to us Dr. Fairbrother, who I took and my father
to the Bear and gave a pint of sack and a pint of claret.

He do still continue his expressions of respect and love to me, and tells
me my brother John will make a good scholar.  Thence to see the Doctor at
his lodging at Mr. Holden's, where I bought a hat, cost me 35s.  So home
by moonshine, and by the way was overtaken by the Comptroller's coach, and
so home to his house with him.  So home and to bed.  This noon I had my
press set up in my chamber for papers to be put in.

29th.  Mr. Moore making up accounts with me all this morning till Lieut.
Lambert came, and so with them over the water to Southwark, and so over
the fields to Lambeth, and there drank, it being a most glorious and warm
day, even to amazement, for this time of the year.  Thence to my Lord's,
where we found my Lady gone with some company to see Hampton Court, so we
three went to Blackfryers (the first time I ever was there since plays
begun), and there after great patience and little expectation, from so
poor beginning, I saw three acts of "The Mayd in ye Mill" acted to my
great content.  But it being late, I left the play and them, and by water
through bridge home, and so to Mr. Turner's house, where the Comptroller,
Sir William Batten, and Mr. Davis and their ladies; and here we had a most
neat little but costly and genteel supper, and after that a great deal of
impertinent mirth by Mr. Davis, and some catches, and so broke up, and
going away, Mr. Davis's eldest son took up my old Lady Slingsby in his
arms, and carried her to the coach, and is said to be able to carry three
of the biggest men that were in the company, which I wonder at.  So home
and to bed.

30th (Fast day).  The first time that this day hath been yet observed: and
Mr. Mills made a most excellent sermon, upon "Lord forgive us our former
iniquities;" speaking excellently of the justice of God in punishing men
for the sins of their ancestors.  Home, and John Goods comes, and after
dinner I did pay him L30 for my Lady, and after that Sir W. Pen and I into
Moorfields and had a brave talk, it being a most pleasant day, and besides
much discourse did please ourselves to see young Davis and Whitton, two of
our clerks, going by us in the field, who we observe to take much pleasure
together, and I did most often see them at play together.  Back to the Old
James in Bishopsgate Street, where Sir W. Batten and Sir Wm. Rider met him
about business of the Trinity House. So I went home, and there understand
that my mother is come home well from Brampton, and had a letter from my
brother John, a very ingenious one, and he therein begs to have leave to
come to town at the Coronacion. Then to my Lady Batten's; where my wife
and she are lately come back again from being abroad, and seeing of
Cromwell, Ireton, and Bradshaw hanged and buried at Tyburn.  Then I home.

     ["Jan. 30th was kept as a very solemn day of fasting and prayer.
     This morning the carcases of Cromwell, Ireton, and Bradshaw (which
     the day before had been brought from the Red Lion Inn, Holborn),
     were drawn upon a sledge to Tyburn, and then taken out of their
     coffins, and in their shrouds hanged by the neck, until the going
     down of the sun.  They were then cut down, their heads taken off,
     and their bodies buried in a grave made under the gallows.  The
     coffin in which was the body of Cromwell was a very rich thing, very
     full of gilded hinges and nails."--Rugge's Diurnal.]

31st.  This morning with Mr. Coventry at Whitehall about getting a ship to
carry my Lord's deals to Lynne, and we have chosen the Gift.  Thence at
noon to my Lord's, where my Lady not well, so I eat a mouthfull of dinner
there, and thence to the Theatre, and there sat in the pit among the
company of fine ladys, &c.; and the house was exceeding full, to see
Argalus and Parthenia, the first time that it hath been acted: and indeed
it is good, though wronged by my over great expectations, as all things
else are.  Thence to my father's to see my mother, who is pretty well
after her journey from Brampton.  She tells me my aunt is pretty well, yet
cannot live long.  My uncle pretty well too, and she believes would marry
again were my aunt dead, which God forbid.  So home.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                               FEBRUARY
                               1660-61

February 1st (Friday).  A full office all this morning, and busy about
answering the Commissioners of Parliament to their letter, wherein they
desire to borrow two clerks of ours, which we will not grant them.  After
dinner into London and bought some books, and a belt, and had my sword new
furbished.  To the alehouse with Mr. Brigden and W. Symons.  At night
home.  So after a little music to bed, leaving my people up getting things
ready against to-morrow's dinner.

2nd.  Early to Mr. Moore, and with him to Sir Peter Ball, who proffers my
uncle Robert much civility in letting him continue in the grounds which he
had hired of Hetley who is now dead.  Thence home, where all things in a
hurry for dinner, a strange cook being come in the room of Slater, who
could not come.  There dined here my uncle Wight and my aunt, my father
and mother, and my brother Tom, Dr. Fairbrother and Mr. Mills, the parson,
and his wife, who is a neighbour's daughter of my uncle Robert's, and
knows my Aunt Wight and all her and my friends there; and so we had
excellent company to-day.  After dinner I was sent for to Sir G.
Carteret's, where he was, and I found the Comptroller, who are upon
writing a letter to the Commissioners of Parliament in some things a
rougher stile than our last, because they seem to speak high to us.  So
the Comptroller and I thence to a tavern hard by, and there did agree upon
drawing up some letters to be sent to all the pursers and Clerks of the
Cheques to make up their accounts.  Then home; where I found the parson
and his wife gone.  And by and by the rest of the company, very well
pleased, and I too; it being the last dinner I intend to make a great
while, it having now cost me almost L15 in three dinners within this
fortnight.  In the evening comes Sir W. Pen, pretty merry, to sit with me
and talk, which we did for an hour or two, and so good night, and I to
bed.

3d (Lord's day).  This day I first begun to go forth in my coat and sword,
as the manner now among gentlemen is.  To Whitehall.  In my way heard Mr.
Thomas Fuller preach at the Savoy upon our forgiving of other men's
trespasses, shewing among other things that we are to go to law never to
revenge, but only to repayre, which I think a good distinction. So to
White Hall; where I staid to hear the trumpets and kettle-drums, and then
the other drums, which are much cried up, though I think it dull, vulgar
musique.  So to Mr. Fox's, unbid; where I had a good dinner and special
company.  Among other discourse, I observed one story, how my Lord of
Northwich, at a public audience before the King of France, made the Duke
of Anjou cry, by making ugly faces as he was stepping to the King, but
undiscovered.

     [This story relates to circumstances which had occurred many years
     previously.  George, Lord Goring, was sent by Charles I. as
     Ambassador Extraordinary to France in 1644, to witness the oath of
     Louis XIV. to the observance of the treaties concluded with England
     by his father, Louis XIII., and his grandfather, Henry IV.  Louis
     XIV. took this oath at Ruel, on July 3rd, 1644, when he was not yet
     six years of age, and when his brother Philippe, then called Duke of
     Anjou, was not four years old.  Shortly after his return home, Lord
     Goring was created, in September, 1644, Earl of Norwich, the title
     by which he is here mentioned.  Philippe, Duke of Anjou, who was
     frightened by the English nobleman's ugly faces, took the title of
     Duke of Orleans after the death of his uncle, Jean Baptiste Gaston,
     in 1660.  He married his cousin, Henrietta of England.--B.]

And how Sir Phillip Warwick's' lady did wonder to have Mr. Darcy' send for
several dozen bottles of Rhenish wine to her house, not knowing that the
wine was his.  Thence to my Lord's; where I am told how Sir Thomas Crew's
Pedro, with two of his countrymen more, did last night kill one soldier of
four that quarrelled with them in the street, about 10 o'clock.  The other
two are taken; but he is now hid at my Lord's till night, that he do
intend to make his escape away.  So up to my Lady, and sat and talked with
her long, and so to Westminster Stairs, and there took boat to the bridge,
and so home, where I met with letters to call us all up to-morrow morning
to Whitehall about office business.

4th.  Early up to Court with Sir W. Pen, where, at Mr. Coventry's chamber,
we met with all our fellow officers, and there after a hot debate about
the business of paying off the Fleet, and how far we should join with the
Commissioners of Parliament, which is now the great business of this month
more to determine, and about which there is a great deal of difference
between us, and then how far we should be assistants to them therein.
That being done, he and I back again home, where I met with my father and
mother going to my cozen Snow's to Blackwall, and had promised to bring me
and my wife along with them, which we could not do because we are to go to
the Dolphin to-day to a dinner of Capt. Tayler's.  So at last I let my
wife go with them, and I to the tavern, where Sir William Pen and the
Comptroller and several others were, men and women; and we had a very
great and merry dinner; and after dinner the Comptroller begun some
sports, among others the naming of people round and afterwards demanding
questions of them that they are forced to answer their names to, which do
make very good sport.  And here I took pleasure to take the forfeits of
the ladies who would not do their duty by kissing of them; among others a
pretty lady, who I found afterwards to be wife to Sir W. Batten's son.
Home, and then with my wife to see Sir W. Batten, who could not be with us
this day being ill, but we found him at cards, and here we sat late,
talking with my Lady and others and Dr. Whistler,

     [Daniel Whistler, M.D., Fellow of Merton College, whose inaugural
     dissertation on Rickets in 1645 contains the earliest printed
     account of that disease.  He was Gresham Professor of Geometry,
     1648-57, and held several offices at the College of Physicians,
     being elected President in 1683.  He was one of the original Fellows
     of the Royal Society.  Dr. Munk, in his "Roll of the Royal College
     of Physicians," speaks very unfavourably of Whistler, and says that
     he defrauded the college.  He died May 11th, 1684.]

who I found good company and a very ingenious man.  So home and to bed.

5th.  Washing-day.  My wife and I by water to Westminster.  She to her
mother's and I to Westminster Hall, where I found a full term, and here I
went to Will's, and there found Shaw and Ashwell and another Bragrave (who
knew my mother wash-maid to my Lady Veere), who by cursing and swearing
made me weary of his company and so I went away.  Into the Hall and there
saw my Lord Treasurer (who was sworn to-day at the Exchequer, with a great
company of Lords and persons of honour to attend him) go up to the
Treasury Offices, and take possession thereof; and also saw the heads of
Cromwell, Bradshaw, and Ireton, set up upon the further end of the Hall.
Then at Mrs. Michell's in the Hall met my wife and Shaw, and she and I and
Captain Murford to the Dog, and there I gave them some wine, and after
some mirth and talk (Mr. Langley coming in afterwards) I went by coach to
the play-house at the Theatre, our coach in King Street breaking, and so
took another.  Here we saw Argalus and Parthenia, which I lately saw, but
though pleasant for the dancing and singing, I do not find good for any
wit or design therein.  That done home by coach and to supper, being very
hungry for want of dinner, and so to bed.

6th.  Called up by my Cozen Snow, who sat by me while I was trimmed, and
then I drank with him, he desiring a courtesy for a friend, which I have
done for him.  Then to the office, and there sat long, then to dinner,
Captain Murford with me.  I had a dish of fish and a good hare, which was
sent me the other day by Goodenough the plasterer.  So to the office
again, where Sir W. Pen and I sat all alone, answering of petitions and
nothing else, and so to Sir W. Batten's, where comes Mr. Jessop (one whom
I could not formerly have looked upon, and now he comes cap in hand to us
from the Commissioners of the Navy, though indeed he is a man of a great
estate and of good report), about some business from them to us, which we
answered by letter.  Here I sat long with Sir W., who is not well, and
then home and to my chamber, and some little, music, and so to bed.

7th.  With Sir W.  Batten and Pen to Whitehall to Mr. Coventry's chamber,
to debate upon the business we were upon the other day morning, and thence
to Westminster Hall.  And after a walk to my Lord's; where, while I and my
Lady were in her chamber in talk, in comes my Lord from sea, to our great
wonder.  He had dined at Havre de Grace on Monday last, and came to the
Downs the next day, and lay at Canterbury that night; and so to Dartford,
and thence this morning to White Hall.  All my friends his servants well.
Among others, Mr. Creed and Captain Ferrers tell me the stories of my Lord
Duke of Buckingham's and my Lord's falling out at Havre de Grace, at
cards; they two and my Lord St. Alban's playing.  The Duke did, to my
Lord's dishonour, often say that he did in his conscience know the
contrary to what he then said, about the difference at cards; and so did
take up the money that he should have lost to my Lord.  Which my Lord
resenting, said nothing then, but that he doubted not but there were ways
enough to get his money of him.  So they parted that night; and my Lord
sent for Sir R. Stayner and sent him the next morning to the Duke, to know
whether he did remember what he said last night, and whether he would own
it with his sword and a second; which he said he would, and so both sides
agreed.  But my Lord St. Alban's, and the Queen and Ambassador Montagu,
did waylay them at their lodgings till the difference was made up, to my
Lord's honour; who hath got great reputation thereby.  I dined with my
Lord, and then with Mr. Shepley and Creed (who talked very high of France
for a fine country) to the tavern, and then I home.  To the office, where
the two Sir Williams had staid for me, and then we drew up a letter to the
Commissioners of Parliament again, and so to Sir W. Batten, where I staid
late in talk, and so home, and after writing the letter fair then I went
to bed.

8th.  At the office all the morning.  At noon to the Exchange to meet Mr.
Warren the timber merchant, but could not meet with him.  Here I met with
many sea commanders, and among others Captain Cuttle, and Curtis, and
Mootham, and I, went to the Fleece Tavern to drink; and there we spent
till four o'clock, telling stories of Algiers, and the manner of the life
of slaves there!  And truly Captn. Mootham and Mr. Dawes (who have been
both slaves there) did make me fully acquainted with their condition
there: as, how they eat nothing but bread and water.  At their redemption
they pay so much for the water they drink at the public fountaynes, during
their being slaves.  How they are beat upon the soles of their feet and
bellies at the liberty of their padron.  How they are all, at night,
called into their master's Bagnard; and there they lie.  How the poorest
men do use their slaves best.  How some rogues do live well, if they do
invent to bring their masters in so much a week by their industry or
theft; and then they are put to no other work at all.  And theft there is
counted no great crime at all.  Thence to Mr. Rawlinson's, having met my
old friend Dick Scobell, and there I drank a great deal with him, and so
home and to bed betimes, my head aching.

9th.  To my Lord's with Mr. Creed (who was come to me this morning to get
a bill of imprest signed), and my Lord being gone out he and I to the
Rhenish wine-house with Mr. Blackburne.  To whom I did make known my fears
of Will's  losing of his time, which he will take care to give him good
advice about.  Afterwards to my Lord's and Mr. Shepley and I did make even
his accounts and mine.  And then with Mr. Creed and two friends of his (my
late landlord Jones' son one of them), to an ordinary to dinner, and then
Creed and I to Whitefriars' to the Play-house, and saw "The Mad Lover,"
the first time I ever saw it acted, which I like pretty well, and home.

10th (Lord's day).  Took physique all day, and, God forgive me, did spend
it in reading of some little French romances.  At night my wife and I did
please ourselves talking of our going into France, which I hope to effect
this summer.  At noon one came to ask for Mrs. Hunt that was here
yesterday, and it seems is not come home yet, which makes us afraid of
her.  At night to bed.

11th.  At the office all the morning.  Dined at home, and then to the
Exchequer, and took Mr. Warren with me to Mr. Kennard, the master joiner,
at Whitehall, who was at a tavern, and there he and I to him, and agreed
about getting some of my Lord's deals on board to-morrow.  Then with young
Mr. Reeve home to his house, who did there show me many pretty pleasures
in perspectives,

     ['Telescope' and 'microscope' are both as old as Milton, but for long
     while 'perspective' (glass being sometimes understood and sometimes
     expressed) did the work of these.  It is sometimes written
     'prospective.' Our present use of 'perspective' does not, I suppose,
     date farther back than Dryden.--Trench's Select Glossary.--M. B.]

that I have not seen before, and I did buy a little glass of him cost me
5s.  And so to Mr. Crew's, and with Mr. Moore to see how my father and
mother did, and so with him to Mr. Adam Chard's' (the first time I ever
was at his house since he was married) to drink, then we parted, and I
home to my study, and set some papers and money in order, and so to bed.

12th.  To my Lord's, and there with him all the morning, and then (he
going out to dinner) I and Mr. Pickering, Creed, and Captain Ferrers to
the Leg in the Palace to dinner, where strange Pickering's impertinences.
Thence the two others and I after a great dispute whither to go, we went
by water to Salsbury Court play-house, where not liking to sit, we went
out again, and by coach to the Theatre, and there saw "The Scornfull
Lady," now done by a woman, which makes the play appear much better than
ever it did to me.  Then Creed and I (the other being lost in the crowd)
to drink a cup of ale at Temple Bar, and there we parted, and I (seeing my
father and mother by the way) went home.

13th.  At the office all the morning; dined at home, and poor Mr. Wood
with me, who after dinner would have borrowed money of me, but I would
lend none.  Then to Whitehall by coach with Sir W. Pen, where we did very
little business, and so back to Mr. Rawlinson's, where I took him and gave
him a cup of wine, he having formerly known Mr. Rawlinson, and here I met
my uncle Wight, and he drank with us, and with him to Sir W. Batten's,
whither I sent for my wife, and we chose Valentines' against to-morrow.

     [The observation of St. Valentine's day is very ancient in this
     country.  Shakespeare makes Ophelia sing

                   "To-morrow is Saint Valentine's day,
                    All in the morning betime,
                    And I a maid at your window
                    To be your Valentine."

                         Hamlet, act iv.  sc. 5.--M. B.]

My wife chose me, which did much please me; my Lady Batten Sir W. Pen, &c.
Here we sat late, and so home to bed, having got my Lady Batten to give me
a spoonful of honey for my cold.

14th (Valentine's day).  Up early and to Sir W. Batten's, but would not go
in till I asked whether they that opened the door was a man or a woman,
and Mingo, who was there, answered a woman, which, with his tone, made me
laugh; so up I went and took Mrs. Martha for my Valentine (which I do only
for complacency), and Sir W. Batten he go in the same manner to my wife,
and so we were very merry.  About 10 o'clock we, with a great deal of
company, went down by our barge to Deptford, and there only went to see
how forward Mr. Pett's yacht is; and so all into the barge again, and so
to Woolwich, on board the Rose-bush, Captain Brown's' ship, that is
brother-in-law to Sir W. Batten, where we had a very fine dinner, dressed
on shore, and great mirth and all things successfull; the first time I
ever carried my wife a-ship-board, as also my boy Wayneman, who hath all
this day been called young Pepys, as Sir W. Pen's boy young Pen. So home
by barge again; good weather, but pretty cold.  I to my study, and began
to make up my accounts for my Lord, which I intend to end tomorrow.  To
bed.  The talk of the town now is, who the King is like to have for his
Queen: and whether Lent shall be kept with the strictness of the King's
proclamation;

     ["A Proclamation for restraint of killing, dressing, and eating of
     Flesh in Lent or on fish-dayes appointed by the law to be observed,"
     was dated 29th January, 1660-61].

which it is thought cannot be, because of the poor, who cannot buy fish.
And also the great preparation for the King's crowning is now much thought
upon and talked of.

15th.  At the office all the morning, and in the afternoon at making up my
accounts for my Lord to-morrow; and that being done I found myself to be
clear (as I think) L350 in the world, besides my goods in my house and all
things paid for.

16th.  To my Lord in the morning, who looked over my accounts and agreed
to them.  I did also get him to sign a bill (which do make my heart merry)
for L60 to me, in consideration of my work extraordinary at sea this last
voyage, which I hope to get paid.  I dined with my Lord and then to the
Theatre, where I saw "The Virgin Martyr," a good but too sober a play for
the company.  Then home.

17th (Lord's day).  A most tedious, unreasonable, and impertinent sermon,
by an Irish Doctor.  His text was "Scatter them, O Lord, that delight in
war."  Sir Wm. Batten and I very much angry with the parson.  And so I to
Westminster as soon as I came home to my Lord's, where I dined with Mr.
Shepley and Howe.  After dinner (without speaking to my Lord), Mr. Shepley
and I into the city, and so I home and took my wife to my uncle Wight's,
and there did sup with them, and so home again and to bed.

18th.  At the office all the morning, dined at home with a very good
dinner, only my wife and I, which is not yet very usual.  In the afternoon
my wife and I and Mrs. Martha Batten, my Valentine, to the Exchange, and
there upon a payre of embroydered and six payre of plain white gloves I
laid out 40s. upon her.  Then we went to a mercer's at the end of Lombard
Street, and there she bought a suit of Lutestring--[More properly called
"lustring"; a fine glossy silk.]--for herself, and so home.  And at night
I got the whole company and Sir Wm. Pen home to my house, and there I did
give them Rhenish wine and sugar, and continued together till it was late,
and so to bed.  It is much talked that the King is already married to the
niece of the Prince de Ligne,

     [The Prince de Ligne had no niece, and probably Pepys has made some
     mistake in the name.  Charles at one time made an offer of marriage
     to Mazarin's niece, Hortense Mancini.]

and that he hath two sons already by her: which I am sorry to hear; but
yet am gladder that it should be so, than that the Duke of York and his
family should come to the crown, he being a professed friend to the
Catholiques.

19th.  By coach to Whitehall with Colonel Slingsby (carrying Mrs. Turner
with us) and there he and I up into the house, where we met with Sir G.
Carteret: who afterwards, with the Duke of York, my Lord Sandwich, and
others, went into a private room to consult: and we were a little troubled
that we were not called in with the rest.  But I do believe it was upon
something very private.  We staid walking in the gallery; where we met
with Mr. Slingsby, that was formerly a, great friend of Mons. Blondeau,
who showed me the stamps of the King's new coyne; which is strange to see,
how good they are in the stamp and bad in the money, for lack of skill to
make them.  But he says Blondeau will shortly come over, and then we shall
have it better, and the best in the world.

     [Peter Blondeau, medallist, was invited to London from Paris in
     1649, and appointed by the Council of State to coin their money; but
     the moneyers succeeded in driving him out of the country.  Soon
     after the Restoration he returned, and was appointed engineer to the
     mint.]

The Comptroller and I to the Commissioners of Parliament, and after some
talk away again and to drink a cup of ale.  He tells me, he is sure that
the King is not yet married, as it is said; nor that it is known who he
will have.  To my Lord's and found him dined, and so I lost my dinner, but
I staid and played with him and Mr. Child, &c., some things of four parts,
and so it raining hard and bitter cold (the first winter day we have yet
had this winter), I took coach home and spent the evening in reading of a
Latin play, the "Naufragium Joculare."  And so to bed.

20th.  All the morning at the office, dined at home and my brother Tom
with me, who brought me a pair of fine slippers which he gave me.  By and
by comes little Luellin and friend to see me, and then my coz Stradwick,
who was never here before.  With them I drank a bottle of wine or two, and
to the office again, and there staid about business late, and then all of
us to Sir W.  Pen's, where we had, and my Lady Batten, Mrs. Martha, and my
wife, and other company, a good supper, and sat playing at cards and
talking till 12 at night, and so all to our lodgings.

21st.  To Westminster by coach with Sir W. Pen, and in our way saw the
city begin to build scaffolds against the Coronacion.  To my Lord, and
there found him out of doors.  So to the Hall and called for some caps
that I have a making there, and here met with Mr. Hawley, and with him to
Will's and drank, and then by coach with Mr. Langley our old friend into
the city.  I set him down by the way, and I home and there staid all day
within, having found Mr. Moore, who staid with me till late at night
talking and reading some good books.  Then he went away, and I to bed.

22nd.  All the morning at the office.  At noon with my wife and Pall to my
father's to dinner, where Dr. Thos. Pepys and my coz Snow and Joyce
Norton.  After dinner came The. Turner, and so I home with her to her
mother, good woman, whom I had not seen through my great neglect this half
year, but she would not be angry with me.  Here I staid all the afternoon
talking of the King's being married, which is now the town talk, but I
believe false.  In the evening Mrs. The. and Joyce took us all into the
coach home, calling in Bishopsgate Street, thinking to have seen a new
Harpsicon--[The harpsichord is an instrument larger than a spinet, with
two or three strings to a note.]--that she had a making there, but it was
not done, and so we did not see it.  Then to my home, where I made very
much of her, and then she went home.  Then my wife to Sir W. Batten's, and
there sat a while; he having yesterday sent my wife half-a-dozen pairs of
gloves, and a pair of silk stockings and garters, for her Valentine's
gift.  Then home and to bed.

23rd.  This my birthday, 28 years.  This morning Sir W. Batten, Pen, and I
did some business, and then I by water to Whitehall, having met Mr.
Hartlibb by the way at Alderman Backwell's.  So he did give me a glass of
Rhenish wine at the Steeleyard, and so to Whitehall by water.  He
continues of the same bold impertinent humour that he was always of and
will ever be.  He told me how my Lord Chancellor had lately got the Duke
of York and Duchess, and her woman, my Lord Ossory's and a Doctor, to make
oath before most of the judges of the kingdom, concerning all the
circumstances of their marriage.  And in fine, it is confessed that they
were not fully married till about a month or two before she was brought to
bed; but that they were contracted long before, and time enough for the
child to be legitimate.

     [The Duke of York's marriage took place September 3rd, 1660.  Anne
     Hyde was contracted to the Duke at Breda, November 24th, 1659.]

But I do not hear that it was put to the judges to determine whether it
was so or no.  To my Lord and there spoke to him about his opinion of the
Light, the sea-mark that Captain Murford is about, and do offer me an
eighth part to concern myself with it, and my Lord do give me some
encouragement in it, and I shall go on.  I dined herewith Mr. Shepley and
Howe.  After dinner to Whitehall Chappell with Mr. Child, and there did
hear Captain Cooke and his boy make a trial of an Anthem against tomorrow,
which was brave musique.  Then by water to Whitefriars to the Play-house,
and there saw "The Changeling," the first time it hath been acted these
twenty years, and it takes exceedingly.  Besides, I see the gallants do
begin to be tyred with the vanity and pride of the theatre actors who are
indeed grown very proud and rich.  Then by link home, and there to my book
awhile and to bed.  I met to-day with Mr. Townsend, who tells me that the
old man is yet alive in whose place in the Wardrobe he hopes to get my
father, which I do resolve to put for.  I also met with the Comptroller,
who told me how it was easy for us all, the principal officers, and proper
for us, to labour to get into the next Parliament; and would have me to
ask the Duke's letter, but I shall not endeavour it because it will spend
much money, though I am sure I could well obtain it.  This is now 28 years
that I am born.  And blessed be God, in a state of full content, and great
hopes to be a happy man in all respects, both to myself and friends.

24th (Sunday).  Mr. Mills made as excellent a sermon in the morning
against drunkenness as ever I heard in my life.  I dined at home; another
good one of his in the afternoon.  My Valentine had her fine gloves on at
church to-day that I did give her.  After sermon my wife and I unto Sir
Wm. Batten and sat awhile.  Then home, I to read, then to supper and to
bed.

25th.  Sir Wm. Pen and I to my Lord Sandwich's by coach in the morning to
see him, but he takes physic to-day and so we could not see him.  So he
went away, and I with Luellin to Mr. Mount's chamber at the Cockpit, where
he did lie of old, and there we drank, and from thence to W. Symons where
we found him abroad, but she, like a good lady, within, and there we did
eat some nettle porrige, which was made on purpose to-day for some of
their coming, and was very good.  With her we sat a good while, merry in
discourse, and so away, Luellin and I to my Lord's, and there dined.  He
told me one of the prettiest stories, how Mr. Blurton, his friend that was
with him at my house three or four days ago, did go with him the same day
from my house to the Fleet tavern by Guildhall, and there (by some
pretence) got the mistress of the house into their company, and by and by
Luellin calling him Doctor she thought that he really was so, and did
privately discover her disease to him, which was only some ordinary
infirmity belonging to women, and he proffering her physic, she desired
him to come some day and bring it, which he did.  After dinner by water to
the office, and there Sir W. Pen and I met and did business all the
afternoon, and then I got him to my house and eat a lobster together, and
so to bed.

26th (Shrove Tuesday).  I left my wife in bed, being indisposed .  .  . I
to Mrs. Turner's, who I found busy with The. and Joyce making of things
ready for fritters, so to Mr. Crew's and there delivered Cotgrave's
Dictionary' to my Lady Jemimah, and then with Mr. Moore to my coz Tom
Pepys, but he being out of town I spoke with his lady, though not of the
business I went about, which was to borrow L1000 for my Lord.  Back to
Mrs. Turner's, where several friends, all strangers to me but Mr. Armiger,
dined.  Very merry and the best fritters that ever I eat in my life.
After that looked out at window; saw the flinging at cocks.

     [The cruel custom of throwing at cocks on Shrove Tuesday is of
     considerable antiquity.  It is shown in the first print of Hogarth's
     "Four Stages of Cruelty."]

Then Mrs. The. and I, and a gentleman that dined there and his daughter, a
perfect handsome young and very tall lady that lately came out of the
country, and Mr. Thatcher the Virginall Maister to Bishopsgate Street, and
there saw the new Harpsicon made for Mrs. The.  We offered L12, they
demanded L14.  The Master not being at home, we could make no bargain, so
parted for to-night.  So all by coach to my house, where I found my
Valentine with my wife, and here they drank, and then went away.  Then I
sat and talked with my Valentine and my wife a good while, and then saw
her home, and went to Sir W. Batten to the Dolphin, where Mr. Newborne,
&c., were, and there after a quart or two of wine, we home, and I to bed
.  .  .  .

27th.  At the office all the morning, that done I walked in the garden
with little Captain Murford, where he and I had some discourse concerning
the Light-House again, and I think I shall appear in the business, he
promising me that if I can bring it about, it will be worth L100 per
annum.  Then came into the garden to me young Mr. Powell and Mr. Hooke
that I once knew at Cambridge, and I took them in and gave them a bottle
of wine, and so parted.  Then I called for a dish of fish, which we had
for dinner, this being the first day of Lent; and I do intend to try
whether I can keep it or no.  My father dined with me and did show me a
letter from my brother John, wherein he tells us that he is chosen
Schollar of the house,' which do please me much, because I do perceive now
it must chiefly come from his merit and not the power of his Tutor, Dr.
Widdrington, who is now quite out of interest there and hath put over his
pupils to Mr. Pepper, a young Fellow of the College.  With my father to
Mr. Rawlinson's, where we met my uncle Wight, and after a pint or two
away.  I walked with my father (who gave me an account of the great
falling out between my uncle Fenner and his son Will) as far as Paul's
Churchyard, and so left him, and I home.  This day the Commissioners of
Parliament begin to pay off the Fleet, beginning with the Hampshire, and
do it at Guildhall, for fear of going out of town into the power of the
seamen, who are highly incensed against them.

28th.  Early to wait on my Lord, and after a little talk with him I took
boat at Whitehall for Redriffe, but in my way overtook Captain Cuttance
and Teddiman in a boat and so ashore with them at Queenhithe, and so to a
tavern with them to a barrel of oysters, and so away.  Capt. Cuttance and
I walked from Redriffe to Deptford, where I found both Sir Williams and
Sir G. Carteret at Mr. Uthwayt's, and there we dined, and notwithstanding
my resolution, yet for want of other victualls, I did eat flesh this Lent,
but am resolved to eat as little as I can.  After dinner we went to
Captain Bodilaw's, and there made sale of many old stores by the candle,
and good sport it was to see how from a small matter bid at first they
would come to double and treble the price of things.  After that Sir W.
Pen and I and my Lady Batten and her daughter by land to Redriffe, staying
a little at halfway house, and when we came to take boat, found Sir
George, &c., to have staid with the barge a great while for us, which
troubled us.  Home and to bed.  This month ends with two great secrets
under dispute but yet known to very few: first, Who the King will marry;
and What the meaning of this fleet is which we are now sheathing to set
out for the southward.  Most think against Algier against the Turk, or to
the East Indys against the Dutch who, we hear, are setting out a great
fleet thither.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                MARCH
                               1660-61

March 1st.  All the morning at the office.  Dined at home only upon fish,
and Mr. Shepley and Tom Hater with me.  After dinner Mr. Shepley and I in
private talking about my Lord's intentions to go speedily into the
country, but to what end we know not.  We fear he is to go to sea with
this fleet now preparing.  But we wish that he could get his L4000 per
annum settled before he do go.  Then he and I walked into London, he to
the Wardrobe and I to Whitefryars, and saw "The Bondman" acted; an
excellent play and well done.  But above all that ever I saw, Betterton do
the Bond man the best.  Then to my father's and found my mother ill. After
staying a while with them, I went home and sat up late, spending my
thoughts how to get money to bear me out in my great expense at the
Coronacion, against which all provide, and scaffolds setting up in every
street.  I had many designs in my head to get some, but know not which
will take.  To bed.

2d.  Early with Mr. Moore about Sir Paul Neale's' business with my uncle
and other things all the morning.  Dined with him at Mr. Crew's, and after
dinner I went to the Theatre, where I found so few people (which is
strange, and the reason I did not know) that I went out again, and so to
Salsbury Court, where the house as full as could be; and it seems it was a
new play, "The Queen's Maske," wherein there are some good humours: among
others, a good jeer to the old story of the Siege of Troy, making it to be
a common country tale.  But above all it was strange to see so little a
boy as that was to act Cupid, which is one of the greatest parts in it.
Then home and to bed.

3rd (Lord's day): Mr. Woodcocke preached at our church a very good sermon
upon the imaginacions of the thoughts of man's heart being only evil.  So
home, where being told that my Lord had sent for me I went, and got there
to dine with my Lord, who is to go into the country tomorrow.  I did give
up the mortgage made to me by Sir R. Parkhurst for L2,000.  In the Abby
all the afternoon.  Then at Mr. Pierces the surgeon, where Shepley and I
supped.  So to my Lord's, who comes in late and tells us how news is come
to-day of Mazarin's being dead, which is very great news and of great
consequence.--[This report of the death of Cardinal Mazarin appears to
have been premature, for he did not die until the 9th of March, 1661.]--I
lay tonight with Mr. Shepley here, because of my Lord's going to-morrow.

4th.  My Lord went this morning on his journey to Hinchingbroke, Mr.
Parker with him; the chief business being to look over and determine how,
and in what manner, his great work of building shall be done.  Before his
going he did give me some jewells to keep for him, viz., that that the
King of Sweden did give him, with the King's own picture in it, most
excellently done; and a brave George, all of diamonds, and this with the
greatest expressions of love and confidence that I could imagine or hope
for, which is a very great joy to me.  To the office all the forenoon.
Then to dinner and so to Whitehall to Mr. Coventry about several
businesses, and then with Mr. Moore, who went with me to drink a cup of
ale, and after some good discourse then home and sat late talking with Sir
W. Batten.  So home and to bed.

5th.  With Mr. Pierce, purser, to Westminster Hall, and there met with
Captain Cuttance, Lieut. Lambert, and Pierce, surgeon, thinking to have
met with the Commissioners of Parliament, but they not sitting, we went to
the Swan, where I did give them a barrel of oysters; and so I to my Lady's
and there dined, and had very much talk and pleasant discourse with my
Lady, my esteem growing every day higher and higher in her and my Lord.
So to my father Bowyer's where my wife was, and to the Commissioners of
Parliament, and there did take some course about having my Lord's salary
paid tomorrow when; the Charles is paid off, but I was troubled to see how
high they carry themselves, when in good truth nobody cares for them.  So
home by coach and my wife.  I then to the office, where Sir Williams both
and I set about making an estimate of all the officers' salaries in
ordinary in the Navy till 10 o'clock at night.  So home, and I with my
head full of thoughts how to get a little present money, I eat a bit of
bread and cheese, and so to bed.

6th.  At the office all the morning.  At dinner Sir W. Batten came and
took me and my wife to his house to dinner, my Lady being in the country,
where we had a good Lenten dinner.  Then to Whitehall with Captn. Cuttle,
and there I did some business with Mr. Coventry, and after that home,
thinking to have had Sir W. Batten, &c., to have eat a wigg--[Wigg, a kind
of north country bun or tea-cake, still so called, to my knowledge, in
Staffordshire.--M. B.]--at my house at night.  But my Lady being come home
out of the country ill by reason of much rain that has fallen lately, and
the waters being very high, we could not, and so I home and to bed.

7th.  This morning Sir Williams both went to Woolwich to sell some old
provisions there.  I to Whitehall, and up and down about many businesses.
Dined at my Lord's, then to Mr. Crew to Mr. Moore, and he and I to London
to Guildhall to see the seamen paid off, but could not without trouble,
and so I took him to the Fleece tavern, where the pretty woman that
Luellin lately told me the story of dwells, but I could not see her. Then
towards home and met Spicer, D. Vines, Ruddiard, and a company more of my
old acquaintance, and went into a place to drink some ale, and there we
staid playing the fool till late, and so I home.  At home met with ill
news that my hopes of getting some money for the Charles were spoiled
through Mr. Waith's perverseness, which did so vex me that I could not
sleep at night.  But I wrote a letter to him to send to-morrow morning for
him to take my money for me, and so with good words I thought to coy with
him.  To bed.

8th.  All the morning at the office.  At noon Sir W. Batten, Col. Slingsby
and I by coach to the Tower, to Sir John Robinson's, to dinner; where
great good cheer.  High company; among others the Duchess of Albemarle,
who is ever a plain homely dowdy.  After dinner, to drink all the
afternoon.  Towards night the Duchess and ladies went away.  Then we set
to it again till it was very late.  And at last came in Sir William Wale,
almost fuddled; and because I was set between him and another, only to
keep them from talking and spoiling the company (as we did to others), he
fell out with the Lieutenant of the Tower; but with much ado we made him
under stand his error, and then all quiet.  And so he carried Sir William
Batten and I home again in his coach, and so I almost overcome with drink
went to bed.  I was much contented to ride in such state into the Tower,
and be received among such high company, while Mr. Mount, my Lady
Duchess's gentleman usher, stood waiting at table, whom I ever thought a
man so much above me in all respects; also to hear the discourse of so
many high Cavaliers of things past.  It was a great content and joy to me.

9th.  To Whitehall and there with Mr. Creed took a most pleasant walk for
two hours in the park, which is now a very fair place.  Here we had a long
and candid discourse one to another of one another's condition, and he
giving me an occasion I told him of my intention to get L60 paid me by him
for a gratuity for my labour extraordinary at sea.  Which he did not seem
unwilling to, and therefore I am very glad it is out.  To my Lord's, where
we found him lately come from Hinchingbroke, where he left my uncle very
well, but my aunt not likely to live.  I staid and dined with him. He took
me aside, and asked me what the world spoke of the King's marriage.  Which
I answering as one that knew nothing, he enquired no further of me.  But I
do perceive by it that there is something in it that is ready to come out
that the world knows not of yet.  After dinner into London to Mrs.
Turner's and my father's, made visits and then home, where I sat late
making of my journal for four days past, and so to bed.

10th (Lord's day).  Heard Mr. Mills in the morning, a good sermon.  Dined
at home on a poor Lenten dinner of coleworts and bacon.  In the afternoon
again to church, and there heard one Castle, whom I knew of my year at
Cambridge.  He made a dull sermon.  After sermon came my uncle and aunt
Wight to see us, and we sat together a great while.  Then to reading and
at night to bed.

11th.  At the office all the morning, dined at home and my father and Dr.
Thos. Pepys with him upon a poor dinner, my wife being abroad.  After
dinner I went to the theatre, and there saw "Love's Mistress"  done by
them, which I do not like in some things as well as their acting in
Salsbury Court.  At night home and found my wife come home, and among
other things she hath got her teeth new done by La Roche, and are indeed
now pretty handsome, and I was much pleased with it.  So to bed.

12th.  At the office about business all the morning, so to the Exchange,
and there met with Nick Osborne lately married, and with him to the
Fleece, where we drank a glass of wine.  So home, where I found Mrs. Hunt
in great trouble about her husband's losing of his place in the Excise.
From thence to Guildhall, and there set my hand to the book before Colonel
King for my sea pay, and blessed be God! they have cast me at midshipman's
pay, which do make my heart very glad.  So, home, and there had Sir W.
Batten and my Lady and all their company and Capt. Browne and his wife to
a collation at my house till it was late, and then to bed.

13th.  Early up in the morning to read "The Seaman's Grammar and
Dictionary" I lately have got, which do please me exceeding well.  At the
office all the morning, dined at home, and Mrs. Turner, The. Joyce, and
Mr. Armiger, and my father and mother with me, where they stand till I was
weary of their company and so away.  Then up to my chamber, and there set
papers and things in order, and so to bed.

14th.  With Sir W. Batten and Pen to Mr. Coventry's, and there had a
dispute about my claim to the place of Purveyor of Petty-provisions, and
at last to my content did conclude to have my hand to all the bills for
these provisions and Mr. Turner to purvey them, because I would not have
him to lose the place.  Then to my Lord's, and so with Mr. Creed to an
alehouse, where he told me a long story of his amours at Portsmouth to one
of Mrs. Boat's daughters, which was very pleasant.  Dined with my Lord and
Lady, and so with Mr. Creed to the Theatre, and there saw "King and no
King," well acted.  Thence with him to the Cock alehouse at Temple Bar,
where he did ask my advice about his amours, and I did give him it, which
was to enquire into the condition of his competitor, who is a son of Mr.
Gauden's, and that I promised to do for him, and he to make [what] use he
can of it to his advantage.  Home and to bed.

15th.  At the office all the morning.  At noon Sir Williams both and I at
a great fish dinner at the Dolphin, given us by two tax merchants, and
very merry we were till night, and so home.  This day my wife and Pall
went to see my Lady Kingston, her brother's lady.

16th.  Early at Sir Wm. Pen's, and there before Mr. Turner did reconcile
the business of the purveyance between us two.  Then to Whitehall to my
Lord's, and dined with him, and so to Whitefriars and saw "The Spanish
Curate," in which I had no great content.  So home, and was very much
troubled that Will. staid out late, and went to bed early, intending not
to let him come in, but by and by he comes and I did let him in, and he
did tell me that he was at Guildhall helping to pay off the seamen, and
cast the books late.  Which since I found to be true.  So to sleep, being
in bed when he came.

17th (Lord's day).  At church in the morning, a stranger preached a good
honest and painfull sermon.  My wife and I dined upon a chine of beef at
Sir W. Batten's, so to church again.  Then home, and put some papers in
order.  Then to supper at Sir W. Batten's again, where my wife by chance
fell down and hurt her knees exceedingly.  So home and to bed.

18th.  This morning early Sir W. Batten went to Rochester, where he
expects to be chosen Parliament man.  At the office all the morning, dined
at home and with my wife to Westminster, where I had business with the
Commissioner for paying the seamen about my Lord's pay, and my wife at
Mrs. Hunt's.  I called her home, and made inquiry at Greatorex's and in
other places to hear of Mr. Barlow (thinking to hear that he is dead), but
I cannot find it so, but the contrary.  Home and called at my Lady
Batten's, and supped there, and so home.  This day an ambassador from
Florence was brought into the town in state.  Good hopes given me to-day
that Mrs. Davis is going away from us, her husband going shortly to
Ireland.  Yesterday it was said was to be the day that the Princess
Henrietta was to marry the Duke d'Anjou' in France.  This day I found in
the newes-booke that Roger Pepys is chosen at Cambridge for the town, the
first place that we hear of to have made their choice yet.  To bed with my
head and mind full of business, which do a little put me out of order, and
I do find myself to become more and more thoughtful about getting of money
than ever heretofore.

19th.  We met at the office this morning about some particular business,
and then I to Whitehall, and there dined with my Lord, and after dinner
Mr. Creed and I to White-Fryars, where we saw "The Bondman" acted most
excellently, and though I have seen it often, yet I am every time more and
more pleased with Betterton's action.  From thence with him and young Mr.
Jones to Penell's in Fleet Street, and there we drank and talked a good
while, and so I home and to bed.

20th.  At the office all the morning, dined at home and Mr. Creed and Mr.
Shepley with me, and after dinner we did a good deal of business in my
study about my Lord's accounts to be made up and presented to our office.
That done to White Hall to Mr. Coventry, where I did some business with
him, and so with Sir W. Pen (who I found with Mr. Coventry teaching of him
upon the map to understand Jamaica).

     [Sir William Penn was well fitted to give this information, as it
     was he who took the island from the Spaniards in 1655.]

By water in the dark home, and so to my Lady Batten's where my wife was,
and there we sat and eat and drank till very late, and so home to bed. The
great talk of the town is the strange election that the City of London
made yesterday for Parliament-men; viz.  Fowke, Love, Jones, and .  .  .
men that are so far from being episcopall that they are thought to be
Anabaptists; and chosen with a great deal of zeal, in spite of the other
party that thought themselves very strong, calling out in the Hall, "No
Bishops!  no Lord Bishops!" It do make people to fear it may come to
worse, by being an example to the country to do the same. And indeed the
Bishops are so high, that very few do love them.

21st.  Up very early, and to work and study in my chamber, and then to
Whitehall to my Lord, and there did stay with him a good while discoursing
upon his accounts.  Here I staid with Mr. Creed all the morning, and at
noon dined with my Lord, who was very merry, and after dinner we sang and
fiddled a great while.  Then I by water (Mr. Shepley, Pinkney, and others
going part of the way) home, and then hard at work setting my papers in
order, and writing letters till night, and so to bed.  This day I saw the
Florence Ambassador go to his audience, the weather very foul, and yet he
and his company very gallant.  After I was a-bed Sir W. Pen sent to desire
me to go with him to-morrow morning to meet Sir W. Batten coming from
Rochester.

22nd.  This morning I rose early, and my Lady Batten knocked at her door
that comes into one of my chambers, and called me to know whether I and my
wife were ready to go.  So my wife got her ready, and about eight o'clock
I got a horseback, and my Lady and her two daughters, and Sir W. Pen into
coach, and so over London Bridge, and thence to Dartford.  The day very
pleasant, though the way bad.  Here we met with Sir W. Batten, and some
company along with him, who had assisted him in his election at Rochester;
and so we dined and were very merry.  At 5 o'clock we set out again in a
coach home, and were very merry all the way.  At Deptford we met with Mr.
Newborne, and some other friends and their wives in a coach to meet us,
and so they went home with us, and at Sir W. Batten's we supped, and
thence to bed, my head akeing mightily through the wine that I drank
to-day.

23d.  All the morning at home putting papers in order, dined at home, and
then out to the Red Bull (where I had not been since plays come up again),
but coming too soon I went out again and walked all up and down the
Charterhouse yard and Aldersgate street.  At last came back again and went
in, where I was led by a seaman that knew me, but is here as a servant, up
to the tireing-room, where strange the confusion and disorder that there
is among them in fitting themselves, especially here, where the clothes
are very poor, and the actors but common fellows.  At last into the Pitt,
where I think there was not above ten more than myself, and not one
hundred in the whole house.  And the play, which is called "All's lost by
Lust," poorly done; and with so much disorder, among others, that in the
musique-room the boy that was to sing a song, not singing it right, his
master fell about his ears and beat him so, that it put the whole house in
an uprore.  Thence homewards, and at the Mitre met my uncle Wight, and
with him Lieut.-Col. Baron, who told us how Crofton, the great
Presbyterian minister that had lately preached so highly against Bishops,
is clapped up this day into the Tower.  Which do please some, and
displease others exceedingly.  Home and to bed.

24th (Lord's day).  My wife and I to church, and then home with Sir W.
Batten and my Lady to dinner, where very merry, and then to church again,
where Mr. Mills made a good sermon.  Home again, and after a walk in the
garden Sir W. Batten's two daughters came and sat with us a while, and I
then up to my chamber to read.

25th (Lady day).  This morning came workmen to begin the making of me a
new pair of stairs up out of my parler, which, with other work that I have
to do, I doubt will keep me this two months and so long I shall be all in
dirt; but the work do please me very well.  To the office, and there all
the morning, dined at home, and after dinner comes Mr. Salisbury to see
me, and shewed me a face or two of his paynting, and indeed I perceive
that he will be a great master.  I took him to Whitehall with me by water,
but he would not by any means be moved to go through bridge, and so we
were fain to go round by the Old Swan.  To my Lord's and there I shewed
him the King's picture, which he intends to copy out in little.  After
that I and Captain Ferrers to Salisbury Court by water, and saw part of
the "Queene's Maske."  Then I to Mrs. Turner, and there staid talking
late.  The. Turner being in a great chafe, about being disappointed of a
room to stand in at the Coronacion.  Then to my father's, and there staid
talking with my mother and him late about my dinner to-morrow.  So
homewards and took up a boy that had a lanthorn, that was picking up of
rags, and got him to light me home, and had great discourse with him how
he could get sometimes three or four bushells of rags in a day, and got
3d. a bushell for them, and many other discourses, what and how many ways
there are for poor children to get their livings honestly.  So home and I
to bed at 12 o'clock at night, being pleased well with the work that my
workmen have begun to-day.

26th.  Up early to do business in my study.  This is my great day that
three years ago I was cut of the stone, and, blessed be God, I do yet find
myself very free from pain again.  All this morning I staid at home
looking after my workmen to my great content about my stairs, and at noon
by coach to my father's, where Mrs. Turner, The. Joyce, Mr. Morrice, Mr.
Armiger, Mr. Pierce, the surgeon, and his wife, my father and mother, and
myself and my wife.  Very merry at dinner; among other things, because
Mrs. Turner and her company eat no flesh at all this Lent, and I had a
great deal of good flesh which made their mouths water.  After dinner Mrs.
Pierce and her husband and I and my wife to Salisbury Court, where coming
late he and she light of Col. Boone that made room for them, and I and my
wife sat in the pit, and there met with Mr. Lewes and Tom Whitton, and saw
"The Bondman" done to admiration.  So home by coach, and after a view of
what the workmen had done to-day I went to bed.

27th.  Up early to see my workmen at work.  My brother Tom comes to me,
and among other things I looked over my old clothes and did give him a
suit of black stuff clothes and a hat and some shoes.  At the office all
the morning, where Sir G. Carteret comes, and there I did get him to
promise me some money upon a bill of exchange, whereby I shall secure
myself of L60 which otherwise I should not know how to get.  At noon I
found my stairs quite broke down, that I could not get up but by a ladder;
and my wife not being well she kept her chamber all this day. To the
Dolphin to a dinner of Mr. Harris's, where Sir Williams both and my Lady
Batten, and her two daughters, and other company, where a great deal of
mirth, and there staid till 11 o'clock at night; and in our mirth I sang
and sometimes fiddled (there being a noise of fiddlers there), and at last
we fell to dancing, the first time that ever I did in my life, which I did
wonder to see myself to do.  At last we made Mingo, Sir W. Batten's black,
and Jack, Sir W. Pen's, dance, and it was strange how the first did dance
with a great deal of seeming skill.  Home, where I found my wife all day
in her chamber.  So to bed.

28th.  Up early among my workmen, then Mr. Creed coming to see me I went
along with him to Sir Robert Slingsby (he being newly maister of that
title by being made a Baronett) to discourse about Mr. Creed's accounts to
be made up, and from thence by coach to my cozen Thomas Pepys, to borrow
L1000 for my Lord, which I am to expect an answer to tomorrow. So to my
Lord's, and there staid and dined, and after dinner did get my Lord to
view Mr. Shepley's accounts as I had examined them, and also to sign me a
bond for my L500.  Then with Mr. Shepley to the Theatre and saw "Rollo"
ill acted.  That done to drink a cup of ale and so by coach to London, and
having set him down in Cheapside I went home, where I found a great deal
of work done to-day, and also L70 paid me by the Treasurer upon the bill
of exchange that I have had hopes of so long, so that, my heart in great
content; I went to bed.

29th.  Up among my workmen with great pleasure.  Then to the office, where
I found Sir W. Pen sent down yesterday to Chatham to get two great ships
in readiness presently to go to the East Indies upon some design against
the Dutch, we think, at Goa but it is a great secret yet.  Dined at home,
came Mr. Shepley and Moore, and did business with both of them. After that
to Sir W. Batten's, where great store of company at dinner. Among others
my schoolfellow, Mr. Christmas, where very merry, and hither came letters
from above for the fitting of two other ships for the East Indies in all
haste, and so we got orders presently for the Hampshire and Nonsuch.  Then
home and there put some papers in order, and not knowing what to do, the
house being so dirty, I went to bed.

30th.  At the office we and Sir W. Rider to advise what sort of provisions
to get ready for these ships going to the Indies.  Then the Comptroller
and I by water to Mr. Coventry, and there discoursed upon the same thing.
So to my coz. Tho. Pepys, and got him to promise me L1,000 to lend my Lord
upon his and my uncle Robert's and my security.  So to my Lord's, and
there got him to sign a bond to him, which I also signed too, and he did
sign counter security to us both.  Then into London up and down and drank
a pint of wine with Mr. Creed, and so home and sent a letter and the bonds
to my uncle to sign for my Lord.  This day I spoke with Dr. Castle about
making up the dividend for the last quarter, and agreed to meet about it
on Monday.

31st (Sunday).  At church, where a stranger preached like a fool.  From
thence home and dined with my wife, she staying at home, being unwilling
to dress herself, the house being all dirty.  To church again, and after
sermon I walked to my father's, and to Mrs. Turner's, where I could not
woo The. to give me a lesson upon the harpsicon and was angry at it.  So
home and finding Will abroad at Sir W. Batten's talking with the people
there (Sir W. and my Lady being in the country), I took occasion to be
angry with him, and so to prayers and to bed.




     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     A lady spit backward upon me by a mistake
     A most tedious, unreasonable, and impertinent sermon
     Comely black woman.--[The old expression for a brunette.]
     Cruel custom of throwing at cocks on Shrove Tuesday
     Day I first begun to go forth in my coat and sword
     Discontented that my wife do not go neater now she has two maids
     Fell to dancing, the first time that ever I did in my life
     Have been so long absent that I am ashamed to go
     I took occasion to be angry with him
     Justice of God in punishing men for the sins of their ancestors
     Lady Batten to give me a spoonful of honey for my cold
     My great expense at the Coronacion
     She hath got her teeth new done by La Roche
     That I might not seem to be afeared
     The monkey loose, which did anger me, and so I did strike her
     Was kissing my wife, which I did not like
     We are to go to law never to revenge, but only to repayre
     Who we found ill still, but he do make very much of it
     Wronged by my over great expectations





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Diary of Samuel Pepys,
January/February/March 1660/61, by Samuel Pepys

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***

***** This file should be named 4126.txt or 4126.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/4/1/2/4126/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
