The Project Gutenberg EBook of Diary of Samuel Pepys, September/October
1661, by Samuel Pepys

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Diary of Samuel Pepys, September/October 1661

Author: Samuel Pepys

Release Date: November 29, 2004 [EBook #4129]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***




Produced by David Widger





                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A.  F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                           SEPTEMBER & OCTOBER
                                  1661

September 1st (Lord's day).  Last night being very rainy [the rain] broke
into my house, the gutter being stopped, and spoiled all my ceilings
almost.  At church in the morning, and dined at home with my wife.  After
dinner to Sir W. Batten's, where I found Sir W. Pen and Captain Holmes.
Here we were very merry with Sir W. Pen about the loss of his tankard,
though all be but a cheat, and he do not yet understand it; but the
tankard was stole by Sir W. Batten, and the letter, as from the thief,
wrote by me, which makes: very good sport.  Here I staid all the
afternoon, and then Captain Holmes and I by coach to White Hall; in our
way, I found him by discourse, to be a great friend of my Lord's, and he
told me there was many did seek to remove him; but they were old seamen,
such as Sir J. Minnes (but he would name no more, though I do believe Sir
W. Batten is one of them that do envy him), but he says he knows that the
King do so love him, and the Duke of York too, that there is no fear of
him.  He seems to be very well acquainted with the King's mind, and with
all the several factions at Court, and spoke all with so much frankness,
that I do take him to be my Lord's good friend, and one able to do him
great service, being a cunning fellow, and one (by his own confession to
me) that can put on two several faces, and look his enemies in the face
with as much love as his friends.  But, good God! what an age is this, and
what a world is this! that a man cannot live without playing the knave and
dissimulation.  At Whitehall we parted, and I to Mrs. Pierce's, meeting
her and Madam Clifford in the street, and there staid talking and laughing
with them a good while, and so back to my mother's, and there supped, and
so home and to bed.

2nd.  In the morning to my cozen Thos. Pepys, executor, and there talked
with him about my uncle Thomas, his being in the country, but he could not
advise me to anything therein, not knowing what the other has done in the
country, and so we parted.  And so to Whitehall, and there my Lord Privy
Seal, who has been out of town this week, not being yet come, we can have
no seal, and therefore meeting with Mr. Battersby the apothecary in
Fenchurch Street to the King's Apothecary's chamber in Whitehall, and
there drank a bottle or two of wine, and so he and I by water towards
London.  I landed at Blackfriars and so to the Wardrobe and dined, and
then back to Whitehall with Captain Ferrers, and there walked, and thence
to Westminster Hall, where we met with Mr. Pickering, and so all of us to
the Rhenish wine house (Prior's), where the master of the house is laying
out some money in making a cellar with an arch in his yard, which is very
convenient for him.  Here we staid a good while, and so Mr. Pickering and
I to Westminster Hall again, and there walked an hour or two talking, and
though he be a fool, yet he keeps much company, and will tell all he sees
or hears, and so a man may understand what the common talk of the town is,
and I find by him that there are endeavours to get my Lord out of play at
sea, which I believe Mr. Coventry and the Duke do think will make them
more absolute; but I hope, for all this, they will not be able to do it.
He tells me plainly of the vices of the Court, and how the pox is so
common there, and so I hear on all hands that it is as common as eating
and swearing.  From him by water to the bridge, and thence to the Mitre,
where I met my uncle and aunt Wight come to see Mrs. Rawlinson (in her
husband's absence out of town), and so I staid with them and Mr. Lucas and
other company, very merry, and so home, Where my wife has been busy all
the day making of pies, and had been abroad and bought things for herself,
and tells that she met at the Change with my young ladies of the Wardrobe
and there helped them to buy things, and also with Mr. Somerset, who did
give her a bracelet of rings, which did a little trouble me, though I know
there is no hurt yet in it, but only for fear of further acquaintance.  So
to bed.  This night I sent another letter to Sir W. Pen to offer him the
return of his tankard upon his leaving of 30s. at a place where it should
be brought.  The issue of which I am to expect.

3rd.  This day some of us Commissioners went down to Deptford to pay off
some ships, but I could not go, but staid at home all the morning setting
papers to rights, and this morning Mr. Howell, our turner, sent me two
things to file papers on very handsome.  Dined at home, and then with my
wife to the Wardrobe, where my Lady's child was christened (my Lord Crew
and his Lady, and my Lady Montagu, my Lord's mother-in-law, were the
witnesses), and named Katherine

     [Lady Katherine Montagu, youngest daughter of Lord Sandwich,
     married, first, Nicholas Bacon, eldest son and heir of Sir Nicholas
     Bacon, K.B., of Shrubland Hall, co.  Suffolk; and, secondly, the
     Rev. Balthazar Gardeman.  She died January 15th, 1757, at ninety-six
     years, four months.--B.]

(the Queen elect's name); but to my and all our trouble, the Parson of the
parish christened her, and did not sign the child with the sign of the
cross.  After that was done, we had a very fine banquet, the best I ever
was at, and so (there being very little company) we by and by broke up,
and my wife and I to my mother, who I took a liberty to advise about her
getting things ready to go this week into the country to my father, and
she (being become now-a-days very simple) took it very ill, and we had a
great deal of noise and wrangling about it.  So home by coach.

4th.  In the morning to the Privy Seal to do some things of the last
month, my Lord Privy Seal having been some time out of town.  Then my wife
came to me to Whitehall, and we went and walked a good while in St.
James's Park to see the brave alterations, and so to Wilkinson's, the
Cook's, to dinner, where we sent for Mrs. Sarah and there dined and had
oysters, the first I have eat this year, and were pretty good.  After
dinner by agreement to visit Mrs. Symonds, but she is abroad, which I
wonder at, and so missing her my wife again to my mother's (calling at
Mrs. Pierce's, who we found brought to bed of a girl last night) and there
staid and drank, and she resolves to be going to-morrow without fail.
Many friends come in to take their leave of her, but a great deal of stir
I had again tonight about getting her to go to see my Lady Sandwich before
she goes, which she says she will do tomorrow.  So I home.

5th.  To the Privy Seal this morning about business, in my way taking
leave of my mother, who goes to Brampton to-day.  But doing my business at
the Privy Seal pretty soon, I took boat and went to my uncle Fenner's, and
there I found my mother and my wife and Pall (of whom I had this morning
at my own house taken leave, and given her 20s. and good counsel how to
carry herself to my father and mother), and so I took them, it being late,
to Beard's, where they were staid for, and so I put them into the waggon,
and saw them going presently, Pall crying exceedingly.  Then in with my
wife, my aunt Bell and Charles Pepys, whom we met there, and drank, and so
to my uncle Fenner's to dinner (in the way meeting a French footman with
feathers, who was in quest of my wife, and spoke with her privately, but I
could not tell what it was, only my wife promised to go to some place
to-morrow morning, which do trouble my mind how to know whither it was),
where both his sons and daughters were, and there we were merry and dined.
After dinner news was brought that my aunt Kite, the butcher's widow in
London, is sick ready to die and sends for my uncle and me to come to take
charge of things, and to be entrusted with the care of her daughter.  But
I through want of time to undertake such a business, I was taken up by
Antony Joyce, which came at last to very high words, which made me very
angry, and I did not think that he would ever have been such a fool to
meddle with other people's business, but I saw he spoke worse to his
father than to me and therefore I bore it the better, but all the company
was offended with him, so we parted angry he and I, and so my wife and I
to the fair, and I showed her the Italians dancing the ropes, and the
women that do strange tumbling tricks and so by foot home vexed in my mind
about Antony Joyce.

6th.  This morning my uncle Fenner by appointment came and drank his
morning draft with me, and from thence he and I go to see my aunt Kite (my
wife holding her resolution to go this morning as she resolved yesterday,
and though there could not be much hurt in it, yet my own jealousy put a
hundred things into my mind, which did much trouble me all day), whom we
found in bed and not like to live as we think, and she told us her mind
was that if she should die she should give all she had to her daughter,
only L5 apiece to her second husband's children, in case they live to come
out of their apprenticeships, and that if her daughter should die before
marrying, then L10 to be divided between Sarah Kite's children and the
rest as her own daughter shall dispose of it, and this I set down that I
may be able to swear in case there should be occasion. From thence to an
alehouse while it rained, which kept us there I think above two hours, and
at last we were fain to go through the rainy street home, calling on his
sister Utbeck and drank there.  Then I home to dinner all alone, and
thence my mind being for my wife's going abroad much troubled and unfit
for business, I went to the Theatre, and saw "Elder Brother" ill acted;
that done, meeting here with Sir G. Askew, Sir Theophilus Jones, and
another Knight, with Sir W. Pen, we to the Ship tavern, and there staid
and were merry till late at night, and so got a coach, and Sir Wm. and I
home, where my wife had been long come home, but I seemed very angry, as
indeed I am, and did not all night show her any countenance, neither
before nor in bed, and so slept and rose discontented.

7th.  At the office all the morning.  At noon Mr. Moore dined with me, and
then in comes Wm. Joyce to answer a letter of mine I wrote this morning to
him about a maid of his that my wife had hired, and she sent us word that
she was hired to stay longer with her master, which mistake he came to
clear himself of; and I took it very kindly.  So I having appointed the
young ladies at the Wardrobe to go with them to a play to-day, I left him
and my brother Tom who came along with him to dine, and my wife and I took
them to the Theatre, where we seated ourselves close by the King, and Duke
of York, and Madame Palmer, which was great content; and, indeed, I can
never enough admire her beauty.  And here was "Bartholomew Fayre," with
the puppet-show, acted to-day, which had not been these forty years (it
being so satyricall against Puritanism, they durst not till now, which is
strange they should already dare to do it, and the King do countenance
it), but I do never a whit like it the better for the puppets, but rather
the worse.  Thence home with the ladies, it being by reason of our staying
a great while for the King's coming, and the length of the play, near nine
o'clock before it was done, and so in their coach home, and still in
discontent with my wife, to bed, and rose so this morning also.

8th (Lord's day).  To church, it being a very wet night last night and
to-day, dined at home, and so to church again with my wife in the
afternoon, and coming home again found our new maid Doll asleep, that she
could not hear to let us in, so that we were fain to send the boy in at a
window to open the door to us.  So up to my chamber all alone, and
troubled in mind to think how much of late I have addicted myself to
expense and pleasure, that now I can hardly reclaim myself to look after
my great business of settling Gravely business, until now almost too late.
I pray God give me grace to begin now to look after my business, but it
always was, and I fear will ever be, my foible that after I am once got
behind-hand with business, I am hard to set to it again to recover it.  In
the evening I begun to look over my accounts and upon the whole I do find
myself, by what I can yet see, worth near L600, for which God be blessed,
which put me into great comfort.  So to supper and to bed.

9th.  To the Privy Seal in the morning, but my Lord did not come, so I
went with Captain Morrice at his desire into the King's Privy Kitchen to
Mr. Sayres, the Master Cook, and there we had a good slice of beef or two
to our breakfast, and from thence he took us into the wine cellar where,
by my troth, we were very merry, and I drank too much wine, and all along
had great and particular kindness from Mr. Sayres, but I drank so much
wine that I was not fit for business, and therefore at noon I went and
walked in Westminster Hall a while, and thence to Salisbury Court play
house, where was acted the first time "'Tis pity Shee's a Whore,"  a
simple play and ill acted, only it was my fortune to sit by a most pretty
and most ingenious lady, which pleased me much.  Thence home, and found
Sir Williams both and much more company gone to the Dolphin to drink the
30s. that we got the other day of Sir W. Pen about his tankard.  Here was
Sir R. Slingsby, Holmes, Captn.  Allen, Mr. Turner, his wife and daughter,
my Lady Batten, and Mrs. Martha, &c., and an excellent company of
fiddlers; so we exceeding merry till late; and then we begun to tell Sir
W. Pen the business, but he had been drinking to-day, and so is almost
gone, that we could not make him understand it, which caused us more
sport.  But so much the better, for I believe when he do come to
understand it he will be angry, he has so talked of the business himself
and the letter up and down that he will be ashamed to be found abused in
it.  So home and to bed.

10th.  At the office all the morn, dined at home; then my wife into Wood
Street to buy a chest, and thence to buy other things at my uncle Fenner's
(though by reason of rain we had ill walking), thence to my brother Tom's,
and there discoursed with him about business, and so to the Wardrobe to
see my Lady, and after supper with the young ladies, bought a link and
carried it myself till I met one that would light me home for the link.
So he light me home with his own, and then I did give him mine.  This
night I found Mary, my cozen W. Joyce's maid, come to me to be my cook
maid, and so my house is full again.  So to bed.

11th.  Early to my cozen Thomas Trice to discourse about our affairs, and
he did make demand of the L200 and the interest thereof.  But for the L200
I did agree to pay him, but for the other I did desire to be advised.  So
from him to Dr. Williams, who did carry me into his garden, where he hath
abundance of grapes; and did show me how a dog that he hath do kill all
the cats that come thither to kill his pigeons, and do afterwards bury
them; and do it with so much care that they shall be quite covered; that
if but the tip of the tail hangs out he will take up the cat again, and
dig the hole deeper.  Which is very strange; and he tells me that he do
believe that he hath killed above 100 cats.  After he was ready we went up
and down to inquire about my affairs and then parted, and to the Wardrobe,
and there took Mr. Moore to Tom Trice, who promised to let Mr. Moore have
copies of the bond and my aunt's deed of gift, and so I took him home to
my house to dinner, where I found my wife's brother, Balty, as fine as
hands could make him, and his servant, a Frenchman, to wait on him, and
come to have my wife to visit a young lady which he is a servant to, and
have hope to trepan and get for his wife.  I did give way for my wife to
go with him, and so after dinner they went, and Mr. Moore and I out again,
he about his business and I to Dr. Williams: to talk with him again, and
he and I walking through Lincoln's Fields observed at the Opera a new
play, "Twelfth Night"

     [Pepys seldom liked any play of Shakespeare's, and he sadly
     blundered when he supposed "Twelfth Night" was a new play.]

was acted there, and the King there; so I, against my own mind and
resolution, could not forbear to go in, which did make the play seem a
burthen to me, and I took no pleasure at all in it; and so after it was
done went home with my mind troubled for my going thither, after my
swearing to my wife that I would never go to a play without her.  So that
what with this and things going so cross to me as to matters of my uncle's
estate, makes me very much troubled in my mind, and so to bed. My wife was
with her brother to see his mistress today, and says she is young, rich,
and handsome, but not likely for him to get.

12th.  Though it was an office day, yet I was forced to go to the Privy
Seal, at which I was all the morning, and from thence to my Lady's to
dinner at the Wardrobe; and in my way upon the Thames, I saw the King's
new pleasure-boat that is come now for the King to take pleasure in above
bridge; and also two Gundaloes

     ["Two long boats that were made in Venice, called gondolas, were by
     the Duke of Venice (Dominico Contareni) presented to His Majesty; ,
     and the attending watermen, being four, were in very rich clothes,
     crimson satin; very big were their breeches and doublets; they wore
     also very large shirts of the same satin, very richly laced."
     --Rugge's Diurnal.--B.]

that are lately brought, which are very rich and fine.  After dinner I
went into my Lady's chamber where I found her up now out of her childbed,
which I was glad to see, and after an hour's talk with her I took leave
and to Tom Trice again, and sat talking and drinking with him about our
business a great while.  I do find I am likely to be forced to pay
interest for the L200.  By and by in comes my uncle Thomas, and as he was
always a close cunning fellow, so he carries himself to me, and says
nothing of what his endeavours are, though to my trouble I know that he is
about recovering of Gravely, but neither I nor he began any discourse of
the business.  From thence to Dr. Williams (at the little blind alehouse
in Shoe Lane, at the Gridiron, a place I am ashamed to be seen to go
into), and there with some bland counsel of his we discuss our matters,
but I find men of so different minds that by my troth I know not what to
trust to.  It being late I took leave, and by link home and called at Sir
W. Batten's, and there hear that Sir W. Pen do take our jest of the
tankard very ill, which Pam sorry for.

13th.  This morning I was sent for by my uncle Fenner to come and advise
about the buriall of my aunt, the butcher, who died yesterday; and from
thence to the Anchor, by Doctor's Commons, and there Dr. Williams and I
did write a letter for my purpose to Mr. Sedgewick, of Cambridge, about
Gravely business, and after that I left him and an attorney with him and
went to the Wardrobe, where I found my wife, and thence she and I to the
water to spend the afternoon in pleasure; and so we went to old George's,
and there eat as much as we would of a hot shoulder of mutton, and so to
boat again and home.  So to bed, my mind very full of business and
trouble.

14th.  At the office all the morning, at noon to the Change, and then home
again.  To dinner, where my uncle Fenner by appointment came and dined
with me, thinking to go together to my aunt Kite's that is dead; but
before we had dined comes Sir R. Slingsby and his lady, and a great deal
of company, to take my wife and I out by barge to shew them the King's and
Duke's yachts.  So I was forced to leave my uncle and brother Tom at
dinner and go forth with them, and we had great pleasure, seeing all four
yachts, viz., these two and the two Dutch ones.  And so home again, and
after writing letters by post, to bed.

15th (Lord's day).  To my aunt Kite's in the morning to help my uncle
Fenner to put things in order against anon for the buriall, and at noon
home again; and after dinner to church, my wife and I, and after sermon
with my wife to the buriall of my aunt Kite, where besides us and my uncle
Fenner's family, there was none of any quality, but poor rascally people.
So we went to church with the corps, and there had service read at the
grave, and back again with Pegg Kite who will be, I doubt, a troublesome
carrion to us executors; but if she will not be ruled, I shall fling up my
executorship.  After that home, and Will Joyce along with me where we sat
and talked and drank and ate an hour or two, and so he went away and I up
to my chamber and then to prayers and to bed.

16th.  This morning I was busy at home to take in my part of our freight
of Coles, which Sir G. Carteret, Sir R. Slingsby, and myself sent for,
which is 10 Chaldron, 8 of which I took in, and with the other to repay
Sir W. Pen what I borrowed of him a little while ago.  So that from this
day I should see how long 10 chaldron of coals will serve my house, if it
please the Lord to let me live to see them burned.  In the afternoon by
appointment to meet Dr. Williams and his attorney, and they and I to Tom
Trice, and there got him in discourse to confess the words that he had
said that his mother did desire him not to see my uncle about her L200
bond while she was alive.  Here we were at high words with T. Trice and
then parted, and we to Standing's, in Fleet Street, where we sat and drank
and talked a great while about my going down to Gravely Court,

     [The manorial court of Graveley, in Huntingdonshire, to which
     Impington owed suit or service, and under which the Pepys's copyhold
     estates were held.  See July 8th, 1661, ante.--B.]

which will be this week, whereof the Doctor had notice in a letter from
his sister this week.  In the middle of our discourse word was brought me
from my brother's that there is a fellow come from my father out of the
country, on purpose to speak to me, so I went to him and he made a story
how he had lost his letter, but he was sure it was for me to go into the
country, which I believed, and thought it might be to give me notice of
Gravely Court, but I afterwards found that it was a rogue that did use to
play such tricks to get money of people, but he got none of me.  At night
I went home, and there found letters-from my father informing me of the
Court, and that I must come down and meet him at Impington, which I
presently resolved to do,

17th.  And the next morning got up, telling my wife of my journey, and she
with a few words got me to hire her a horse to go along with me.  So I
went to my Lady's and elsewhere to take leave, and of Mr. Townsend did
borrow a very fine side-saddle for my wife; and so after all things were
ready, she and I took coach to the end of the town towards Kingsland, and
there got upon my horse and she upon her pretty mare that I hired for her,
and she rides very well.  By the mare at one time falling she got a fall,
but no harm; so we got to Ware, and there supped, and to bed very merry
and pleasant.

18th.  The next morning up early and begun our march; the way about
Puckridge--[Puckeridge, a village in Hertfordshire six and a half miles
N.N.E, of Ware.]--very bad, and my wife, in the very last dirty place of
all, got a fall, but no hurt, though some dirt.  At last she begun, poor
wretch, to be tired, and I to be angry at it, but I was to blame; for she
is a very good companion as long as she is well.  In the afternoon we got
to Cambridge, where I left my wife at my cozen Angier's while I went to
Christ's College, and there found my brother in his chamber, and talked
with him; and so to the barber's, and then to my wife again, and remounted
for Impington, where my uncle received me and my wife very kindly.  And by
and by in comes my father, and we supped and talked and were merry, but
being weary and sleepy my wife and I to bed without talking with my father
anything about our business.

19th.  Up early, and my father and I alone into the garden, and there
talked about our business, and what to do therein.  So after I had talked
and advised with my coz Claxton, and then with my uncle by his bedside, we
all horsed away to Cambridge, where my father and I, having left my wife
at the Beare with my brother, went to Mr. Sedgewicke, the steward of
Gravely, and there talked with him, but could get little hopes from
anything that he would tell us; but at last I did give him a fee, and then
he was free to tell me what I asked, which was something, though not much
comfort.  From thence to our horses, and with my wife went and rode
through Sturbridge

     [Sturbridge fair is of great antiquity.  The first trace of it is
     found in a charter granted about 1211 by King John to the Lepers of
     the Hospital of St. Mary Magdalen at Sturbridge by Cambridge, a fair
     to be held in the close of the hospital on the vigil and feast of
     the Holy Cross (see Cornelius Walford's "Fairs Past and Present,"
     1883, p. 54).]

but the fair was almost done.  So we did not 'light there at all, but went
back to Cambridge, and there at the Beare we had some herrings, we and my
brother, and after dinner set out for Brampton, where we come in very good
time, and found all things well, and being somewhat weary, after some talk
about tomorrow's business with my father, we went to bed.

20th.  Will Stankes and I set out in the morning betimes for Gravely,
where to an ale-house and drank, and then, going towards the Court House,
met my uncle Thomas and his son Thomas, with Bradly, the rogue that had
betrayed us, and one Young, a cunning fellow, who guides them.  There
passed no unkind words at all between us, but I seemed fair and went to
drink with them.  I said little till by and by that we come to the Court,
which was a simple meeting of a company of country rogues, with the
Steward, and two Fellows of Jesus College, that are lords of the town
where the jury were sworn; and I producing no surrender, though I told
them I was sure there is and must be one somewhere, they found my uncle
Thomas heir at law, as he is, and so, though I did tell him and his son
that they would find themselves abused by these fellows, and did advise
them to forbear being admitted this Court (which they could have done, but
that these rogues did persuade them to do it now), my uncle was admitted,
and his son also, in reversion after his father, which he did well in to
secure his money.  The father paid a year and a half for his fine, and the
son half a year, in all L48, besides about L3 fees; so that I do believe
the charges of his journeys, and what he gives those two rogues, and other
expenses herein, cannot be less than L70, which will be a sad thing for
them if a surrender be found.  After all was done, I openly wished them
joy in it, and so rode to Offord with them and there parted fairly without
any words.  I took occasion to bid them money for their half acre of land,
which I had a mind to do that in the surrender I might secure Piggott's,
which otherwise I should be forced to lose.  So with Stankes home and
supped, and after telling my father how things went, I went to bed with my
mind in good temper, because I see the matter and manner of the Court and
the bottom of my business, wherein I was before and should always have
been ignorant.

21st.  All the morning pleasing myself with my father, going up and down
the house and garden with my father and my wife, contriving some
alterations.  After dinner (there coming this morning my aunt Hanes and
her son from London, that is to live with my father) I rode to Huntingdon,
where I met Mr. Philips, and there put my Bugden

     [Bugden, or Buckden, a village and parish in the St. Neots district
     of Huntingdonshire, four miles S.W. of Huntingdon.]

matter in order against the Court, and so to Hinchingbroke, where Mr.
Barnwell shewed me the condition of the house, which is yet very backward,
and I fear will be very dark in the cloyster when it is done. So home and
to supper and to bed, very pleasant and quiet.

22nd (Lord's day).  Before church time walking with my father in the
garden contriving.  So to church, where we had common prayer, and a dull
sermon by one Mr. Case, who yet I heard sing very well.  So to dinner, and
busy with my father about his accounts all the afternoon, and people came
to speak with us about business.  Mr. Barnwell at night came and supped
with us.  So after setting matters even with my father and I, to bed.

23rd.  Up, and sad to hear my father and mother wrangle as they used to do
in London, of which I took notice to both, and told them that I should
give over care for anything unless they would spend what they have with
more love and quiet.  So (John Bowles coming to see us before we go) we
took horse and got early to Baldwick; where there was a fair, and we put
in and eat a mouthfull of pork, which they made us pay 14d. for, which
vexed us much.  And so away to Stevenage, and staid till a showre was
over, and so rode easily to Welling, where we supped well, and had two
beds in the room and so lay single, and still remember it that of all the
nights that ever I slept in my life I never did pass a night with more
epicurism of sleep; there being now and then a noise of people stirring
that waked me, and then it was a very rainy night, and then I was a little
weary, that what between waking and then sleeping again, one after
another, I never had so much content in all my life, and so my wife says
it was with her.

24th.  We rose, and set forth, but found a most sad alteration in the road
by reason of last night's rains, they being now all dirty and washy,
though not deep.  So we rode easily through, and only drinking at
Holloway, at the sign of a woman with cakes in one hand and a pot of ale
in the other, which did give good occasion of mirth, resembling her to the
maid that served us, we got home very timely and well, and finding there
all well, and letters from sea, that speak of my Lord's being well, and
his action, though not considerable of any side, at Argier.--[Algiers]--I
went straight to my Lady, and there sat and talked with her, and so home
again, and after supper we to bed somewhat weary, hearing of nothing ill
since my absence but my brother Tom, who is pretty well though again.

25th.  By coach with Sir W. Pen to Covent Garden.  By the way, upon my
desire, he told me that I need not fear any reflection upon my Lord for
their ill success at Argier, for more could not be done than was done. I
went to my cozen, Thos. Pepys, there, and talked with him a good while
about our country business, who is troubled at my uncle Thomas his folly,
and so we parted; and then meeting Sir R. Slingsby in St. Martin's Lane,
he and I in his coach through the Mewes, which is the way that now all
coaches are forced to go, because of a stop at Charing Cross, by reason of
a drain there to clear the streets.  To Whitehall, and there to Mr.
Coventry, and talked with him, and thence to my Lord Crew's and dined with
him, where I was used with all imaginable kindness both from him and her.
And I see that he is afraid that my Lord's reputacon will a little suffer
in common talk by this late success; but there is no help for it now.  The
Queen of England (as she is now owned and called) I hear doth keep open
Court, and distinct at Lisbon.  Hence, much against my nature and will,
yet such is the power of the Devil over me I could not refuse it, to the
Theatre, and saw "The Merry Wives of Windsor," ill done.  And that ended,
with Sir W. Pen and Sir G. More to the tavern, and so home with him by
coach, and after supper to prayers and to bed.  In full quiet of mind as
to thought, though full of business, blessed be God.

26th.  At the office all the morning, so dined at home, and then abroad
with my wife by coach to the Theatre to shew her "King and no King," it
being very well done.  And so by coach, though hard to get it, being
rainy, home.  So to my chamber to write letters and the journal for these
six last days past.

27th.  By coach to Whitehall with my wife (where she went to see Mrs.
Pierce, who was this day churched, her month of childbed being out).  I
went to Mrs. Montagu and other businesses, and at noon met my wife at the
Wardrobe; and there dined, where we found Captain Country (my little
Captain that I loved, who carried me to the Sound), come with some grapes
and millons

     [The antiquity of the cultivation of the melon is very remote.  Both
     the melon (cucaimis melo) and the water-melon (cucumis citrullus)
     were introduced into England at the end of the sixteenth century.
     See vol. i., p. 228.]

from my Lord at Lisbon, the first that ever I saw any, and my wife and I
eat some, and took some home; but the grapes are rare things.  Here we
staid; and in the afternoon comes Mr. Edwd. Montagu (by appointment this
morning) to talk with my Lady and me about the provisions fit to be
bought, and sent to my Lord along with him.  And told us, that we need not
trouble ourselves how to buy them, for the King would pay for all, and
that he would take care to get them: which put my Lady and me into a great
deal of ease of mind.  Here we staid and supped too, and, after my wife
had put up some of the grapes in a basket for to be sent to the King, we
took coach and home, where we found a hampire of millons sent to me also.

28th.  At the office in the morning, dined at home, and then Sir W. Pen
and his daughter and I and my wife to the Theatre, and there saw "Father's
own Son," a very good play, and the first time I ever saw it, and so at
night to my house, and there sat and talked and drank and merrily broke
up, and to bed.

29th (Lord's day).  To church in the morning, and so to dinner, and Sir W.
Pen and daughter, and Mrs. Poole, his kinswoman, Captain Poole's wife,
came by appointment to dinner with us, and a good dinner we had for them,
and were very merry, and so to church again, and then to Sir W. Pen's and
there supped, where his brother, a traveller, and one that speaks Spanish
very well, and a merry man, supped with us, and what at dinner and supper
I drink I know not how, of my own accord, so much wine, that I was even
almost foxed, and my head aked all night; so home and to bed, without
prayers, which I never did yet, since I came to the house, of a Sunday
night: I being now so out of order that I durst not read prayers, for fear
of being perceived by my servants in what case I was.  So to bed.

30th.  This morning up by moon-shine, at 5 o'clock, to White Hall, to meet
Mr. Moore at the Privy Seal, but he not being come as appointed, I went
into King Street to the Red Lyon' to drink my morning draft, and there I
heard of a fray between the two Embassadors of Spain and France; and that,
this day, being the day of the entrance of an Embassador from Sweden, they
intended to fight for the precedence!  Our King, I heard, ordered that no
Englishman should meddle in the business,

     [The Comte de Brienne insinuates, in his "Memoirs," that Charles
     purposely abstained from interfering, in the belief that it was for
     his interest to let France and Spain quarrel, in order to further
     his own designs in the match with Portugal.  Louis certainly held
     that opinion; and he afterwards instructed D'Estrades to solicit
     from the English court the punishment of those Londoners who had
     insulted his ambassador, and to demand the dismissal of De
     Batteville.  Either no Londoner had interfered, or Louis's demand
     had not in England the same force as in Spain; for no one was
     punished.  The latter part of his request it was clearly not for
     Charles to entertain, much less enforce.--B.]

but let them do what they would.  And to that end all the soldiers in the
town were in arms all the day long, and some of the train-bands in the
City; and a great bustle through the City all the day.  Then I to the
Privy Seal, and there Mr. Moore and a gentleman being come with him, we
took coach (which was the business I come for) to Chelsy, to my Lord Privy
Seal, and there got him to seal the business.  Here I saw by day-light two
very fine pictures in the gallery, that a little while ago I saw by night;
and did also go all over the house, and found it to be the prettiest
contrived house that ever I saw in my life.  So to coach back again; and
at White Hall light, and saw the soldiers and people running up and down
the streets.  So I went to the Spanish Embassador's and the French, and
there saw great preparations on both sides; but the French made the most
noise and vaunted most, the other made no stir almost at all; so that I
was afraid the other would have had too great a conquest over them.  Then
to the Wardrobe, and dined there, end then abroad and in Cheapside hear
that the Spanish hath got the best of it, and killed three of the French
coach-horses and several men, and is gone through the City next to our
King's coach; at which, it is strange to see how all the City did rejoice.
And indeed we do naturally all love the Spanish, and hate the French.  But
I, as I am in all things curious, presently got to the water-side, and
there took oars to Westminster Palace, thinking to have seen them come in
thither with all the coaches, but they being come and returned, I ran
after them with my boy after me through all the dirt and the streets full
of people; till at last, at the Mewes, I saw the Spanish coach go, with
fifty drawn swords at least to guard it, and our soldiers shouting for
joy.  And so I followed the coach, and then met it at York House, where
the embassador lies; and there it went in with great state. So then I went
to the French house, where I observe still, that there is no men in the
world of a more insolent spirit where they do well, nor before they begin
a matter, and more abject if they do miscarry, than these people are; for
they all look like dead men, and not a word among them, but shake their
heads.  The truth is, the Spaniards were not only observed to fight most
desperately, but also they did outwitt them; first in lining their own
harness with chains of iron that they could not be cut, then in setting
their coach in the most advantageous place, and to appoint men to guard
every one of their horses, and others for to guard the coach, and others
the coachmen.  And, above all, in setting upon the French horses and
killing them, for by that means the French were not able to stir.  There
were several men slain of the French, and one or two of the Spaniards, and
one Englishman by a bullet.  Which is very observable, the French were at
least four to one in number, and had near 100 case of pistols among them,
and the Spaniards had not one gun among them; which is for their honour
for ever, and the others' disgrace. So, having been very much daubed with
dirt, I got a coach, and home where I vexed my wife in telling of her this
story, and pleading for the Spaniards against the French.  So ends this
month; myself and family in good condition of health, but my head full of
my Lord's and my own and the office business; where we are now very busy
about the business of sending forces to Tangier,

     [This place so often mentioned, was first given up to the English
     fleet under Lord Sandwich, by the Portuguese, January 30th, 1662;
     and Lord Peterborough left governor, with a garrison.  The greatest
     pains were    afterwards taken to preserve the fortress, and a fine
     mole was constructed at a vast expense, to improve the harbour.  At
     length, after immense sums of money had been wasted there, the House
     of Commons expressed a dislike to the management of the garrison,
     which they suspected to be a nursery for a popish army, and seemed
     disinclined to maintain it any longer.  The king consequently, in
     1683, sent Lord Dartmouth to bring home the troops, and destroy the
     works; which he performed so effectually, that it would puzzle all
     our engineers to restore the harbour.  It were idle to speculate on
     the benefits which might have accrued to England, by its
     preservation and retention; Tangier fell into the hands of the
     Moors, its importance having ceased, with the demolition of the
     mole.  Many curious views of Tangier were taken by Hollar, during
     its occupation by the English; and his drawings are preserved in the
     British Museum.  Some have been engraved by himself; but the
     impressions are of considerable rarity.--B.]

and the fleet to my Lord of Sandwich, who is now at Lisbon to bring over
the Queen, who do now keep a Court as Queen of England.  The business of
Argier hath of late troubled me, because my Lord hath not done what he
went for, though he did as much as any man in the world could have done.
The want of money puts all things, and above all things the Nary, out of
order; and yet I do not see that the King takes care to bring in any
money, but thinks of new designs to lay out money.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                 OCTOBER
                                   1661

October 1st.  This morning my wife and I lay long in bed, and among other
things fell into talk of musique, and desired that I would let her learn
to sing, which I did consider, and promised her she should.  So before I
rose, word was brought me that my singing master, Mr. Goodgroome, was come
to teach me and so she rose and this morning began to learn also. To the
office, where busy all day.  So to dinner and then to the office again
till night, and then to my study at home to set matters and papers in
order, which, though I can hardly bring myself to do, yet do please me
much when it is done.  So eat a bit of bread and cheese, and to bed.

2nd.  All this morning at Pegg Kite's with my uncle Fenner, and two
friends of his, appraising her goods that her mother has left; but the
slut is like to prove so troublesome that I am out of heart with troubling
myself in her business.  After we had done we all went to a cook's shop in
Bishopsgate Street and dined, and then I took them to the tavern and did
give them a quart of sack, and so parted.  I home and then took my wife
out, and in a coach of a gentlewoman's that had been to visit my Lady
Batten and was going home again our way, we went to the Theatre, but
coming late, and sitting in an ill place, I never had so little pleasure
in a play in my life, yet it was the first time that ever I saw it,
"Victoria Corombona."  Methinks a very poor play.  Then at night troubled
to get my wife home, it being very dark, and so we were forced to have a
coach.  So to supper and to bed.

3rd.  At the office all the morning; dined at home, and in the afternoon
Mr. Moore came to me, and he and I went to Tower Hill to meet with a man,
and so back all three to my house, and there I signed a bond to Mr.
Battersby, a friend of Mr. Moore's, who lends me L50, the first money that
ever I borrowed upon bond for my own occasion, and so I took them to the
Mitre and a Portugal millon with me; there sat and discoursed in matters
of religion till night with great pleasure, and so parted, and I home,
calling at Sir W. Batten's, where his son and his wife were, who had
yesterday been at the play where we were, and it was good sport to hear
how she talked of it with admiration like a fool.  So home, and my head
was not well with the wine that I drank to-day.

4th.  By coach to White Hall with Sir W. Pen.  So to Mr. Montagu, where
his man, Mons. Eschar, makes a great com plaint against the English, that
they did help the Spaniards against the French the other day; and that
their Embassador do demand justice of our King, and that he do resolve to
be gone for France the next week; which I, and all that I met with, are
very glad of.  Thence to Paternoster Row, where my Will did receive the
L50 I borrowed yesterday.  I to the Wardrobe to dinner, and there staid
most of the afternoon very merry with the ladies.  Then Captain Ferrers
and I to the Theatre, and there came too late, so we staid and saw a bit
of "Victoria," which pleased me worse than it did the other day.  So we
staid not to see it out, but went out and drank a bottle or two of China
ale, and so home, where I found my wife vexed at her people for grumbling
to eat Suffolk cheese, which I also am vexed at.  So to bed.

5th.  At the office all the morning, then dined at home, and so staid at
home all the afternoon putting up my Lord's model of the Royal James,
which I borrowed of him long ago to hang up in my room.  And at night Sir
W. Pen and I alone to the Dolphin, and there eat some bloat-herrings

     [To bloat is to dry by smoke, a method chiefly used to cure herrings
     or bloaters.  "I have more smoke in my mouth than would blote a
     hundred herrings."--Beaumont and Fletcher, Island Princess.  "Why,
     you stink like so many bloat-herrings newly taken out of the
     chimney."--Ben Jonson, "Masque of Augurs."]

and drank good sack.  Then came in Sir W. Warren and another and staid a
while with us, and then Sir Arnold Brames, with whom we staid late and
till we had drank too much wine.  So home and I to bed pleased at my
afternoon's work in hanging up the shipp.  So to bed.

6th (Lord's day).  To church in the morning; Mr. Mills preached, who, I
expect, should take in snuffe [anger] that my wife not come to his child's
christening the other day.  The winter coming on, many of parish ladies
are come home and appear at church again; among others, the three sisters
the Thornbury's, a very fine, and the most zealous people that ever I saw
in my life, even to admiration, if it were true zeal.  There was also my
pretty black girl, Mrs. Dekins, and Mrs.  Margaret Pen, this day come to
church in a new flowered satin suit that my wife helped to buy her the
other day.  So me to dinner, and to church in the afternoon to St.
Gregory's, by Paul's, where I saw Mr. Moose in the gallery and went up to
him and heard a good sermon of Dr. Buck's, one I never heard before, a
very able man.  So home, and in the evening I went to my Valentine, her
father and mother being out of town, to fetch her to supper to my house,
and then came Sir W. Pen and would have her to his, so with much sport I
got them all to mine, and we were merry, and so broke up and to bed.

7th.  Up in the morning and to my uncle Fenner's, thinking to have met Peg
Kite about her business but she comes not, so I went to Dr. Williams,
where I found him sick in bed and was sorry for it.  So about business all
day, troubled in my mind till I can hear from Brampton, how things go on
at Sturtlow, at the Court, which I was cleared in at night by a letter,
which tells me that my cozen Tom was there to be admitted, in his father's
name, as heir-at-law, but that he was opposed, and I was admitted by
proxy, which put me out of great trouble of mind.

8th.  At the office all the morning.  After office done, went and eat some
Colchester oysters with Sir W. Batten at his house, and there, with some
company; dined and staid there talking all the afternoon; and late after
dinner took Mrs. Martha out by coach, and carried her to the Theatre in a
frolique, to my great expense, and there shewed her part of the "Beggar's
Bush," without much pleasure, but only for a frolique, and so home again.

9th.  This morning went out about my affairs, among others to put my
Theorbo out to be mended, and then at noon home again, thinking to go with
Sir Williams both to dinner by invitation to Sir W. Rider's, but at home I
found Mrs. Pierce, la belle, and Madam Clifford, with whom I was forced to
stay, and made them the most welcome I could; and I was (God knows) very
well pleased with their beautiful company, and after dinner took them to
the Theatre, and shewed them "The Chances;" and so saw them both at home
and back to the Fleece tavern, in Covent Garden, where Luellin and
Blurton, and my old friend Frank Bagge, was to meet me, and there staid
till late very merry.  Frank Bagge tells me a story of Mrs. Pepys that
lived with my Lady Harvy,  Mr. Montagu's sister, a good woman; that she
had been very ill, and often asked for me; that she is in good condition,
and that nobody could get her to make her will; but that she did still
enquire for me, and that now she is well she desires to have a chamber at
my house.  Now I do not know whether this is a trick of Bagge's, or a good
will of hers to do something for me; but I will not trust her, but told
him I should be glad to see her, and that I would be sure to do all that I
could to provide a place for her.  So by coach home late.

10th.  At the office all the morning; dined at home, and after dinner Sir
W. Pen and my wife and I to the Theatre (she first going into Covent
Garden to speak a word with a woman to enquire of her mother, and I in the
meantime with Sir W. Pen's coach staying at W. Joyce's), where the King
came to-day, and there was "The Traytor"  most admirably acted; and a most
excellent play it is.  So home, and intended to be merry, it being my
sixth wedding night; but by a late bruise .  .  .  .  I am in so much pain
that I eat my supper and in pain to bed, yet my wife and I pretty merry.

11th:  All day in bed with a cataplasm .  .  .  .  and at night rose a
little, and to bed again in more ease than last night.  This noon there
came my brother and Dr. Tom and Snow to dinner, and by themselves were
merry.

12th.  In bed the greatest part of this day also, and my swelling in some
measure gone.  I received a letter this day from my father, that Sir R.
Bernard do a little fear that my uncle has not observed exactly the custom
of Brampton in his will about his lands there, which puts me to a great
trouble in mind, and at, night wrote to him and to my father about it,
being much troubled at it.

13th (Lord's day).  Did not stir out all day, but rose and dined below,
and this day left off half skirts and put on a wastecoate, and my false
taby wastecoate with gold lace; and in the evening there came Sir W.
Batten to see me, and sat and supped very kindly with me, and so to
prayers and to bed.

14th.  This morning I ventured by water abroad to Westminster, but lost my
labour, for Mr. Montagu was not in town.  So to the Wardrobe, and there
dined with my Lady, which is the first time I have seen her dine abroad
since her being brought to bed of my Lady Katherine.  In the afternoon
Captain Ferrers and I walked abroad to several places, among others to Mr.
Pim's, my Lord's Taylour's, and there he went out with us to the Fountain
tavern and did give us store of wine, and it being the Duke of York's
birthday, we drank the more to his health.  But, Lord! what a sad story he
makes of his being abused by a Dr. of Physique who is in one part of the
tenement wherein he dwells.  It would make one laugh, though I see he is
under a great trouble in it.  Thence home by link and found a good answer
from my father that Sir R. Bernard do clear all things as to us and our
title to Brampton, which puts my heart in great ease and quiet.

15th.  At the office all the morning, and in the afternoon to Paul's
Churchyard to a blind place, where Mrs. Goldsborough was to meet me (who
dare not be known where she lives) to treat about the difference which
remains between my uncle and her.  But, Lord! to hear how she talks and
how she rails against my uncle would make one mad.  But I seemed not to be
troubled at it, but would indeed gladly have an agreement with her. So I
appoint Mr. Moore and she another against Friday next to look into our
papers and to see what can be done to conclude the matter.  So home in
much pain by walking too much yesterday .  .  .  .  which much troubles
me.

16th.  In bed till 12 o'clock.  This morning came several maids to my wife
to be hired, and at last she pitched upon one Nell, whose mother, an old
woman, came along with her, but would not be hired under half a year,
which I am pleased at their drollness.  This day dined by appointment with
me, Dr. Thos. Pepys and my Coz: Snow, and my brother Tom, upon a fin of
ling and some sounds, neither of which did I ever know before, but most
excellent meat they are both, that in all my life I never eat the like
fish.  So after dinner came in W. Joyce and eat and drank and were merry.
So up to my chamber, and put all my papers, at rights, and in the evening
our maid Mary.  (who was with us upon trial for a month) did take leave of
us, going as we suppose to be married, for the maid liked us and we her,
but all she said was that she had a mind to live in a tradesman's house
where there was but one maid.  So to supper and to bed.

17th.  At the office all the morning, at noon my wife being gone to my coz
Snow's with Dr. Thomas Pepys and my brother Tom to a venison pasty (which
proved a pasty of salted pork); by appointment I went with Captain David
Lambert to the Exchequer, and from thence by appointment he and I were to
meet at a cook's shop to dine.  But before I went to him Captain. Cock, a
merchant I had not long known, took me to the Sun tavern and gave me a
glass of sack, and being a man of great observation and repute, did tell
me that he was confident that the Parliament, when it comes the next month
to sit again, would bring trouble with it, and enquire how the King had
disposed of offices and money, before they will raise more; which, I fear,
will bring all things to ruin again.  Thence to the Cook's and there dined
with Captain Lambert and his father-in-law, and had much talk of
Portugall; from whence he is lately come, and he tells me it is a very
poor dirty place; I mean the City and Court of Lisbon; that the King is a
very rude and simple fellow; and, for reviling of somebody a little while
ago, and calling of him cuckold, was run into .  .  .  .  with a sword and
had been killed, had he not told them that he was their king.  That there
are there no glass windows, nor will they have any; which makes sport
among our merchants there to talk of an English factor that, being newly
come thither, writ into England that glass would be a good commodity to
send thither, &c.  That the King has his meat sent up by a dozen of lazy
guards and in pipkins, sometimes, to his own table; and sometimes nothing
but fruits, and, now and then, half a hen.  And now that the Infanta is
become our Queen, she is come to have a whole hen or goose to her table,
which is not ordinary.  So home and to look over my papers that concern
the difference between Mrs. Goldsborough and us; which cost me much pains,
but contented me much after it was done.  So at home all the evening and
to supper and to bed.

18th.  To White Hall, to Mr. Montagu's, where I met with Mr. Pierce, the
purser, to advise about the things to be sent to my Lord for the Queen's
provision, and was cleared in it, and now there is all haste made, for the
fleet's going.  At noon to my Lord's to dinner, and in the afternoon,
leaving my wife there, Mr. Moore and I to Mrs. Goldsborough, who sent for
a friend to meet with us, and so we were talking about the difference
between us till 10 at night.  I find it very troublesome, and have brought
it into some hopes of an agreement, I offering to forgive her L10 that is
yet due according to my uncle's accounts to us.  So we left her friend to
advise about it, and I hope to hear of her, for I would not by any means
go to law with a woman of so devilish a tongue as she has.  So to my
Lady's, where I left my wife to lie with Mademoiselle all night, and I by
link home and to bed.  This night lying alone, and the weather cold, and
having this last 7 or 8 days been troubled with a tumor .  .  . which is
now abated by a poultice of a good handful of bran with half a pint of
vinegar and a pint of water boiled till it be thick, and then a spoonful
of honey put to it and so spread in a cloth and laid to it, I first put on
my waistcoat to lie in all night this year, and do not intend to put it
off again till spring.  I met with complaints at home that my wife left no
victuals for them all this day.

19th.  At the office all the morning, and at noon Mr. Coventry, who sat
with us all the morning, and Sir G. Carteret, Sir W. Pen, and myself,. by
coach to Captain Marshe's, at Limehouse, to a house that hath been their
ancestors for this 250 years, close by the lime-house which gives the name
to the place.  Here they have a design to get the King to hire a dock for
the herring busses, which is now the great design on foot, to lie up in.
We had a very good and handsome dinner, and excellent wine. I not being
neat in clothes, which I find a great fault in me, could not be so merry
as otherwise, and at all times I am and can be, when I am in good habitt,
which makes me remember my father Osborne's' rule for a gentleman to spare
in all things rather than in that.  So by coach home, and so to write
letters by post, and so to bed.

20th (Lord's day).  At home in bed all the morning to ease my late tumour,
but up to dinner and much offended in mind at a proud trick my man Will
hath got, to keep his hat on in the house, but I will not speak of it to
him to-day; but I fear I shall be troubled with his pride and laziness,
though in other things he is good enough.  To church in the afternoon,
where a sleepy Presbyter preached, and then to Sir W. Batten who is to go
to Portsmouth to-morrow to wait upon the Duke of York, who goes to take
possession and to set in order the garrison there.  Supped at home and to
bed.

21st.  Early with Mr. Moore by coach to Chelsy, to my Lord Privy Seal's,
but have missed of coming time enough; and having taken up Mr. Pargiter,
the goldsmith (who is the man of the world that I do most know and believe
to be a cheating rogue), we drank our morning draft there together of cake
and ale, and did make good sport of his losing so much by the King's
coming in, he having bought much of Crown lands, of which, God forgive me!
I am very glad.  At Whitehall, at the Privy Seal, did with Sir W. Pen take
advice about passing of things of his there that concern his matters of
Ireland.  Thence to the Wardrobe and dined, and so against my judgment and
conscience (which God forgive, for my very heart knows that I offend God
in breaking my vows herein) to the Opera, which is now newly begun to act
again, after some alteracion of their scene, which do make it very much
worse; but the play, "Love and Honour," being the first time of their
acting it, is a very good plot, and well done. So on foot home, and after
a little business done in my study and supper, to bed.

22nd.  At the office all the morning, where we had a deputation from the
Duke in his absence, he being gone to Portsmouth, for us to have the whole
disposal and ordering of the Fleet.  In the afternoon about business up
and down, and at night to visit Sir R. Slingsby, who is fallen sick of
this new disease, an ague and fever.  So home after visiting my aunt Wight
and Mrs. Norbury (who continues still a very pleasant lady), and to
supper, and so to bed.

23rd.  To Whitehall, and there, to drink our morning, Sir W. Pen and I to
a friend's lodging of his (Col. Pr. Swell), and at noon he and I dined
together alone at the Legg in King Street, and so by coach to Chelsy to my
Lord Privy Seal's about business of Sir William's, in which we had a fair
admittance to talk with my Lord, and had his answer, and so back to the
Opera, and there I saw again "Love and Honour," and a very good play it
is.  And thence home, calling by the way to see Sir Robert Slingsby, who
continues ill, and so home.  This day all our office is invited against
Tuesday next, my Lord Mayor's day, to dinner with him at Guildhall.  This
evening Mr. Holliard came and sat with us, and gave us both directions to
observe.

24th.  At the office all morning, at noon Luellin dined with me, and then
abroad to Fleet Street, leaving my wife at Tom's while I went out and did
a little business.  So home again, and went to see Sir Robert [Slingsby],
who continues ill, and this day has not spoke at all, which makes them all
afeard of him.  So home.

25th.  To Whitehall, and so to dinner at the Wardrobe, where my wife met
me, and there we met with a venison pasty, and my Lady very merry and very
handsome, methought.  After dinner my wife and I to the Opera, and there
saw again "Love and Honour," a play so good that it has been acted but
three times and I have seen them all, and all in this week; which is too
much, and more than I will do again a good while.  Coming out of the house
we met Mrs. Pierce and her comrade Mrs. Clifford, and I seeming willing to
stay with them to talk my wife grew angry, and whether she be jealous or
no I know, not, but she loves not that I should speak of Mrs. Pierce.
Home on foot very discontented, in my way I calling at the Instrument
maker, Hunt's, and there saw my lute, which is now almost done, it being
to have a new neck to it and to be made to double strings. So home and to
bed.  This day I did give my man Will a sound lesson about his forbearing
to give us the respect due to a master and mistress.

26th.  This morning Sir W. Pen and I should have gone out of town with my
Lady Batten, to have met Sir William coming back from Portsmouth; at
Kingston, but could not, by reason that my Lord of Peterborough (who is to
go Governor of Tangier) came this morning, with Sir G. Carteret, to advise
with us about completing of the affairs and preparacions for that place.
So at the office all the morning, and in the afternoon Sir W. Pen, my wife
and I to the Theatre, and there saw "The Country Captain," the first time
it hath been acted this twenty-five years, a play of my Lord Newcastle's,
but so silly a play as in all my life I never saw, and the first that ever
I was weary of in my life.  So home again, and in the evening news was
brought that Sir R. Slingsby, our Comptroller (who hath this day been sick
a week), is dead; which put me into so great a trouble of mind, that all
the night I could not sleep, he being a man that loved me, and had many
qualitys that made me to love him above all the officers and commissioners
in the Navy.  Coming home we called at Dan Rawlinson's; and there drank
good sack, and so home.

27th (Lord's day).  At church in the morning; where in the pew both Sir
Williams and I had much talk about the death of Sir Robert, which troubles
me much; and them in appearance, though I do not believe it; because I
know that he was a cheque to their engrossing the whole trade of the Navy
office.  Home to dinner, and in the afternoon to church again, my wife
with me, whose mourning is now grown so old that I am ashamed to go to
church with her.  And after church to see my uncle and aunt Wight, and
there staid and talked and supped with them, and were merry as we could be
in their company.  Among other things going up into their chamber to see
their two pictures, which I am forced to commend against my judgment, and
also she showed us her cabinet, where she had very pretty medals and good
jewels.  So home and to prayers and to bed.

28th.  At the office all the morning, and dined at home, and so to Paul's
Churchyard to Hunt's, and there found my Theorbo done, which pleases me
very well, and costs me 26s. to the altering.  But now he tells me it is
as good a lute as any is in England, and is worth well L10.  Hither I sent
for Captain Ferrers to me, who comes with a friend of his, and they and I
to the Theatre, and there saw "Argalus and Parthenia," where a woman acted
Parthenia, and came afterwards on the stage in men's clothes, and had the
best legs that ever I saw, and I was very well pleased with it.  Thence to
the Ringo alehouse, and thither sent for a belt-maker, and bought of him a
handsome belt for second mourning, which cost me 24s., and is very neat.

29th.  This day I put on my half cloth black stockings and my new coat of
the fashion, which pleases me well, and with my beaver I was (after office
was done) ready to go to my Lord Mayor's feast, as we are all invited; but
the Sir Williams were both loth to go, because of the crowd, and so none
of us went, and I staid and dined with them, and so home, and in evening,
by consent, we met at the Dolphin, where other company came to us, and
should have been merry, but their wine was so naught, and all other things
out of order, that we were not so, but staid long at night, and so home
and to bed.  My mind not pleased with the spending of this day, because I
had proposed a great deal of pleasure to myself this day at Guildhall.
This Lord Mayor, it seems, brings up again the Custom of Lord Mayors going
the day of their installment to Paul's, and walking round about the Cross,
and offering something at the altar.

30th.  All the morning at the office.  At noon played on my Theorbo, and
much pleased therewith; it is now altered with a new neck.  In the
afternoon Captain Lambert called me out by appointment, and we walked
together to Deptford, and there in his ship, the Norwich, I got him to
shew me every hole and corner of the ship, much to my information, and the
purpose of my going.  So home again, and at Sir W. Batten's heard how he
had been already at Sir R. Slingsby's, as we were all invited, and I
intended this night to go, and there he finds all things out of order, and
no such thing done to-night, but pretending that the corps stinks, they
will bury it to-night privately, and so will unbespeak all their guests,
and there shall be no funerall, which I am sorry for, that there should be
nothing done for the honour of Sir Robert, but I fear he hath left his
family in great distraction.  Here I staid till late at cards with my Lady
and Mrs. Martha, and so home.  I sent for a bottle or two of wine thither.
At my coming home I am sorry to find my wife displeased with her maid
Doll, whose fault is that she cannot keep her peace, but will always be
talking in an angry manner, though it be without any reason and to no
purpose, which I am sorry for and do see the inconvenience that do attend
the increase of a man's fortune by being forced to keep more servants,
which brings trouble.  Sir Henry Vane, Lambert, and others, are lately
sent suddenly away from the Tower, prisoners to Scilly; but I do not think
there is any plot as is said, but only a pretence; as there was once
pretended often against the Cavaliers.

31st.  This morning comes Prior of Brampton to me about the house he has
to buy of me, but I was forced to be at the office all the morning, and so
could not talk with him.  And so, after the office was done, and dined at
home, I went to my brother Tom's, and there met him.  He demanded some
abatement, he having agreed with my father for Barton's house, at a price
which I told him I could not meddle with, but that as for anything to
secure his title to them I was ready, and so we parted.  Thence to Sir
Robert Bernard, and as his client did ask his advice about my uncle
Thomas's case and ours as to Gravely, and in short he tells me that there
is little hopes of recovering it or saving his annuity, which do trouble
me much, but God's will be done.  Hence, with my mind full of trouble, to
my uncle Fenner's, when at the alehouse I found him drinking and very
jolly and youthsome, and as one that I believe will in a little time get a
wife.  So home.

     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     And so by coach, though hard to get it, being rainy, home
     But she loves not that I should speak of Mrs. Pierce
     God! what an age is this, and what a world is this
     In men's clothes, and had the best legs that ever I saw
     Inconvenience that do attend the increase of a man's fortune
     Man cannot live without playing the knave and dissimulation
     My head was not well with the wine that I drank to-day
     She is a very good companion as long as she is well
     So much wine, that I was even almost foxed
     Still in discontent with my wife, to bed, and rose so this morn
     This day churched, her month of childbed being out
     Vices of the Court, and how the pox is so common there
     We do naturally all love the Spanish, and hate the French





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Diary of Samuel Pepys,
September/October 1661, by Samuel Pepys

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***

***** This file should be named 4129.txt or 4129.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/4/1/2/4129/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
