The Project Gutenberg EBook of Diary of Samuel Pepys, January/February
1661/62, by Samuel Pepys

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Diary of Samuel Pepys, January/February 1661/62

Author: Samuel Pepys

Release Date: November 29, 2004 [EBook #4132]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***




Produced by David Widger





                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A.  F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

   TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.

                           

1661-62.  January 1st.  Waking this morning out of my sleep on a sudden, I
did with my elbow hit my wife a great blow over her face and nose, which
waked her with pain, at which I was sorry, and to sleep again.  Up and
went forth with Sir W. Pen by coach towards Westminster, and in my way
seeing that the "Spanish Curate" was acted today, I light and let him go
alone, and I home again and sent to young Mr. Pen and his sister to go
anon with my wife and I to the Theatre.  That done, Mr. W. Pen came to me
and he and I walked out, and to the Stacioner's, and looked over some
pictures and traps for my house, and so home again to dinner, and by and
by came the two young Pens, and after we had eat a barrel of oysters we
went by coach to the play, and there saw it well acted, and a good play it
is, only Diego the Sexton did overdo his part too much.  From thence home,
and they sat with us till late at night at cards very merry, but the jest
was Mr. W. Pen had left his sword in the coach, and so my boy and he run
out after the coach, and by very great chance did at the Exchange meet
with the coach and got his sword again.  So to bed.

2nd.  An invitation sent us before we were up from my Lady Sandwich's, to
come and dine with her: so at the office all the morning, and at noon
thither to dinner, where there was a good and great dinner, and the
company, Mr. William Montagu and his Lady (but she seemed so far from the
beauty that I expected her from my Lady's talk to be, that it put me into
an ill humour all the day, to find my expectation so lost), Mr. Rurttball
and Townsend and their wives.  After dinner, borne by water, and so to the
office till night, and then I went forth, by appointment, to meet with Mr.
Grant, who promised to meet me at the Coffee-house to bring me acquainted
with Cooper the great limner in little, but they deceived me, and so I
went home, and there sat at my lute and singing till almost twelve at
night, and so to bed.  Sir Richd. Fanshaw is come suddenly from Portugall,
but nobody knows what his business is.

3rd.  Lay long in bed, and so up and abroad to several places about petty
businesses.  Among others to Tom's, who I find great hopes of that he will
do well, which I am glad of, and am not now so hasty to get a wife for him
as I was before.  So to dinner to my Lord Crew's with him and his Lady,
and after dinner to Faithorne's, and there bought some pictures of him;
and while I was there, comes by the King's life-guard, he being gone to
Lincoln's Inn this afternoon to see the Revells there; there being,
according to an old custom, a prince and all his nobles, and other matters
of sport and charge.  So home, and up to my chamber to look over my papers
and other things, my mind being much troubled for these four or five days
because of my present great expense, and will be so till I cast up and see
how my estate stands, and that I am loth to do for fear I have spent too
much, and delay it the rather that I may pay for my pictures and my
wife's, and the book that I am buying for Paul's School before I do cast
up my accompts.

4th.  At home most of the morning hanging up pictures, and seeing how my
pewter sconces that I have bought will become my stayres and entry, and
then with my wife by water to Westminster, whither she to her father's and
I to Westminster Hall, and there walked a turn or two with Mr. Chetwin
(who had a dog challenged of him by another man that said it was his, but
Mr. Chetwin called the dog, and the dog at last would follow him, and not
his old master, and so Chetwin got the dog) and W. Symons, and thence to
my wife, who met me at my Lord's lodgings, and she and I and old East to
Wilkinson's to dinner, where we had some rost beef and a mutton pie, and a
mince-pie, but none of them pleased me.  After dinner by coach my wife and
I home, and I to the office, and there till late, and then I and my wife
to Sir W. Pen's to cards and supper, and were merry, and much
correspondence there has been between our two families all this Christmas.
So home and to bed.

5th (Lord's day).  Left my wife in bed not well .  .  .  and I to church,
and so home to dinner, and dined alone upon some marrow bones, and had a
fine piece of rost beef, but being alone I eat none.  So after dinner
comes in my brother Tom, and he tells me how he hath seen the father and
mother of the girl which my cozen Joyces would have him to have for a
wife, and they are much for it, but we are in a great quandary what to do
therein, L200 being but a little money; and I hope, if he continues as he
begins, he may look out for one with more.  To church, and before sermon
there was a long psalm, and half another sung out while the Sexton
gathered what the church would give him for this last year.  I gave him
3s., and have the last week given the Clerk 2s., which I set down that I
may know what to do the next year, if it please the Lord that I live so
long; but the jest was, the Clerk begins the 25th psalm, which hath a
proper tune to it, and then the 116th, which cannot be sung with that
tune, which seemed very ridiculous.  After church to Sir W. Batten's,
where on purpose I have not been this fortnight, and I am resolved to keep
myself more reserved to avoyd the contempt which otherwise I must fall
into, and so home and six and talked and supped with my wife, and so up to
prayers and to bed, having wrote a letter this night to Sir J. Mennes in
the Downs for his opinion in the business of striking of flags.

6th (Twelfth day).  This morning I sent my lute to the Paynter's, and
there I staid with him all the morning to see him paint the neck of my
lute in my picture, which I was not pleased with after it was done. Thence
to dinner to Sir W. Pen's, it being a solemn feast day with him, his
wedding day, and we had, besides a good chine of beef and other good
cheer, eighteen mince pies in a dish, the number of the years that he hath
been married, where Sir W. Batten and his Lady, and daughter was, and
Colonel Treswell and Major Holmes, who I perceive would fain get to be
free and friends with my wife, but I shall prevent it, and she herself
hath also a defyance against him.  After dinner they set in to drinking,
so that I would stay no longer, but went away home, and Captain Cock, who
was quite drunk, comes after me, and there sat awhile and so away, and
anon I went again after the company was gone, and sat and played at cards
with Sir W. Pen and his children, and so after supper home, and there I
hear that my man Gull was gone to bed, and upon enquiry I hear that he did
vomit before he went to bed, and complained his head ached, and thereupon
though he was asleep I sent for him out of his bed, and he rose and came
up to me, and I appeared very angry and did tax him with being drunk, and
he told me that he had been with Mr. Southerne and Homewood at the
Dolphin, and drank a quart of sack, but that his head did ache before he
went out.  But I do believe he has drunk too much, and so I did threaten
him to bid his uncle dispose of him some other way, and sent him down to
bed and do resolve to continue to be angry with him.  So to bed to my
wife, and told her what had passed.

7th.  Long in bed, and then rose and went along with Sir W. Pen on foot to
Stepny to Mrs. Chappell's (who has the pretty boy to her son), and there
met my wife and Sir W. Pen's children all, and Mrs. Poole and her boy, and
there dined and' were very merry, and home again by coach and so to the
office.  In the afternoon and at night to Sir W. Pen's, there supped and
played at cards with them and were merry, the children being to go all
away to school again to-morrow.  Thence home and to bed.

8th.  I rose and went to Westminster Hall, and there walked up and down
upon several businesses, and among, others I met with Sir W. Pen, who told
me that he had this morning heard Sir G. Carteret extremely angry against
my man Will that he is every other day with the Commissioners of
Parliament at Westminster, and that his uncle was a rogue, and that he did
tell his uncle every thing that passes at the office, and Sir William,
though he loves the lad, did advise me to part with him, which did with
this surprise mightily trouble me, though I was already angry with him,
and so to the Wardrobe by water, and all the way did examine Will about
the business, but did not tell him upon what score, but I find that the
poor lad do suspect something.  To dinner with my Lady, and after dinner
talked long with her, and so home, and to Sir W. Batten's, and sat and
talked with him, and so home troubled in mind, and so up to my study and
read the two treaties before Mr. Selden's "Mare Clausum," and so to bed.
This night come about L100 from Brampton by carrier to me, in holsters
from my father, which made me laugh.

9th.  At the office all the morning private with Sir G. Carteret (who I
expected something from about yesterday's business, but he said nothing),
Sir W. Batten, and Sir W. Pen, about drawing; up an answer to several
demands of my Lord Treasurer, and late at it till 2 o'clock.  Then to
dinner, and my wife to Sir W. Pen's, and so to the office again and sat
till late; and so home, where I found Mr. Armiger below talking with my
wife, but being offended with him for his leaving of my brother Tom I
shewed him no countenance, but did take notice of it to him plainly, and I
perceive he was troubled at it, but I am glad I told him of it.  Then
(when he was gone) up to write several letters by the post, and so to set
my papers and things in order, and to bed.  This morning we agreed upon
some things to answer to the Duke about the practice of striking of the
flags, which will now put me upon finishing my resolution of writing
something upon the subject.

10th.  To White Hall, and there spoke with Sir Paul Neale' about a
mathematical request of my Lord's to him, which I did deliver to him, and
he promised to employ somebody to answer it, something about observation
of the moon and stars, but what I did not mind.  Here I met with Mr.
Moore, who tells me that an injuncon is granted in Chancery against T.
Trice, at which I was very glad, being before in some trouble for it. With
him to Westminster Hall, where I walked till noon talking with one or
other, and so to the Wardrobe to dinner, where tired with Mr. Pickering's
company I returned to Westminster, by appointment, to meet my wife at Mrs.
Hunt's to gossip with her, which we did alone, and were very merry, and
did give her a cup and spoon for my wife's god-child, and so home by
coach, and I late reading in my chamber and then to bed, my wife being
angry that I keep the house so late up.

11th.  My brother Tom came to me, and he and I to Mr. Turner the Draper's,
and paid L15 to him for cloth owing to him by my father for his mourning
for my uncle, and so to his house, and there invited all the Honiwood's to
dinner on Monday next.  So to the Exchange, and there all the news is of
the French and Dutch joyning against us; but I do not think it yet true.
So home to dinner, and in the afternoon to the office, and so to Sir W.
Batten's, where in discourse I heard the custom of the election of the
Dukes of Genoa, who for two years are every day attended in the greatest
state; and four or five hundred men always waiting upon him as a king; and
when the two years are out, and another is chose, a messenger is, sent to
him, who stands at the bottom of the stairs, and he at the top, and says,
"Va. Illustrissima Serenita sta finita, et puede andar en casa."--"Your
serenity is now ended; and now you may be going home," and so claps on his
hat.  And the old Duke (having by custom sent his goods home before),
walks away, it may be but with one man at his heels; and the new one
brought immediately in his room, in the greatest state in the world.
Another account was told us, how in the Dukedom of Ragusa, in the
Adriatique (a State that is little, but more ancient, they say, than
Venice, and is called the mother of Venice, and the Turks lie round about
it), that they change all the officers of their guard, for fear of
conspiracy, every twenty-four hours, so that nobody knows who shall be
captain of the guard to-night; but two men come to a man, and lay hold of
him as a prisoner, and carry him to the place; and there he hath the keys
of the garrison given him, and he presently issues his orders for that
night's watch: and so always from night to night.  Sir Win. Rider told the
first of his own knowledge; and both he and Sir W. Batten confirm the
last.  Hence home and to read, and so to bed, but very late again.

12th (Lord's day).  To church, where a stranger made a very good sermon.
At noon Sir W. Pen and my good friend Dean Fuller, by appointment, and my
wife's brother by chance, dined with me very merry and handsomely.  After
dinner the Dean, my wife and I by Sir W. Pen's coach left us, he to
Whitehall, and my wife and I to visit Mrs. Pierce and thence Mrs. Turner,
who continues very ill still, and The. is also fallen sick, which do
trouble me for the poor mother.  So home and to read, I being troubled to
hear my wife rate though not without cause at her mayd Nell, who is a lazy
slut.  So to prayers and to bed.

13th.  All the morning at home, and Mr. Berkenshaw (whom I have not seen a
great while, came to see me), who staid with me a great while talking of
musique, and I am resolved to begin to learn of him to compose, and to
begin to-morrow, he giving of me so great hopes that I shall soon do it.
Before twelve o'clock comes, by appointment, Mr. Peter and the Dean, and
Collonel Noniwood, brothers, to dine with me; but so soon that I was
troubled at it.  But, however, I entertained them with talk and oysters
till one o'clock, and then we sat down to dinner, not staying for my uncle
and aunt Wight, at which I was troubled, but they came by and by, and so
we dined very merry, at least I seemed so, but the dinner does not please
me, and less the Dean and Collonel, whom I found to be pitiful sorry
gentlemen, though good-natured, but Mr. Peter above them both, who after
dinner did show us the experiment (which I had heard talk of) of the
chymicall glasses, which break all to dust by breaking off a little small
end; which is a great mystery to me.  They being gone, my aunt Wight and
my wife and I to cards, she teaching of us how to play at gleeke, which is
a pretty game; but I have not my head so free as to be troubled with it.
By and by comes my uncle Wight back, and so to supper and talk, and then
again to cards, when my wife and I beat them two games and they us one,
and so good night and to bed.

14th.  All the morning at home, Mr. Berkenshaw by appointment yesterday
coming to me, and begun composition of musique, and he being gone I to
settle my papers and things in my chamber, and so after dinner in the
afternoon to the office, and thence to my chamber about several businesses
of the office and my own, and then to supper and to bed.  This day my
brave vellum covers to keep pictures in, come in, which pleases me very
much.

15th.  This morning Mr. Berkenshaw came again, and after he had examined
me and taught me something in my work, he and I went to breakfast in my
chamber upon a collar of brawn, and after we had eaten, asked me whether
we had not committed a fault in eating to-day; telling me that it is a
fast day ordered by the Parliament, to pray for more seasonable weather;
it having hitherto been summer weather, that it is, both as to warmth and
every other thing, just as if it were the middle of May or June, which do
threaten a plague (as all men think) to follow, for so it was almost the
last winter; and the whole year after hath been a very sickly time to this
day.  I did not stir out of my house all day, but conned my musique, and
at night after supper to bed.

16th.  Towards Cheapside; and in Paul's Churchyard saw the funeral of my
Lord Cornwallis, late Steward of the King's House, a bold profane talking
man, go by, and thence I to the Paynter's, and there paid him L6 for the
two pictures, and 36s. for the two frames.  From thence home, and Mr.
Holliard and my brother Tom dined with me, and he did give me good advice
about my health.  In the afternoon at the office, and at night to Sir W.
Batten, and there saw him and Captain Cock and Stokes play at cards, and
afterwards supped with them.  Stokes told us, that notwithstanding the
country of Gambo is so unhealthy, yet the people of the place live very
long, so as the present king there is 150 years old, which they count by
rains: because every year it rains continually four months together.  He
also told us, that the kings there have above 100 wives a-piece, and
offered him the choice of any of his wives to lie with, and so he did
Captain Holmes.  So home and to bed.

17th.  To Westminster with Mr. Moore, and there, after several walks up
and down to hear news, I met with Lany, the Frenchman, who told me that he
had a letter from France last night, that tells him that my Lord
Hinchingbroke is dead,--[proved false]--and that he did die yesterday was
se'nnight, which do surprise me exceedingly (though we know that he hath
been sick these two months), so I hardly ever was in my life; but being
fearfull that my Lady should come to hear it too suddenly, he and I went
up to my Lord Crew's, and there I dined with him, and after dinner we told
him, and the whole family is much disturbed by it: so we consulted what to
do to tell my Lady of it; and at last we thought of my going first to Mr.
George Montagu's to hear whether he had any news of it, which I did, and
there found all his house in great heaviness for the death of his son, Mr.
George Montagu, who did go with our young gentlemen into France, and that
they hear nothing at all of our young Lord; so believing that thence comes
the mistake, I returned to my Lord Crew (in my way in the Piazza seeing a
house on fire, and all the streets full of people to quench it), and told
them of it, which they are much glad of, and conclude, and so I hope, that
my Lord is well; and so I went to my Lady Sandwich, and told her all, and
after much talk I parted thence with my wife, who had been there all the
day, and so home to my musique, and then to bed.

18th.  This morning I went to Dr. Williams, and there he told me how T.
Trice had spoke to him about getting me to meet that our difference might
be made up between us by ourselves, which I am glad of, and have appointed
Monday next to be the day.  Thence to the Wardrobe, and there hearing it
would be late before they went to dinner, I went and spent some time in
Paul's Churchyard among some books, and then returned thither, and there
dined with my Lady and Sir H. Wright and his lady, all glad of yesterday's
mistake, and after dinner to the office, and then home and wrote letters
by the post to my father, and by and by comes Mr. Moore to give me an
account how Mr. Montagu was gone away of a sudden with the fleet, in such
haste that he hath left behind some servants, and many things of
consequence; and among others, my Lord's commission for Embassador.
Whereupon he and I took coach, and to White Hall to my Lord's lodgings, to
have spoke with Mr. Ralph Montagu, his brother (and here we staid talking
with Sarah and the old man); but by and by hearing that he was in Covent
Garden, we went thither: and at my Lady Harvy's, his sister, I spoke with
him, and he tells me that the commission is not left behind.  And so I
went thence by the same coach (setting down Mr. Moore) home, and after
having wrote a letter to my Lord at 12 o'clock at night by post I went to
bed.

19th (Lord's day).  To church in the morning, where Mr. Mills preached
upon Christ's being offered up for our sins, and there proving the equity
with what justice God would lay our sins upon his Son, he did make such a
sermon (among other things pleading, from God's universal sovereignty over
all his creatures, the power he has of commanding what he would of his Son
by the same rule as that he might have made us all, and the whole world
from the beginning to have been in hell, arguing from the power the potter
has over his clay), that I could have wished he had let it alone; and
speaking again, the Father is now so satisfied by our security for our
debt, that we might say at the last day as many of us as have interest in
Christ's death: Lord, we owe thee nothing, our debt is paid. We are not
beholden to, thee for anything, for thy debt is paid to thee to the full;
which methinks were very bold words.  Home to dinner, and then my wife and
I on foot to see Mrs. Turner, who continues still sick, and thence into
the Old Bayly by appointment to speak with Mrs. Norbury who lies at (it
falls out) next door to my uncle Fenner's; but as God would have it, we
having no desire to be seen by his people, he having lately married a
midwife that is old and ugly, and that hath already brought home to him a
daughter and three children, we were let in at a back door.  And here she
offered me the refusall of some lands of her's at Brampton, if I have a
mind to buy, which I answered her I was not at present provided to do.
She took occasion to talk of her sister Wight's making much of the Wights,
who for namesake only my uncle do shew great kindness to, so I fear may do
us that are nearer to him a great deal of wrong, if he should die without
children, which I am sorry for.  Thence to my uncle Wight's, and there we
supped and were merry, though my uncle hath lately lost 200 or 300 at sea,
and I am troubled to hear that the Turks do take more and more of our
ships in the Straights, and that our merchants here in London do daily
break, and are still likely to do so. So home, and I put in at Sir W.
Batten's, where Major Holmes was, and in our discourse and drinking I did
give Sir J. Mennes' health, which he swore he would not pledge, and called
him knave and coward (upon the business of Holmes with the Swedish ship
lately), which we all and I particularly did desire him to forbear, he
being of our fraternity, which he took in great dudgeon, and I was vexed
to hear him persist in calling him so, though I believe it to be true, but
however he is to blame and I am troubled at it.  So home and to prayers,
and to bed.

20th.  This morning Sir Win. Batten and Pen and I did begin the examining
the Treasurer's accounts, the first time ever he had passed in the office,
which is very long, and we were all at it till noon, and then to dinner,
he providing a fine dinner for us, and we eat it at Sir W. Batten's, where
we were very merry, there being at table the Treasurer and we three, Mr.
Wayth, Ferrer, Smith, Turner, and Mr. Morrice, the wine cooper, who this
day did divide the two butts, which we four did send for, of sherry from
Cales, and mine was put into a hogshead, and the vessel filled up with
four gallons of Malaga wine, but what it will stand us in I know not: but
it is the first great quantity of wine that I ever bought.  And after
dinner to the office all the afternoon till late at night, and then home,
where my aunt and uncle Wight and Mrs. Anne Wight came to play at cards
(at gleek which she taught me and my wife last week) and so to supper, and
then to cards and so good night.  Then I to my practice of musique and
then at 12 o'clock to bed.  This day the workmen began to make me a sellar
door out of the back yard, which will much please me.

21st.  To the finishing of the Treasurer's accounts this morning, and then
to dinner again, and were merry as yesterday, and so home, and then to the
office till night, and then home to write letters, and to practise my
composition of musique, and then to bed.  We have heard nothing yet how
far the fleet hath got toward Portugall, but the wind being changed again,
we fear they are stopped, and may be beat back again to the coast of
Ireland.

22d.  After musique-practice, to White Hall, and thence to Westminster, in
my way calling at Mr. George Montagu's, to condole him the loss of his
son, who was a fine gentleman, and it is no doubt a great discomfort to
our two young gentlemen, his companions in France.  After this discourse
he told me, among other news, the great jealousys that are now in the
Parliament House.  The Lord Chancellor, it seems, taking occasion from
this late plot to raise fears in the people, did project the raising of an
army forthwith, besides the constant militia, thinking to make the Duke of
York General thereof.  But the House did, in very open terms, say, they
were grown too wise to be fooled again into another army; and said they
had found how that man that hath the command of an army is not beholden to
any body to make him King.  There are factions (private ones at Court)
about Madam Palmer; but what it is about I know not.  But it is something
about the King's favour to her now that the Queen is coming. He told me,
too, what sport the King and Court do make at Mr. Edward Montagu's leaving
his things behind him.  But the Chancellor (taking it a little more
seriously) did openly say to my Lord Chamberlain, that had it been such a
gallant as my Lord Mandeville his son, it might have; been taken as a
frolique; but for him that would be thought a grave coxcomb, it was very
strange.  Thence to the Hall, where I heard the House had ordered all the
King's murderers, that remain, to be executed, but Fleetwood and Downes.
So to the Wardrobe and there dined, meeting my wife there, who went after
dinner with my Lady to see Mr. George Montagu's lady, and I to have a
meeting by appointment with Tho. Trice and Dr. Williams in order to a
treating about the difference between us, but I find there is no hopes of
ending it but by law, and so after a pint or two of wine we parted.  So to
the Wardrobe for my wife again, and so home, and after writing and doing
some things to bed.

23rd.  All the morning with Mr. Berkenshaw, and after him Mr. Moore in
discourse of business, and in the afternoon by coach by invitacon to my
uncle Fenner's, where I found his new wife, a pitiful, old, ugly, illbred
woman in a hatt, a midwife.  Here were many of his, and as many of her
relations, sorry, mean people; and after choosing our gloves, we all went
over to the Three Crane Tavern,' and though the best room in the house, in
such a narrow dogg-hole we were crammed, and I believe we were near forty,
that it made me loathe my company and victuals; and a sorry poor dinner it
was too.  After dinner, I took aside the two Joyce's, and took occasion to
thank them for their kind thoughts for a wife for Tom: but that
considering the possibility there is of my having no child, and what then
I shall be able to leave him, I do think he may expect in that respect a
wife with more money, and so desired them to think no more of it.  Now the
jest was Anthony mistakes and thinks that I did all this while encourage
him (from my thoughts of favour to Tom) to pursue the match till Will
Joyce tells him that he was mistaken.  But how he takes it I know not, but
I endeavoured to tell it him in the most respectful way that I could.
This done with my wife by coach to my aunt Wight's, where I left her, and
I to the office, and that being done to her again, and sat playing at
cards after supper till 12 at night, and so by moonshine home and to bed.

24th.  This morning came my cozen Thos. Pepys the Executor, to speak with
me, and I had much talk with him both about matters of money which my Lord
Sandwich has of his and I am bond for, as also of my uncle Thomas, who I
hear by him do stand upon very high terms.  Thence to my painter's, and
there I saw our pictures in the frames, which please me well.  Thence to
the Wardrobe, where very merry with my Lady, and after dinner I seat for
the pictures thither, and mine is well liked; but she is much offended
with my wife's, and I am of her opinion, that it do much wrong her; but I
will have it altered.  So home, in my way calling at Pope's Head alley,
and there bought me a pair of scissars and a brass square. So home and to
my study and to bed.

25th.  At home and the office all the morning.  Walking in the garden to
give the gardener directions what to do this year (for I intend to have
the garden handsome), Sir W. Pen came to me, and did break a business to
me about removing his son from Oxford to Cambridge to some private
college.  I proposed Magdalene, but cannot name a tutor at present; but I
shall think and write about it.  Thence with him to the Trinity-house to
dinner; where Sir Richard Brown (one of the clerks of the Council, and who
is much concerned against Sir N. Crisp's project of making a great sasse

     [A kind of weir with flood-gate, or a navigable sluice.  This
     project is mentioned by Evelyn, January 16th, 1661-62, and Lysons'
     "Environs" vol. iv., p.  392.--B.]

in the King's lands about Deptford, to be a wett-dock to hold 200 sail of
ships.  But the ground, it seems, was long since given by the King to Sir
Richard) was, and after the Trinity-house men had done their business, the
master, Sir William Rider, came to bid us welcome; and so to dinner, where
good cheer and discourse, but I eat a little too much beef, which made me
sick, and so after dinner we went to the office, and there in a garden I
went in the dark and vomited, whereby I did much ease my stomach.  Thence
to supper with my wife to Sir W. Pen's, his daughter being come home
to-day, not being very well, and so while we were at supper comes Mr.
Moore with letters from my Lord Sandwich, speaking of his lying still at
Tangier, looking for the fleet; which, we hope, is now in a good way
thither.  So home to write letters by the post to-night, and then again to
Sir W. Pen's to cards, where very merry, and so home and to bed.

26th (Lord's day).  To church in the morning, and then home to dinner
alone with my wife, and so both to church in the afternoon and home again,
and so to read and talk with my wife, and to supper and to bed. It having
been a very fine clear frosty day-God send us more of them!--for the warm
weather all this winter makes us fear a sick summer.  But thanks be to
God, since my leaving drinking of wine, I do find myself much better and
do mind my business better, and do spend less money, and less time lost in
idle company.

27th.  This morning, both Sir Williams and I by barge to Deptford-yard to
give orders in businesses there; and called on several ships, also to give
orders, and so to Woolwich, and there dined at Mr. Falconer's of victuals
we carried ourselves, and one Mr. Dekins, the father of my Morena, of whom
we have lately bought some hemp.  That being done we went home again.
This morning, going to take water upon Tower-hill, we met with three
sleddes standing there to carry my Lord Monson and Sir H. Mildmay and
another, to the gallows and back again, with ropes about their necks;
which is to be repeated every year, this being the day of their sentencing
the King.

28th.  This morning (after my musique practice with Mr. Berkenshaw) with
my wife to the Paynter's, where we staid very late to have her picture
mended, which at last is come to be very like her, and I think well done;
but the Paynter, though a very honest man, I found to be very silly as to
matter of skill in shadows, for we were long in discourse, till I was
almost angry to hear him talk so simply.  So home to dinner and then to
the office, and so home for all night.

29th.  To Westminster, and at the Parliament door spoke with Mr. Coventry
about business, and so to the Wardrobe to dinner, and thence to several
places, and so home, where I found Mrs. Pen and Mrs. Rooth and Smith, who
played at cards with my wife, and I did give them a barrel of oysters, and
had a pullet to supper for them, and when it was ready to come to table,
the foolish girl had not the manners to stay and sup with me, but went
away, which did vex me cruelly.  So I saw her home, and then to supper,
and so to musique practice, and to bed.

30th.  Fast-day for the murthering of the late King.  I went to church,
and Mr. Mills made a good sermon upon David's words, "Who can lay his
hands upon the Lord's Anoynted and be guiltless?"  So home and to dinner,
and employed all the afternoon in my chamber, setting things and papers to
rights, which pleased me very well, and I think I shall begin to take
pleasure in being at home and minding my business.  I pray God I may, for
I find a great need thereof.  At night to supper and to bed.

31st.  All the morning, after musique practice, in my cellar, ordering
some alteracons therein, being much pleased with my new door into the back
yard.  So to dinner, and all the afternoon thinking upon business. I did
by night set many things in order, which pleased me well, and puts me upon
a resolution of keeping within doors and minding my business and the
business of the office, which I pray God I may put in practice.  At night
to bed.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                FEBRUARY
                                1661-1962

February 1st.  This morning within till 11 o'clock, and then with
Commissioner Pett to the office; and he staid there writing, while I and
Sir W. Pen walked in the garden talking about his business of putting his
son to Cambridge; and to that end I intend to write to-night to Dr.
Fairebrother, to give me an account of Mr. Burton of Magdalene.  Thence
with Mr. Pett to the Paynter's; and he likes our pictures very well, and
so do I. Thence he and I to the Countess of Sandwich, to lead him to her
to kiss her hands: and dined with her, and told her the news (which Sir W.
Pen told me to-day) that express is come from my Lord with letters, that
by a great storm and tempest the mole of Argier is broken down, and many
of their ships sunk into the mole.  So that God Almighty hath now ended
that unlucky business for us;  which is very good news.  After dinner to
the office, where we staid late, and so I home, and late writing letters
to my father and Dr. Fairebrother, and an angry letter to my brother John
for not writing to me, and so to bed.

2nd (Lord's day).  To church in the morning, and then home and dined with
my wife, and so both of us to church again, where we had an Oxford man
give us a most impertinent sermon upon "Cast your bread upon the waters,
&c.  So home to read, supper, and to prayers, and then to bed.

3rd.  After musique practice I went to the office, and there with the two
Sir Williams all the morning about business, and at noon I dined with Sir
W. Batten with many friends more, it being his wedding-day, and among
other froliques, it being their third year, they had three pyes, whereof
the middlemost was made of an ovall form, in an ovall hole within the
other two, which made much mirth, and was called the middle piece; and
above all the rest, we had great striving to steal a spooneful out of it;
and I remember Mrs. Mills, the minister's wife, did steal one for me and
did give it me; and to end all, Mrs. Shippman did fill the pye full of
white wine, it holding at least a pint and a half, and did drink it off
for a health to Sir William and my Lady, it being the greatest draft that
ever I did see a woman drink in my life.  Before we had dined came Sir G.
Carteret, and we went all three to the office and did business there till
night, and then to Sir W. Batten again, and I went along with my lady and
the rest of the gentlewomen to Major Holmes's, and there we had a fine
supper, among others, excellent lobsters, which I never eat at this time
of the year before.  The Major bath good lodgings at the Trinity House.
Here we staid, and at last home, and, being in my chamber, we do hear
great noise of mirth at Sir William Batten's, tearing the ribbands from my
Lady and him.--[As if they were a newly-married couple.]--So I to bed.

4th.  To Westminster Hall, where it was full term.  Here all the morning,
and at noon to my Lord Crew's, where one Mr. Tempter (an ingenious man and
a person of honour he seems to be) dined; and, discoursing of the nature
of serpents, he told us some that in the waste places of Lancashire do
grow to a great bigness, and that do feed upon larks, which they take
thus: They observe when the lark is soared to the highest, and do crawl
till they come to be just underneath them; and there they place themselves
with their mouths uppermost, and there, as is conceived, they do eject
poyson up to the bird; for the bird do suddenly come down again in its
course of a circle, and falls directly into the mouth of the serpent;
which is very strange.  He is a great traveller; and, speaking of the
tarantula, he says that all the harvest long (about which times they are
most busy) there are fidlers go up and down the fields every where, in
expectation of being hired by those that are stung.  Thence to the office,
where late, and so to my chamber and then to bed, my mind a little
troubled how to put things in order to my advantage in the office in
readiness to the Duke's orders lately sent to us, and of which we are to
treat at the office to-morrow morning.  This afternoon, going into the
office, one met me and did serve a subpoena upon me for one Field, whom we
did commit to prison the other day for some ill words he did give the
office.  The like he had for others, but we shall scour him for it.

5th.  Early at the office.  Sir G. Carteret, the two Sir Williams and
myself all alone reading of the Duke's institutions for the settlement of
our office, whereof we read as much as concerns our own duties, and left
the other officers for another time.  I did move several things for my
purpose, and did ease my mind.  At noon Sir W. Pen dined with me, and
after dinner he and I and my wife to the Theatre, and went in, but being
very early we went out again to the next door, and drank some Rhenish wine
and sugar, and so to the House again, and there saw "Rule a Wife and have
a Wife" very well done.  And here also I did look long upon my Lady
Castlemaine, who, notwithstanding her late sickness, continues a great
beauty.  Home and supped with Sir W. Pen and played at cards with him, and
so home and to bed, putting some cataplasm to my .  .  .  .  which begins
to swell again.

6th.  At my musique practice, and so into my cellar to my workmen, and I
am very much pleased with my alteracon there.  About noon comes my uncle
Thomas to me to ask for his annuity, and I did tell him my mind freely. We
had some high words, but I was willing to end all in peace, and so I made
him' dine with me, and I have hopes to work my end upon him.  After dinner
the barber trimmed me, and so to the office, where I do begin to be exact
in my duty there and exacting my privileges, and shall continue to do so.
None but Sir W. Batten and me here to-night, and so we broke up early, and
I home and to my chamber to put things in order, and so to bed.  My
swelling I think do begin to go away again.

7th.  Among my workmen this morning.  By and by by water to Westminster
with Commissioner Pett (landing my wife at Black Friars) where I hear the
prisoners in the Tower that are to die are come to the Parliament-house
this morning.  To the Wardrobe to dinner with my Lady; where a civitt cat,
parrot, apes, and many other things are come from my Lord by Captain Hill,
who dined with my Lady with us to-day.  Thence to the Paynter's, and am
well pleased with our pictures.  So by coach home, where I found the
joyners putting up my chimney-piece in the dining-room, which pleases me
well, only the frame for a picture they have made so massy and heavy that
I cannot tell what to do with it.  This evening came my she cozen Porter
to see us (the first time that we had seen her since we came to this end
of the town) and after her Mr. Hart, who both staid with us a pretty while
and so went away.  By and by, hearing that Mr. Turner was much troubled at
what I do in the office, and do give ill words to Sir W. Pen and others of
me, I am much troubled in my mind, and so went to bed; not that I fear him
at all, but the natural aptness I have to be troubled at any thing that
crosses me.

8th.  All the morning in the cellar with the colliers, removing the coles
out of the old cole hole into the new one, which cost me 8s. the doing;
but now the cellar is done and made clean, it do please me exceedingly, as
much as any thing that was ever yet done to my house.  I pray God keep me
from setting my mind too much upon it.  About 3 o'clock the colliers
having done I went up to dinner (my wife having often urged me to come,
but my mind is so set upon these things that I cannot but be with the
workmen to see things done to my mind, which if I am not there is seldom
done), and so to the office, and thence to talk with Sir W. Pen, walking
in the dark in the garden some turns, he telling me of the ill management
of our office, and how Wood the timber merchant and others were very
knaves, which I am apt to believe.  Home and wrote letters to my father
and my brother John, and so to bed.  Being a little chillish, intending to
take physique to-morrow morning.

9th (Lord's day).  I took physique this day, and was all day in my
chamber, talking with my wife about her laying out of L20, which I had
long since promised her to lay out in clothes against Easter for herself,
and composing some ayres, God forgive me!  At night to prayers and to bed.

10th.  Musique practice a good while, then to Paul's Churchyard, and there
I met with Dr. Fuller's "England's Worthys," the first time that I ever
saw it; and so I sat down reading in it, till it was two o'clock before I,
thought of the time going, and so I rose and went home to dinner, being
much troubled that (though he had some discourse with me about my family
and arms) he says nothing at all, nor mentions us either in Cambridgeshire
or Norfolk.  But I believe, indeed, our family were never considerable.
At home all the afternoon, and at night to bed.

11th.  Musique, then my brother Tom came, and spoke to him about selling
of Sturtlow, he consents to, and I think will be the best for him,
considering that he needs money, and has no mind to marry.  Dined at home,
and at the office in the afternoon.  So home to musique, my mind being
full of our alteracons in the garden, and my getting of things in the
office settled to the advantage of my clerks, which I found Mr. Turner
much troubled at, and myself am not quiet in mind.  But I hope by degrees
to bring it to it.  At night begun to compose songs, and begin with "Gaze
not on Swans."  So to bed.

12th.  This morning, till four in the afternoon, I spent abroad, doing of
many and considerable businesses at Mr. Phillips the lawyer, with Prior,
Westminster, my Lord Crew's, Wardrobe, &c., and so home about the time of
day to dinner with my mind very highly contented with my day's work,
wishing I could do so every day.  Then to my chamber drawing up writings,
in expectation of my uncle Thomas corning.  So to my musique and then to
bed.  This night I had half a 100 poor Jack--[The "poor john" is a hake
salted and dried.  It is frequently referred to in old authors as poor
fare.]--sent me by Mr. Adis.

13th.  After musique comes my cozen Tom Pepys the executor, and he did
stay with me above two hours discoursing about the difference between my
uncle Thomas and me, and what way there may be to make it up, and I have
hopes we may do good of it for all this.  Then to dinner, and then came
Mr. Kennard, and he and I and Sir W. Pen went up and down his house to
view what may be the contrivance and alterations there to the best
advantage.  So home, where Mr. Blackburne (whom I have not seen a long
time) was come to speak with me, and among other discourse he do tell me
plain of the corruption of all our Treasurer's officers, and that they
hardly pay any money under ten per cent.; and that the other day, for a
mere assignation of L200 to some counties, they took L15 which is very
strange.  So to the office till night, and then home and to write by the
post about many businesses, and so to bed.  Last night died the Queen of
Bohemia.

14th (Valentine's day).  I did this day purposely shun to be seen at Sir
W. Batten's, because I would not have his daughter to be my Valentine, as
she was the last year, there being no great friendship between us now, as
formerly.  This morning in comes W. Bowyer, who was my wife's Valentine,
she having, at which I made good sport to myself, held her hands all the
morning, that she might not see the paynters that were at work in gilding
my chimney-piece and pictures in my diningroom.  By and by she and I by
coach with him to Westminster, by the way leaving at Tom's and my wife's
father's lodgings each of them some poor Jack, and some she carried to my
father Bowyer's, where she staid while I walked in the Hall, and there
among others met with Serj'. Pierce, and I took him aside to drink a cup
of ale, and he told me the basest thing of Mr. Montagu's and his man
Eschar's going away in debt, that I am troubled and ashamed, but glad to
be informed of.  He thinks he has left L1000 for my Lord to pay, and that
he has not laid out L3,000 Out of the L5,000 for my Lord's use, and is not
able to make an account of any of the money.  My wife and I to dinner to
the Wardrobe, and then to talk with my Lady, and so by coach, it raining
hard, home, and so to do business and to bed.

15th.  With the two Sir Williams to the Trinity-house; and there in their
society had the business debated of Sir Nicholas Crisp's sasse at
Deptford.  Then to dinner, and after dinner I was sworn a Younger Brother;
Sir W. Rider being Deputy Master for my Lord of Sandwich; and after I was
sworn, all the Elder Brothers shake me by the hand: it is their custom, it
seems.  Hence to the office, and so to Sir Wm. Batten's all three, and
there we staid till late talking together in complaint of the Treasurer's
instruments.  Above all Mr. Waith, at whose child's christening our wives
and we should have been to-day, but none of them went and I am glad of it,
for he is a very rogue, So home, and drew up our report for Sir N.
Crispe's sasse, and so to bed.  No news yet of our fleet gone to Tangier,
which we now begin to think long.

16th (Lord's day).  To church this morning, and so home and to dinner. In
the afternoon I walked to St. Bride's to church, to hear Dr. Jacomb preach
upon the recovery, and at the request of Mrs. Turner, who came abroad this
day, the first time since her long sickness.  He preached upon David's
words, "I shall not die, but live, and declare the works of the Lord," and
made a pretty good sermon, though not extraordinary. After sermon I led
her home, and sat with her, and there was the Dr. got before us; but
strange what a command he hath got over Mrs. Turner, who was so carefull
to get him what he would, after his preaching, to drink, and he, with a
cunning gravity, knows how to command, and had it, and among other things
told us that he heard more of the Common Prayer this afternoon (while he
stood in the vestry, before he went up into the pulpitt) than he had heard
this twenty years.  Thence to my uncle Wight to meet my wife, and with
other friends of hers and his met by chance we were very merry, and
supped, and so home, not being very well through my usual pain got by
cold.  So to prayers and to bed, and there had a good draft of mulled ale
brought me.

17th.  This morning, both Sir Williams, myself, and Captain Cocke and
Captain Tinker of the Convertine, which we are going to look upon (being
intended to go with these ships fitting for the East Indys), down to
Deptford; and thence, after being on shipboard, to Woolwich, and there eat
something.  The Sir Williams being unwilling to eat flesh,

     [In Lent, of which the observance, intermitted for nineteen years,
     was now reviving.  We have seen that Pepys, as yet, had not cast off
     all show of Puritanism.  "In this month the Fishmongers' Company
     petitioned the King that Lent might be kept, because they had
     provided abundance of fish for this season, and their prayer was
     granted."--Rugge.--B.]

Captain Cocke and I had a breast of veal roasted.  And here I drank wine
upon necessity, being ill for want of it, and I find reason to fear that
by my too sudden leaving off wine, I do contract many evils upon myself.
Going and coming we played at gleeke, and I won 9s. 6d.  clear, the most
that ever I won in my life.  I pray God it may not tempt me to play again.
Being come home again we went to the Dolphin, where Mr. Alcock and my Lady
and Mrs. Martha Batten came to us, and after them many others (as it
always is where Sir W. Batten goes), and there we had some pullets to
supper.  I eat though I was not very well, and after that left them, and
so home and to bed.

18th.  Lay long in bed, then up to the office (we having changed our days
to Tuesday and Saturday in the morning and Thursday at night), and by and
by with Sir W. Pen, Mr. Kennard, and others to survey his house again, and
to contrive for the alterations there, which will be handsome I think.
After we had done at the office, I walked to the Wardrobe, where with Mr.
Moore and Mr. Lewis Phillips after dinner we did agree upon the agreement
between us and Prior and I did seal and sign it.  Having agreed with Sir
Wm. Pen and my wife to meet them at the Opera, and finding by my walking
in the streets, which were every where full of brick-battes and tyles
flung down by the extraordinary wind the last night (such as hath not been
in memory before, unless at the death of the late Protector), that it was
dangerous to go out of doors; and hearing how several persons had been
killed to-day by the fall of things in the streets, and that the pageant
in Fleetstreet is most of it blown down, and hath broke down part of
several houses, among others Dick Brigden's; and that one Lady Sanderson,
a person of quality in Covent Garden, was killed by the fall of the house,
in her bed, last night; I sent my boy home to forbid them to go forth.
But he bringing me word that they are gone, I went thither and there saw
"The Law against Lovers," a good play and well performed, especially the
little girl's (whom I never saw act before) dancing and singing; and were
it not for her, the loss of Roxalana would spoil the house.  So home and
to musique, and so to bed.

19th.  Musique practice: thence to the Trinity House to conclude upon our
report of Sir N. Crisp's project, who came to us to answer objections, but
we did give him no ear, but are resolved to stand to our report; though I
could wish we had shewn him more justice and had heard him. Thence to the
Wardrobe and dined with my Lady, and talked after dinner as I used to do,
and so home and up to my chamber to put things in order to my good
content, and so to musique practice.

20th.  This morning came Mr. Child to see me, and set me something to my
Theorbo, and by and by come letters from Tangier from my Lord, telling me
how, upon a great defete given to the Portuguese there by the Moors, he
had put in 300 men into the town, and so he is in possession, of which we
are very glad, because now the Spaniard's designs of hindering our getting
the place are frustrated.  I went with the letter inclosed to my Lord
Chancellor to the House of Lords, and did give it him in the House. And
thence to the Wardrobe with my Lady's, and there could not stay dinner,
but went by promise to Mr. Savill's, and there sat the first time for my
picture in little, which pleaseth me well.  So to the office till night
and then home.

     ["Sunday, Jan.  12.  This morning, the Portuguese, 140 horse in
     Tangier, made a salley into the country for booty, whereof they had
     possessed about 400 cattle, 30 camels, and some horses, and 35 women
     and girls, and being six miles distant from Tangier, were
     intercepted by 100 Moors with harquebusses, who in the first charge
     killed the Aidill with a shot in the head, whereupon the rest of the
     Portuguese ran, and in the pursuit 51 were slain, whereof were 11 of
     the knights, besides the Aidill.  The horses of the 51 were also
     taken by the Moors, and all the booty relieved.

     "Tuesday, Jan. 14.  This morning, Mr. Mules came to me from the
     Governor, for the assistance of some of our men into the castle.

     "Thursday, Jan. 16.  About 80 men out of my own ship, and the
     Princess, went into Tangier, into the lower castle, about four of
     the clock in the afternoon.

     "Friday, Jan. 17.  In the morning, by eight o'clock, the 'Martyr'
     came in from Cales (Cadiz) with provisions, and about ten a clock I
     sent Sir Richard Stayner, with 120 men, besides officers, to the
     assistance of the Governor, into Tangier."--Lord Sandwich's Journal,
     in Kennet's Register.

     On the 23rd, Lord Sandwich put one hundred more men into Tangier; on
     the 29th and 30th, Lord Peterborough and his garrison arrived from
     England, and received possession from the Portuguese; and, on the
     31st, Sir Richard Stayner and the seamen re-embarked on board Lord
     Sandwich's fleet.--B.]

21st, All the morning putting things in my house in order, and packing up
glass to send into the country to my father, and books to my brother John,
and then to my Lord Crew's to dinner; and thence to Mr. Lewes Philip's
chamber, and there at noon with him for business, and received L80 upon
Jaspar Trice's account, and so home with it, and so to my chamber for all
this evening, and then to bed.

22nd.  At the office busy all the morning, and thence to dinner to my Lady
Sandwich's, and thence with Mr. Moore to our Attorney, Wellpoole's, and
there found that Godfry has basely taken out a judgment against us for the
L40, for which I am vexed.  And thence to buy a pair of stands and a
hanging shelf for my wife's chamber, and so home, and thither came Mr.
Savill with the pictures, and we hung them up in our dining-room. It comes
now to appear very handsome with all my pictures.  This evening I wrote
letters to my father; among other things acquainting him with the unhappy
accident which hath happened lately to my Lord of Dorset's two oldest
sons, who, with two Belasses and one Squire Wentworth, were lately
apprehended for killing and robbing of a tanner about Newington' on
Wednesday last, and are all now in Newgate.  I am much troubled for it,
and for the grief and disgrace it brings to their familys and friends.
After this, having got a very great cold, I got something warm to-night,
and so to bed.

23rd (Lord's day).  My cold being increased, I staid at home all day,
pleasing myself with my dining-room, now graced with pictures, and reading
of Dr. Fuller's "Worthys."  So I spent the day, and at night comes Sir W.
Pen and supped and talked with me.  This day by God's mercy I am 29 years
of age, and in very good health, and like to live and get an estate; and
if I have a heart to be contented, I think I may reckon myself as happy a
man as any is in the world, for which God be praised. So to prayers and to
bed.

24th.  Long with Mr. Berkenshaw in the morning at my musique practice;
finishing my song of "Gaze not on Swans," in two parts, which pleases me
well, and I did give him L5 for this month or five weeks that he hath
taught me, which is a great deal of money and troubled me to part with it.
Thence to the Paynter s, and set again for my picture in little, and
thence over the water to Southwark to Mr. Berkenshaw's house, and there
sat with him all the afternoon, he showing me his great card of the body
of musique, which he cries up for a rare thing, and I do believe it cost
much pains, but is not so useful as he would have it.  Then we sat down
and set "Nulla, nulla sit formido," and he has set it very finely.  So
home and to supper, and then called Will up, and chid him before my wife
for refusing to go to church with the maids yesterday, and telling his
mistress that he would not be made a slave of, which vexes me.  So to bed.

25th.  All the morning at the office.  At noon with Mr. Moore to the
Coffee-house, where among other things the great talk was of the effects
of this late great wind; and I heard one say that he had five great trees
standing together blown down; and, beginning to lop them, one of them, as
soon as the lops were cut off, did, by the weight of the root, rise again
and fasten.  We have letters from the forest of Deane, that above 1000
Oakes and as many beeches are blown down in one walk there.  And letters
from my father tell me of L20 hurt done to us at Brampton.  This day in
the news-book I find that my Lord Buckhurst and his fellows have printed
their case as they did give it in upon examination to a justice of Peace,
wherein they make themselves a very good tale that they were in pursuit of
thieves, and that they took this man for one of them, and so killed him;
and that he himself confessed it was the first time of his robbing; and
that he did pay dearly for it, for he was a dead man.  But I doubt things
will be proved otherwise, as they say.  Home to dinner, and by and by
comes Mr. Hunt and his wife to see us and staid a good, while with us.
Then parted, and I to my study in the office.  The first time since the
alteracon that I have begun to do business myself there, and I think I
shall be well pleased with it.  At night home to supper and to bed.

26th.  Mr. Berkenshaw with me all the morning composing of musique to
"This cursed jealousy, what is it," a song of Sir W. Davenant's.  After
dinner I went to my Bookseller's, W. Joyce's, and several other places to
pay my debts and do business, I being resolved to cast up my accounts
within a day or two, for I fear I have run out too far.  In coming home I
met with a face I knew and challenged him, thinking it had been one of the
Theatre musicians, and did enquire for a song of him, but finding it a
mistake, and that it was a gentleman that comes sometimes to the office, I
was much ashamed, but made a pretty good excuse that I took him for a
gentleman of Gray's Inn who sings well, and so parted.  Home for all night
and set things in order and so to bed.

27th.  This morning came Mr. Berkenshaw to me and in our discourse I,
finding that he cries up his rules for most perfect (though I do grant
them to be very good, and the best I believe that ever yet were made), and
that I could not persuade him to grant wherein they were somewhat lame, we
fell to angry words, so that in a pet he flung out of my chamber and I
never stopped him, having intended to put him off today, whether this had
happened or no, because I think I have all the rules that he hath to give.
And so there remains not the practice now to do me good, and it is not for
me to continue with him at; L5 per month.  So I settled to put all his
rules in fair order in a book, which was my work all the morning till
dinner.  After dinner to the office till late at night, and so home to
write by the post, and so to bed.

28th.  The boy failing to call us up as I commanded, I was angry, and
resolved to whip him for that and many other faults, to-day.  Early with
Sir W. Pen by coach to Whitehall, to the Duke of York's chamber, and there
I presented him from my Lord a fine map of Tangier, done by one Captain
Beckman, a Swede, that is with my Lord.  We staid looking it over a great
while with the Duke after he was ready.  Thence I by water to the
Painter's, and there sat again for my face in little, and thence home to
dinner, and so at home all the afternoon.  Then came Mr. Moore and staid
and talked with me, and then I to the office, there being all the
Admiralty papers brought hither this afternoon from Mr. Blackburne's,
where they have lain all this while ever since my coming into this office.
This afternoon Mr. Hater received half a year's salary for me, so that now
there is not owing me but this quarter, which will be out the next month.
Home, and to be as good as my word, I bade Will get me a rod, and he and I
called the boy up to one of the upper rooms of the Comptroller's house
towards the garden, and there I reckoned all his faults, and whipped him
soundly, but the rods were so small that I fear they did not much hurt to
him, but only to my arm, which I am already, within a quarter of an hour,
not able to stir almost.  After supper to bed.




     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     Aptness I have to be troubled at any thing that crosses me
     Cannot but be with the workmen to see things done to my mind
     Command of an army is not beholden to any body to make him King





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Diary of Samuel Pepys,
January/February 1661/62, by Samuel Pepys

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***

***** This file should be named 4132.txt or 4132.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/4/1/3/4132/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
