The Project Gutenberg EBook of Diary of Samuel Pepys, March/April 1661/62
by Samuel Pepys

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Diary of Samuel Pepys, March/April 1661/62

Author: Samuel Pepys

Release Date: November 30, 2004 [EBook #4133]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***




Produced by David Widger





                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A.  F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                  AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                           DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.

                              MARCH & APRIL
                                1661-1662

March 1st.  This morning I paid Sir W. Batten L40, which I have owed him
this half year, having borrowed it of him.  Then to the office all the
morning, so dined at home, and after dinner comes my uncle Thomas, with
whom I had some high words of difference, but ended quietly, though I fear
I shall do no good by fair means upon him.  Thence my wife and I by coach,
first to see my little picture that is a drawing, and thence to the Opera,
and there saw "Romeo and Juliet," the first time it was ever acted; but it
is a play of itself the worst that ever I heard in my life, and the worst
acted that ever I saw these people do, and I am resolved to go no more to
see the first time of acting, for they were all of them out more or less.
Thence home, and after supper and wrote by the post, I settled to what I
had long intended, to cast up my accounts with myself, and after much
pains to do it and great fear, I do find that I am 1500 in money
beforehand in the world, which I was afraid I was not, but I find that I
had spent above L250 this last half year, which troubles me much, but by
God's blessing I am resolved to take up, having furnished myself with all
things for a great while, and to-morrow to think upon some rules and
obligations upon myself to walk by.  So with my mind eased of a great deal
of trouble, though with no great content to find myself above L100 worse
now than I was half a year ago, I went to bed.

2nd (Lord's day).  With my mind much eased talking long in bed with my
wife about our frugall life for the time to come, proposing to her what I
could and would do if I were worth L2,000, that is, be a knight, and keep
my coach, which pleased her,

     [Lord Braybrooke wrote, "This reminds me of a story of my father's,
     when he was of Merton College, and heard Bowen the porter wish that
     he had L100 a-year, to enable him to keep a couple of hunters and a
     pack of foxhounds."]

and so I do hope we shall hereafter live to save something, for I am
resolved to keep myself by rules from expenses.  To church in the morning:
none in the pew but myself.  So home to dinner, and after dinner came Sir
William and talked with me till church time, and then to church, where at
our going out I was at a loss by Sir W. Pen's putting me upon it whether
to take my wife or Mrs. Martha (who alone was there), and I began to take
my wife, but he jogged me, and so I took Martha, and led her down before
him and my wife.  So set her at home, and Sir William and my wife and I to
walk in the garden, and anon hearing that Sir G. Carteret had sent to see
whether we were at home or no, Sir William and I went to his house, where
we waited a good while, they being at prayers, and by and by we went up to
him; there the business was about hastening the East India ships, about
which we are to meet to-morrow in the afternoon.  So home to my house, and
Sir William supped with me, and so to bed.

3rd.  All the morning at home about business with my brother Tom, and then
with Mr. Moore, and then I set to make some strict rules for my future
practice in my expenses, which I did bind myself in the presence of God by
oath to observe upon penalty therein set down, and I do not doubt but
hereafter to give a good account of my time and to grow rich, for I do
find a great deal more of content in these few days, that I do spend well
about my business, than in all the pleasure of a whole week, besides the
trouble which I remember I always have after that for the expense of my
money.  Dined at home, and then up to my chamber again about business, and
so to the office about despatching of the East India ships, where we staid
till 8 at night, and then after I had been at Sir W. Pen's awhile
discoursing with him and Mr. Kenard the joiner about the new building in
his house, I went home, where I found a vessel of oysters sent me from
Chatham, so I fell to eat some and then to supper, and so after the barber
had done to bed.  I am told that this day the Parliament hath voted 2s.
per annum for every chimney in England, as a constant revenue for ever to
the Crown.

     [Although fumage or smoke money was as old as the Conquest, the
     first parliamentary levy of hearth or chimney money was by statute
     13 and 14 Car. II., c. 10, which gave the king an hereditary revenue
     of two shillings annually upon every hearth in all houses paying
     church or poor rate.  This act was repealed by statute I William and
     Mary, c. 10, it being declared in the preamble as "not only a great
     oppression to the poorer sort, but a badge of slavery upon the whole
     people, exposing every man's house to be entered into and searched
     at pleasure by persons unknown to him."]

4th.  At the office all the morning, dined at home at noon, and then to
the office again in the afternoon to put things in order there, my mind
being very busy in settling the office to ourselves, I having now got
distinct offices for the other two.  By and by Sir W. Pen and I and my
wife in his coach to Moore Fields, where we walked a great while, though
it was no fair weather and cold; and after our walk we went to the Pope's
Head, and eat cakes and other fine things, and so home, and I up to my
chamber to read and write, and so to bed.

5th.  In the morning to the Painter's about my little picture.  Thence to
Tom's about business, and so to the pewterer's, to buy a poore's-box to
put my forfeits in, upon breach of my late vows.  So to the Wardrobe and
dined, and thence home and to my office, and there sat looking over my
papers of my voyage, when we fetched over the King, and tore so many of
these that were worth nothing, as filled my closet as high as my knees. I
staid doing this till 10 at night, and so home and to bed.

6th.  Up early, my mind full of business, then to the office, where the
two Sir Williams and I spent the morning passing the victualler's
accounts, the first I have had to do withal.  Then home, where my Uncle
Thomas (by promise and his son Tom) were come to give me his answer
whether he would have me go to law or arbitracon with him, but he is
unprovided to answer me, and desires two days more.  I left them to dine
with my wife, and myself to Mr. Gauden and the two knights at dinner at
the Dolphin, and thence after dinner to the office back again till night,
we having been these four or five days very full of business, and I thank
God I am well pleased with it, and hope I shall continue of that temper,
which God grant.  So after a little being at Sir W. Batten's with Sir G.
Carteret talking, I went home, and so to my chamber, and then to bed, my
mind somewhat troubled about Brampton affairs.  This night my new camelott
riding coat to my coloured cloth suit came home.  More news to-day of our
losses at Brampton by the late storm.

7th.  Early to White Hall to the chappell, where by Mr. Blagrave's means I
got into his pew, and heard Dr. Creeton, the great Scotchman, preach
before the King, and Duke and Duchess, upon the words of Micah:--"Roule
yourselves in dust."  He made a most learned sermon upon the words; but,
in his application, the most comical man that ever I heard in my life.
Just such a man as Hugh Peters; saying that it had been better for the
poor Cavalier never to have come with the King into England again; for he
that hath the impudence to deny obedience to the lawful magistrate, and to
swear to the oath of allegiance, &c., was better treated now-a-days in
Newgate, than a poor Royalist, that hath suffered all his life for the
King, is at White Hall among his friends.  He discoursed much against a
man's lying with his wife in Lent, saying that he might be as incontinent
during that time with his own wife as at another time in another man's
bed.  Thence with Mr. Moore to Whitehall and walked a little, and so to
the Wardrobe to dinner, and so home to the office about business till late
at night by myself, and so home and to bed.

8th.  By coach with both Sir Williams to Westminster; this being a great
day there in the House to pass the business for chimney-money, which was
done.  In the Hall I met with Serjeant Pierce; and he and I to drink a cup
of ale at the Swan, and there he told me how my Lady Monk hath disposed of
all the places which Mr. Edwd. Montagu hoped to have had, as he was Master
of the Horse to the Queen; which I am afraid will undo him, because he
depended much upon the profit of what he should make by these places.  He
told me, also, many more scurvy stories of him and his brother Ralph,
which troubles me to hear of persons of honour as they are.  About one
o'clock with both Sir Williams and another, one Sir Rich. Branes, to the
Trinity House, but came after they had dined, so we had something got
ready for us.  Here Sir W. Batten was taken with a fit of coughing that
lasted a great while and made him very ill, and so he went home sick upon
it.  Sir W. Pen. and I to the office, whither afterward came Sir G.
Carteret; and we sent for Sir Thos. Allen, one of the Aldermen of the
City, about the business of one Colonel Appesley, whom we had taken
counterfeiting of bills with all our hands and the officers of the yards,
so well counterfeited that I should never have mistrusted them.  We staid
about this business at the office till ten at night, and at last did send
him with a constable to the Counter; and did give warrants for the seizing
of a complice of his, one Blinkinsopp.  So home and wrote to my father,
and so to bed.

9th (Lord's day).  Church in the morning: dined at home, then to Church
again and heard Mr. Naylor, whom I knew formerly of Keye's College, make a
most eloquent sermon.  Thence to Sir W. Batten's to see how he did, then
to walk an hour with Sir W. Pen in the garden: then he in to supper with
me at my house, and so to prayers and to bed.

10th.  At the office doing business all the morning, and my wife being
gone to buy some things in the city I dined with Sir W. Batten, and in the
afternoon met Sir W. Pen at the Treasury Office, and there paid off the
Guift, where late at night, and so called in and eat a bit at Sir W.
Batten's again, and so home and to bed, to-morrow being washing day.

11th.  At the office all the morning, and all the afternoon rummaging of
papers in my chamber, and tearing some and sorting others till late at
night, and so to bed, my wife being not well all this day.  This afternoon
Mrs. Turner and The. came to see me, her mother not having been abroad
many a day before, but now is pretty well again and has made me one of the
first visits.

12th.  At the office from morning till night putting of papers in order,
that so I may have my office in an orderly condition.  I took much pains
in sorting and folding of papers.  Dined at home, and there came Mrs.
Goldsborough about her old business, but I did give her a short answer and
sent away.  This morning we had news from Mr. Coventry, that Sir G.
Downing (like a perfidious rogue, though the action is good and of service
to the King,

     [("And hail the treason though we hate the traitor.") On the 21st
     Charles returned his formal thanks to the States for their
     assistance in the matter.--B.]

yet he cannot with any good conscience do it) hath taken Okey, Corbet, and
Barkestead at Delfe, in Holland, and sent them home in the Blackmore. Sir
W. Pen, talking to me this afternoon of what a strange thing it is for
Downing to do this, he told me of a speech he made to the Lords States of
Holland, telling them to their faces that he observed that he was not
received with the respect and observance now, that he was when he came
from the traitor and rebell Cromwell: by whom, I am sure, he hath got all
he hath in the world,--and they know it too.

     [Charles, when residing at Brussels, went to the Hague at night to
     pay a secret visit to his sister, the Princess of Orange.  After his
     arrival, "an old reverend-like man, with a long grey beard and
     ordinary grey clothes," entered the inn and begged for a private
     interview.  He then fell on his knees, and pulling off his disguise,
     discovered himself to be Mr. Downing, then ambassador from Cromwell
     to the States-General.  He informed Charles that the Dutch had
     guaranteed to the English Commonwealth to deliver him into their
     hands should he ever set foot in their territory.  This warning
     probably saved Charles's liberty.--M. B.]

13th.  All day, either at the office or at home, busy about business till
late at night, I having lately followed my business much, I find great
pleasure in it, and a growing content.

14th.  At the office all the morning.  At noon Sir W. Pen and I making a
bargain with the workmen about his house, at which I did see things not so
well contracted for as I would have, and I was vexed and made him so too
to see me so critical in the agreement.  Home to dinner.  In the afternoon
came the German Dr. Kuffler,

     [This is the secret of Cornelius van Drebbel (1572-1634), which is
     referred to again by Pepys on November 11th, 1663.  Johannes
     Siberius Kuffler was originally a dyer at Leyden, who married
     Drebbel's daughter. In the "Calendar of State Papers, Domestic,"
     1661-62 (p. 327), is the following entry: "Request of Johannes
     Siberius Kuffler and Jacob Drebble for a trial of their father
     Cornelius Drebble's secret of sinking or destroying ships in a
     moment; and if it succeed, for a reward of L10,000. The secret was
     left them by will, to preserve for the English crown before any
     other state."  Cornelius van Drebbel settled in London, where he
     died. James I.  took some interest in him, and is said to have
     interfered when he was in prison in Austria and in danger of
     execution.]

to discourse with us about his engine to blow up ships.  We doubted not
the matter of fact, it being tried in Cromwell's time, but the safety of
carrying them in ships; but he do tell us, that when he comes to tell the
King his secret (for none but the Kings, successively, and their heirs
must know it), it will appear to be of no danger at all.  We concluded
nothing; but shall discourse with the Duke of York to-morrow about it. In
the afternoon, after we had done with him, I went to speak with my uncle
Wight and found my aunt to have been ill a good while of a miscarriage, I
staid and talked with her a good while.  Thence home, where I found that
Sarah the maid had been very ill all day, and my wife fears that she will
have an ague, which I am much troubled for.  Thence to my lute, upon which
I have not played a week or two, and trying over the two songs of "Nulla,
nulla," &c., and "Gaze not on Swans," which Mr. Berkenshaw set for me a
little while ago, I find them most incomparable songs as he has set them,
of which I am not a little proud, because I am sure none in the world has
them but myself, not so much as he himself that set them.  So to bed.

15th.  With Sir G. Carteret and both the Sir Williams at Whitehall to wait
on the Duke in his chamber, which we did about getting money for the Navy
and other things.  So back again to the office all the morning. Thence to
the Exchange to hire a ship for the Maderas, but could get none.  Then
home to dinner, and Sir G. Carteret and I all the afternoon by ourselves
upon business in the office till late at night.  So to write letters and
home to bed. Troubled at my maid's being ill.

16th (Lord's day).  This morning, till churches were done, I spent going
from one church to another and hearing a bit here and a bit there.  So to
the Wardrobe to dinner with the young Ladies, and then into my Lady's
chamber and talked with her a good while, and so walked to White Hall, an
hour or two in the Park, which is now very pleasant.  Here the King and
Duke came to see their fowl play.  The Duke took very civil notice of me.
So walked home, calling at Tom's, giving him my resolution about my boy's
livery.  Here I spent an hour walking in the garden with Sir W. Pen, and
then my wife and I thither to supper, where his son William is at home not
well.  But all things, I fear, do not go well with them; they look
discontentedly, but I know not what ails them. Drinking of cold small beer
here I fell ill, and was forced to go out and vomit, and so was well again
and went home by and by to bed.  Fearing that Sarah would continue ill,
wife and I removed this night to our matted chamber and lay there.

17th.  All the morning at the office by myself about setting things in
order there, and so at noon to the Exchange to see and be seen, and so
home to dinner and then to the office again till night, and then home and
after supper and reading a while to bed.  Last night the Blackmore pink

     [A "pink" was a form of vessel now obsolete, and had a very narrow
     stern. The "Blackmoor" was a sixth-rate of twelve guns, built at
     Chatham by Captain Tayler in 1656.]

brought the three prisoners, Barkestead, Okey, and Corbet, to the Tower,
being taken at Delfe in Holland; where, the Captain tells me, the Dutch
were a good while before they could be persuaded to let them go, they
being taken prisoners in their land.  But Sir G. Downing would not be
answered so: though all the world takes notice of him for a most
ungrateful villain for his pains.

18th.  All the morning at the office with Sir W. Pen.  Dined at home, and
Luellin and Blurton with me.  After dinner to the office again, where Sir
G. Carteret and we staid awhile, and then Sir W. Pen and I on board some
of the ships now fitting for East Indys and Portugall, to see in what
forwardness they are, and so back home again, and I write to my father by
the post about Brampton Court, which is now coming on.  But that which
troubles me is that my Father has now got an ague that I fear may endanger
his life.  So to bed.

19th.  All the morning and afternoon at my office putting things in order,
and in the evening I do begin to digest my uncle the Captain's papers into
one book, which I call my Brampton book, for the clearer understanding
things how they are with us.  So home and supper and to bed.  This noon
came a letter from T. Pepys, the turner, in answer to one of mine the
other day to him, wherein I did cheque him for not coming to me, as he had
promised, with his and his father's resolucion about the difference
between us.  But he writes to me in the very same slighting terms that I
did to him, without the least respect at all, but word for word as I did
him, which argues a high and noble spirit in him, though it troubles me a
little that he should make no more of my anger, yet I cannot blame him for
doing so, he being the elder brother's son, and not depending upon me at
all.

20th.  At my office all the morning, at noon to the Exchange, and so home
to dinner, and then all the afternoon at the office till late at night,
and so home and to bed, my mind in good ease when I mind business, which
methinks should be a good argument to me never to do otherwise.

21st.  With Sir W. Batten by water to Whitehall, and he to Westminster. I
went to see Sarah and my Lord's lodgings, which are now all in dirt, to be
repaired against my Lord's coming from sea with the Queen.  Thence to
Westminster Hall; and there walked up and down and heard the great
difference that hath been between my Lord Chancellor and my Lord of
Bristol, about a proviso that my Lord Chancellor would have brought into
the Bill for Conformity, that it shall be in the power of the King, when
he sees fit, to dispense with the Act of Conformity; and though it be
carried in the House of Lords, yet it is believed it will hardly pass in
the Commons.  Here I met with Chetwind, Parry, and several others, and
went to a little house behind the Lords' house to drink some wormwood ale,
which doubtless was a bawdy house, the mistress of the house having the
look and dress: Here we staid till noon and then parted, I by water to the
Wardrobe to meet my wife, but my Lady and they had dined, and so I dined
with the servants, and then up to my Lady, and there staid and talked a
good while, and then parted and walked into Cheapside, and there saw my
little picture, for which I am to sit again the next week.  So home, and
staid late writing at my office, and so home and to bed, troubled that now
my boy is also fallen sick of an ague we fear.

22nd.  At the office all the morning.  At noon Sir Williams both and I by
water down to the Lewes, Captain Dekins, his ship, a merchantman, where we
met the owners, Sir John Lewes and Alderman Lewes, and several other great
merchants; among others one Jefferys, a merry man that is a fumbler, and
he and I called brothers, and he made all the mirth in the company.  We
had a very fine dinner, and all our wives' healths, with seven or nine
guns apiece; and exceeding merry we were, and so home by barge again, and
I vexed to find Griffin leave the office door open, and had a design to
have carried away the screw or the carpet in revenge to him, but at last I
would not, but sent for him and chid him, and so to supper and to bed,
having drank a great deal of wine.

23rd (Lord's day).  This morning was brought me my boy's fine livery,
which is very handsome, and I do think to keep to black and gold lace upon
gray, being the colour of my arms, for ever.  To church in the morning,
and so home with Sir W. Batten, and there eat some boiled great oysters,
and so home, and while I was at dinner with my wife I was sick, and was
forced to vomit up my oysters again, and then I was well.  By and by a
coach came to call me by my appointment, and so my wife and I carried to
Westminster to Mrs. Hunt's, and I to Whitehall, Worcester House, and to my
Lord Treasurer's to have found Sir G. Carteret, but missed in all these
places.  So back to White Hall, and there met with Captn. Isham, this day
come from Lisbon, with letters from the Queen to the King.  And he did
give me letters which speak that our fleet is all at Lisbon;

     [One of these letters was probably from John Creed.  Mr. S. J.
     Davey, of 47, Great Russell Street, Bloomsbury, in 1889 had in his
     possession nine long letters from Creed to Pepys.  In the first of
     these, dated from Lisbon, March, 1662, Creed wrote: "My Lord
     Embassador doth all he can to hasten the Queen's Majestie's
     embarquement, there being reasons enough against suffering any
     unnecessary delay."  There appear to have been considerable delays
     in the arrangements for the following declaration of Charles II.
     was dated June 22nd, 1661: "Charles R.  Whereas his Maj. is resolved
     to declare, under his Royall hand and seale, the most illustrious
     Lady Infanta of Portugall to be his lawfull wife, before the Treaty
     shall be signed by the King of Portugall; which is to be done only
     for the better expediting the marriage, without sending to Rome for
     a dispensation, which the laws of Portugall would require if the
     said most Illustrious Infanta were to be betrothed in that
     Kingdome," &c.]

and that the Queen do not intend to embarque sooner than tomorrow come
fortnight.  So having sent for my wife, she and I to my Lady Sandwich, and
after a short visit away home.  She home, and I to Sir G. Carteret's about
business, and so home too, and Sarah having her fit we went to bed.

24th.  Early Sir G. Carteret, both Sir Williams and I on board the
Experiment, to dispatch her away, she being to carry things to the
Madeiras with the East Indy fleet.  Here (Sir W. Pen going to Deptford to
send more hands) we staid till noon talking, and eating and drinking a
good ham of English bacon, and having put things in very good order home,
where I found Jane, my old maid, come out of the country, and I have a
mind to have her again.  By and by comes La Belle Pierce to see my wife,
and to bring her a pair of peruques of hair, as the fashion now is for
ladies to wear; which are pretty, and are of my wife's own hair, or else I
should not endure them.  After a good whiles stay, I went to see if any
play was acted, and I found none upon the post, it being Passion week. So
home again, and took water with them towards Westminster; but as we put
off with the boat Griffin came after me to tell me that Sir G. Carteret
and the rest were at the office, so I intended to see them through the
bridge and come back again, but the tide being against us, when we were
almost through we were carried back again with much danger, and Mrs.
Pierce was much afeard and frightened.  So I carried them to the other
side and walked to the Beare, and sent them away, and so back again myself
to the office, but finding nobody there I went again to the Old Swan, and
thence by water to the New Exchange, and there found them, and thence by
coach carried my wife to Bowes to buy something, and while they were there
went to Westminster Hall, and there bought Mr. Grant's book of
observations upon the weekly bills of mortality, which appear to me upon
first sight to be very pretty.  So back again and took my wife, calling at
my brother Tom's, whom I found full of work, which I am glad of, and
thence at the New Exchange and so home, and I to Sir W. Batten's, and
supped there out of pure hunger and to save getting anything ready at
home, which is a thing I do not nor shall not use to do.  So home and to
bed.

26th.  Up early.  This being, by God's great blessing, the fourth solemn
day of my cutting for the stone this day four years, and am by God's mercy
in very good health, and like to do well, the Lord's name be praised for
it.  To the office and Sir G. Carteret's all the morning about business.
At noon come my good guests, Madame Turner, The., and Cozen Norton, and a
gentleman, one Mr. Lewin of the King's Life-Guard; by the same token he
told us of one of his fellows killed this morning in a duel.  I had a
pretty dinner for them, viz., a brace of stewed carps, six roasted
chickens, and a jowl of salmon, hot, for the first course; a tanzy

     [Tansy (tanacetum), a herb from which puddings were made.  Hence any
     pudding of the kind.  Selden ("Table Talk") says: "Our tansies at
     Easter have reference to the bitter herbs."  See in Wordsworth's
     "University Life in the Eighteenth Century" recipes for "an apple
     tansey," "a bean tansey," and "a gooseberry tansey."--M. B.]

and two neats' tongues, and cheese the second; and were very merry all the
afternoon, talking and singing and piping upon the flageolette.  In the
evening they went with great pleasure away, and I with great content and
my wife walked half an hour in the garden, and so home to supper and to
bed.  We had a man-cook to dress dinner to-day, and sent for Jane to help
us, and my wife and she agreed at L3 a year (she would not serve under)
till both could be better provided, and so she stays with us, and I hope
we shall do well if poor Sarah were but rid of her ague.

27th.  Early Sir G. Carteret, both Sir Williams and I by coach to
Deptford, it being very windy and rainy weather, taking a codd and some
prawnes in Fish Street with us.  We settled to pay the Guernsey, a small
ship, but come to a great deal of money, it having been unpaid ever since
before the King came in, by which means not only the King pays wages while
the ship has lain still, but the poor men have most of them been forced to
borrow all the money due for their wages before they receive it, and that
at a dear rate, God knows, so that many of them had very little to receive
at the table, which grieved me to see it.  To dinner, very merry.  Then
Sir George to London, and we again to the pay, and that done by coach home
again and to the office, doing some business, and so home and to bed.

28th (Good Friday).  At home all the morning, and dined with my wife, a
good dinner.  At my office all the afternoon.  At night to my chamber to
read and sing, and so to supper and to bed.

29th.  At the office all the morning.  Then to the Wardrobe, and there
coming late dined with the people below.  Then up to my Lady, and staid
two hours talking with her about her family business with great content
and confidence in me.  So calling at several places I went home, where my
people are getting the house clean against to-morrow.  I to the office and
wrote several letters by post, and so home and to bed.

30th (Easter day).  Having my old black suit new furbished, I was pretty
neat in clothes to-day, and my boy, his old suit new trimmed, very
handsome.  To church in the morning, and so home, leaving the two Sir
Williams to take the Sacrament, which I blame myself that I have hitherto
neglected all my life, but once or twice at Cambridge.

     [This does not accord with the certificate which Dr. Mines wrote in
     1681, where he says that Pepys was a constant communicant.  See Life
     of Pepys in vol. i.]

Dined with my wife, a good shoulder of veal well dressed by Jane, and
handsomely served to table, which pleased us much, and made us hope that
she will serve our turn well enough.  My wife and I to church in the
afternoon, and seated ourselves, she below me, and by that means the
precedence of the pew, which my Lady Batten and her daughter takes, is
confounded; and after sermon she and I did stay behind them in the pew,
and went out by ourselves a good while after them, which we judge a very
fine project hereafter to avoyd contention.  So my wife and I to walk an
hour or two on the leads, which begins to be very pleasant, the garden
being in good condition.  So to supper, which is also well served in. We
had a lobster to supper, with a crabb Pegg Pen sent my wife this
afternoon, the reason of which we cannot think; but something there is of
plot or design in it, for we have a little while carried ourselves pretty
strange to them. After supper to bed.

31st.  This morning Mr. Coventry and all our company met at the office
about some business of the victualling, which being dispatched we parted.
I to my Lord Crew's to dinner (in my way calling upon my brother Tom, with
whom I staid a good while and talked, and find him a man like to do well,
which contents me much), where used with much respect, and talking with
him about my Lord's debts, and whether we should make use of an offer of
Sir G. Carteret's to lend my Lady 4 or L500, he told me by no means, we
must not oblige my Lord to him, and by the by he made a question whether
it was not my Lord's interest a little to appear to the King in debt, and
for people to clamor against him as well as others for their money, that
by that means the King and the world may see that he do lay out for the
King's honour upon his own main stock, which many he tells me do, that in
fine if there be occasion he and I will be bound for it. Thence to Sir
Thomas Crew's lodgings.  He hath been ill, and continues so, under fits of
apoplexy.  Among other things, he and I did discourse much of Mr.
Montagu's base doings, and the dishonour that he will do my Lord, as well
as cheating him of 2 or L3,000, which is too true.  Thence to the play,
where coming late, and meeting with Sir W. Pen, who had got room for my
wife and his daughter in the pit, he and I into one of the boxes, and
there we sat and heard "The Little Thiefe," a pretty play and well done.
Thence home, and walked in the garden with them, and then to the house to
supper and sat late talking, and so to bed.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.

                                APRIL 1662

April 1st.  Within all the morning and at the office.  At noon my wife and
I (having paid our maid Nell her whole wages, who has been with me half a
year, and now goes away for altogether) to the Wardrobe, where my Lady and
company had almost dined.  We sat down and dined.  Here was Mr. Herbert,
son to Sir Charles Herbert, that lately came with letters from my Lord
Sandwich to the King.  After some discourse we remembered one another to
have been together at the tavern when Mr. Fanshaw took his leave of me at
his going to Portugall with Sir Richard.  After dinner he and I and the
two young ladies and my wife to the playhouse, the Opera, and saw "The
Mayde in the Mill," a pretty good play.  In the middle of the play my Lady
Paulina, who had taken physique this morning, had need to go forth, and so
I took the poor lady out and carried her to the Grange, and there sent the
maid of the house into a room to her, and she did what she had a mind to,
and so back again to the play; and that being done, in their coach I took
them to Islington, and then, after a walk in the fields, I took them to
the great cheese-cake house and entertained them, and so home, and after
an hour's stay with my Lady, their coach carried us home, and so weary to
bed.

2nd.  Mr. Moore came to me, and he and I walked to the Spittle an hour or
two before my Lord Mayor and the blewcoat boys come, which at last they
did, and a fine sight of charity it is indeed.  We got places and staid to
hear a sermon; but, it being a Presbyterian one, it was so long, that
after above an hour of it we went away, and I home and dined; and then my
wife and I by water to the Opera, and there saw "The Bondman" most
excellently acted; and though we had seen it so often, yet I never liked
it better than to-day, Ianthe acting Cleora's part very well now Roxalana
is gone.  We are resolved to see no more plays till Whitsuntide, we having
been three days together.  Met Mr. Sanchy, Smithes; Gale, and Edlin at the
play, but having no great mind to spend money, I left them there.  And so
home and to supper, and then dispatch business, and so to bed.

3rd.  At home and at the office all day.  At night to bed.

4th.  By barge Sir George, Sir Williams both and I to Deptford, and there
fell to pay off the Drake and Hampshire, then to dinner, Sir George to his
lady at his house, and Sir Wm. Pen to Woolwich, and Sir W. Batten and I to
the tavern, where much company came to us and our dinner, and somewhat
short by reason of their taking part away with them.  Then to pay the rest
of the Hampshire and the Paradox, and were at it till 9 at night, and so
by night home by barge safe, and took Tom Hater with some that the clerks
had to carry home along with us in the barge, the rest staying behind to
pay tickets, but came home after us that night.  So being come home, to
bed.  I was much troubled to-day to see a dead man lie floating upon the
waters, and had done (they say) these four days, and nobody takes him up
to bury him, which is very barbarous.

5th.  At the office till almost noon, and then broke up.  Then came Sir G.
Carteret, and he and I walked together alone in the garden, taking notice
of some faults in the office, particularly of Sir W. Batten's, and he
seemed to be much pleased with me, and I hope will be the ground of a
future interest of mine in him, which I shall be glad of.  Then with my
wife abroad, she to the Wardrobe and there dined, and I to the Exchange
and so to the Wardrobe, but they had dined.  After dinner my wife and the
two ladies to see my aunt Wight, and thence met me at home.  From thence
(after Sir W. Batten and I had viewed our houses with a workman in order
to the raising of our roofs higher to enlarge our houses) I went with them
by coach first to Moorfields and there walked, and thence to Islington and
had a fine walk in the fields there, and so, after eating and drinking,
home with them, and so by water with my wife home, and after supper to
bed.

6th (Lord's day).  By water to White Hall, to Sir G. Carteret, to give him
an account of the backwardness of the ships we have hired to Portugall: at
which he is much troubled.  Thence to the Chappell, and there, though
crowded, heard a very honest sermon before the King by a Canon of Christ
Church, upon these words, "Having a form of godliness, but denying," &c.
Among other things, did much insist upon the sin of adultery: which
methought might touch the King, and the more because he forced it into his
sermon, methinks, besides his text.  So up and saw the King at dinner; and
thence with Sir G. Carteret to his lodgings to dinner, with him and his
lady, where I saluted her, and was well received as a stranger by her; she
seems a good lady, and all their discourse, which was very much, was upon
their sufferings and services for the King. Yet not without some trouble,
to see that some that had been much bound to them, do now neglect them;
and others again most civil that have received least from them: and I do
believe that he hath been a good servant to the King.  Thence to walk in
the Park, where the King and Duke did walk round the Park.  After I was
tired I went and took boat to Milford stairs, and so to Graye's Inn walks,
the first time I have been there this year, and it is very pleasant and
full of good company.  When tired I walked to the Wardrobe, and there
staid a little with my Lady, and so by water from Paul's Wharf (where my
boat staid for me), home and supped with my wife with Sir W. Pen, and so
home and to bed.

7th.  By water to Whitehall and thence to Westminster, and staid at the
Parliament-door long to speak with Mr. Coventry, which vexed me.  Thence
to the Lords' House, and stood within the House, while the Bishops and
Lords did stay till the Chancellor's coming, and then we were put out, and
they to prayers. There comes a Bishop; and while he was rigging himself,
he bid his man listen at the door, whereabout in the prayers they were but
the man told him something, but could not tell whereabouts it was in the
prayers, nor the Bishop neither, but laughed at the conceit; so went in:
but, God forgive me!  I did tell it by and by to people, and did say that
the man said that they were about something of saving their souls, but
could not tell whereabouts in the prayers that was.  I sent in a note to
my Lord Privy Seal, and he came out to me; and I desired he would make
another deputy for me, because of my great business of the Navy this
month; but he told me he could not do it without the King's consent, which
vexed me.  So to Dr. Castle's, and there did get a promise from his clerk
that his master should officiate for me to-morrow.  Thence by water to
Tom's, and there with my wife took coach and to the old Exchange, where
having bought six large Holland bands, I sent her home, and myself found
out my uncle Wight and Mr. Rawlinson, and with them went to the tatter's
house to dinner, and there had a good dinner of cold meat and good wine,
but was troubled in my head after the little wine I drank, and so home to
my office, and there did promise to drink no more wine but one glass a
meal till Whitsuntide next upon any score.  Mrs. Bowyer and her daughters
being at my house I forbore to go to them, having business and my head
disturbed, but staid at my office till night, and then to walk upon the
leads with my wife, and so to my chamber and thence to bed.  The great
talk is, that the Spaniards and the Hollanders do intend to set upon the
Portuguese by sea, at Lisbon, as soon as our fleet is come away; and by
that means our fleet is not likely to come yet these two months or three;
which I hope is not true.

8th.  Up very early and to my office, and there continued till noon.  So
to dinner, and in comes uncle Fenner and the two Joyces.  I sent for a
barrel of oysters and a breast of veal roasted, and were very merry; but I
cannot down with their dull company and impertinent.  After dinner to the
office again.  So at night by coach to Whitehall, and Mr. Coventry not
being there I brought my business of the office to him, it being almost
dark, and so came away and took up my wife.  By the way home and on
Ludgate Hill there being a stop I bought two cakes, and they were our
supper at home.

9th.  Sir George Carteret, Sir Williams both and myself all the morning at
the office passing the Victualler's accounts, and at noon to dinner at the
Dolphin, where a good chine of beef and other good cheer.  At dinner Sir
George showed me an account in French of the great famine, which is to the
greatest extremity in some part of France at this day, which is very
strange.

     [On the 5th of June following, Louis, notwithstanding the scarcity,
     gave that splendid carousal in the court before the Tuileries, from
     which the place has ever since taken its name.--B.]

So to the Exchange, Mrs. Turner (who I found sick in bed), and several
other places about business, and so home.  Supper and to bed.

10th.  To Westminster with the two Sir Williams by water, and did several
businesses, and so to the Wardrobe with Mr. Moore to dinner.  Yesterday
came Col. Talbot with letters from Portugall, that the Queen is resolved
to embarque for England this week.  Thence to the office all the
afternoon.  My Lord Windsor came to us to discourse of his affairs, and to
take his leave of us; he being to go Governor of Jamaica with this fleet
that is now going.  Late at the office.  Home with my mind full of
business.  So to bed.

11th.  Up early to my lute and a song, then about six o'clock with Sir W.
Pen by water to Deptford; and among the ships now going to Portugall with
men and horse, to see them dispatched.  So to Greenwich; and had a fine
pleasant walk to Woolwich, having in our company Captn. Minnes, with whom
I was much pleased to hear him talk in fine language, but pretty well for
all that. Among other things, he and the other Captains that were with us
tell me that negros drowned look white and lose their blackness, which I
never heard before. At Woolwich, up and down to do the same business; and
so back to Greenwich by water, and there while something is dressing for
our dinner, Sir William and I walked into the Park, where the King hath
planted trees and made steps in the hill up to the Castle, which is very
magnificent.  So up and down the house, which is now repayring in the
Queen's lodgings.  So to dinner at the Globe, and Captain Lambert of the
Duke's pleasure boat came to us and dined with us, and were merry, and so
home, and I in the evening to the Exchange, and spoke with uncle Wight,
and so home and walked with my wife on the leads late, and so the barber
came to me, and so to bed very weary, which I seldom am.

12th.  At the office all the morning, where, among other things, being
provoked by some impertinence of Sir W. Batten's, I called him
unreasonable man, at which he was very angry and so was I, but I think we
shall not much fall out about it.  After dinner to several places about
business, and so home and wrote letters at my office, and one to Mr.
Coventry about business, and at the close did excuse my not waiting on him
myself so often as others do for want of leisure.  So home and to bed.

13th (Lord's day).  In the morning to Paul's, where I heard a pretty good
sermon, and thence to dinner with my Lady at the Wardrobe; and after much
talk with her after dinner, I went to the Temple to Church, and there
heard another: by the same token a boy, being asleep, fell down a high
seat to the ground, ready to break his neck, but got no hurt.  Thence to
Graye's Inn walkes; and there met Mr. Pickering and walked with him two
hours till 8 o'clock till I was quite weary.  His discourse most about the
pride of the Duchess of York; and how all the ladies envy my Lady
Castlemaine.  He intends to go to Portsmouth to meet the Queen this week;
which is now the discourse and expectation of the town.  So home, and no
sooner come but Sir W. Warren comes to me to bring me a paper of Field's
(with whom we have lately had a great deal of trouble at the office),
being a bitter petition to the King against our office for not doing
justice upon his complaint to us of embezzlement of the King's stores by
one Turpin.  I took Sir William to Sir W. Pen's (who was newly come from
Walthamstow), and there we read it and discoursed, but we do not much fear
it, the King referring it to the Duke of York.  So we drank a glass or two
of wine, and so home and I to bed, my wife being in bed already.

14th.  Being weary last night I lay very long in bed to-day, talking with
my wife, and persuaded her to go to Brampton, and take Sarah with her,
next week, to cure her ague by change of ayre, and we agreed all things
therein.  We rose, and at noon dined, and then we to the Paynter's, and
there sat the last time for my little picture, which I hope will please
me.  Then to Paternoster Row to buy things for my wife against her going.
So home and walked upon the leads with my wife, and whether she suspected
anything or no I know not, but she is quite off of her going to Brampton,
which something troubles me, and yet all my design was that I might the
freer go to Portsmouth when the rest go to pay off the yards there, which
will be very shortly.  But I will get off if I can.  So to supper and to
bed.

15th.  At the office all the morning.  Dined at home.  Again at the office
in the afternoon to despatch letters and so home, and with my wife, by
coach, to the New Exchange, to buy her some things; where we saw some
new-fashion pettycoats of sarcenett, with a black broad lace printed round
the bottom and before, very handsome, and my wife had a mind to one of
them, but we did not then buy one.  But thence to Mr. Bowyer's, thinking
to have spoke to them for our Sarah to go to Huntsmore for a while to get
away her ague, but we had not opportunity to do it, and so home and to
bed.

16th.  Up early and took my physique; it wrought all the morning well. At
noon dined, and all the afternoon, Mr. Hater to that end coming to me, he
and I did go about my abstracting all the contracts made in the office
since we came into it.  So at night to bed.

17th.  To Mr. Holliard's in the morning, thinking to be let blood, but he
was gone out.  So to White Hall, thinking to have had a Seal at Privy
Seal, but my Lord did not come, and so I walked back home and staid within
all the afternoon, there being no office kept to-day, but in the evening
Sir W. Batten sent for me to tell me that he had this day spoke to the
Duke about raising our houses, and he hath given us leave to do it, at
which, being glad, I went home merry, and after supper to bed.

18th.  This morning sending the boy down into the cellar for some beer I
followed him with a cane, and did there beat him for his staying of awards
and other faults, and his sister came to me down and begged for him.  So I
forebore, and afterwards, in my wife's chamber, did there talk to Jane how
much I did love the boy for her sake, and how much it do concern to
correct the boy for his faults, or else he would be undone.  So at last
she was well pleased.  This morning Sir G. Carteret, Sir W. Batten and I
met at the office, and did conclude of our going to Portsmouth next week,
in which my mind is at a great loss what to do with my wife, for I cannot
persuade her to go to Brampton, and I am loth to leave her at, home.  All
the afternoon in several places to put things in order for my going.  At
night home and to bed.

19th.  This morning, before we sat, I went to Aldgate; and at the corner
shop, a draper's, I stood, and did see Barkestead, Okey, and Corbet, drawn
towards the gallows at Tiburne; and there they were hanged and quartered.
They all looked very cheerful; but I hear they all die defending what they
did to the King to be just; which is very strange. So to the office and
then home to dinner, and Captain David Lambert came to take his leave of
me, he being to go back to Tangier there to lie. Then abroad about
business, and in the evening did get a bever, an old one, but a very good
one, of Sir W. Batten, for which I must give him something; but I am very
well pleased with it.  So after writing by the post to bed.

20th (Lord's day).  My intention being to go this morning to White Hall to
hear South, my Lord Chancellor's chaplain, the famous preacher and oratour
of Oxford, (who the last Lord's day did sink down in the pulpit before the
King, and could not proceed,) it did rain, and the wind against me, that I
could by no means get a boat or coach to carry me; and so I staid at
Paul's, where the judges did all meet, and heard a sermon, it being the
first Sunday of the term; but they had a very poor sermon. So to my Lady's
and dined, and so to White Hall to Sir G. Carteret, and so to the
Chappell, where I challenged my pew as Clerk of the Privy Seal and had it,
and then walked home with Mr. Blagrave to his old house in the Fishyard,
and there he had a pretty kinswoman that sings, and we did sing some holy
things, and afterwards others came in and so I left them, and by water
through the bridge (which did trouble me) home, and so to bed.

21st: This morning I attempted to persuade my wife in bed to go to
Brampton this week, but she would not, which troubles me, and seeing that
I could keep it no longer from her, I told her that I was resolved to go
to Portsmouth to-morrow.  Sir W. Batten goes to Chatham to-day, and will
be back again to come for Portsmouth after us on Thursday next.  I went to
Westminster and several places about business.  Then at noon dined with my
Lord Crew; and after dinner went up to Sir Thos. Crew's chamber, who is
still ill.  He tells me how my Lady Duchess of Richmond and Castlemaine
had a falling out the other day; and she calls the latter Jane Shore, and
did hope to see her come to the same end that she did. Coming down again
to my Lord, he told me that news was come that the Queen is landed; at
which I took leave, and by coach hurried to White Hall, the bells ringing
in several places; but I found there no such matter, nor anything like it.
So I went by appointment to Anthony Joyce's, where I sat with his wife and
Matt.  Joyce an hour or two, and so her husband not being at home, away I
went and in Cheapside spied him and took him into the coach.  Home, and
there I found my Lady Jemimah, and Anne, and Madamoiselle come to see my
wife, whom I left, and to talk with Joyce about a project I have of his
and my joyning, to get some money for my brother Tom and his kinswoman to
help forward with her portion if they should marry.  I mean in buying of
tallow of him at a low rate for the King, and Tom should have the profit;
but he tells me the profit will be considerable, at which I was troubled,
but I have agreed with him to serve some in my absence.  He went away, and
then came Mr. Moore and sat late with me talking about business, and so
went away and I to bed.

22nd.  After taking leave of my wife, which we could hardly do kindly,
because of her mind to go along with me, Sir W. Pen and I took coach and
so over the bridge to Lambeth, W. Bodham and Tom Hewet going as clerks to
Sir W. Pen, and my Will for me.  Here we got a dish of buttered eggs, and
there staid till Sir G. Carteret came to us from White Hall, who brought
Dr. Clerke with him, at which I was very glad, and so we set out, and I
was very much pleased with his company, and were very merry all the way
. .  .  .   We came to Gilford and there passed our time in the garden,
cutting of sparagus for supper, the best that ever I eat in my life but in
the house last year.  Supped well, and the Doctor and I to bed together,
calling cozens from his name and my office.

23d.  Up early, and to Petersfield, and there  dined well; and thence got
a countryman to guide us by Havant, to avoid going through the Forest; but
he carried us much out of the way, and upon our coming we sent away an
express to Sir W. Batten to stop his coming, which I did project to make
good my oath, that my wife should come if any of our wives came, which my
Lady Batten did intend to do with her husband.  The Doctor and I lay
together at Wiard's, the chyrurgeon's, in Portsmouth, his wife a very
pretty woman.  We lay very well and merrily; in the morning, concluding
him to be of the eldest blood and house of the Clerkes, because that all
the fleas came to him and not to me.

24th.  Up and to Sir G. Carteret's lodgings at Mrs. Stephens's, where we
keep our table all the time we are here.  Thence all of us to the
Pay-house; but the books not being ready, we went to church to the
lecture, where there was my Lord Ormond and Manchester, and much London
company, though not so much as I expected.  Here we had a very good sermon
upon this text: "In love serving one another;" which pleased me very well.
No news of the Queen at all.  So to dinner; and then to the Pay all the
afternoon.  Then W. Pen and I walked to the King's Yard, and there lay at
Mr. Tippets's, where exceeding well treated.

25th.  All the morning at Portsmouth, at the Pay, and then to dinner, and
again to the Pay; and at night got the Doctor to go lie with me, and much
pleased with his company; but I was much troubled in my eyes, by reason of
the healths I have this day been forced to drink.

26th.  Sir George' and I, and his clerk Mr. Stephens, and Mr. Holt our
guide, over to Gosport; and so rode to Southampton.  In our way, besides
my Lord Southampton's' parks and lands, which in one view we could see
L6,000 per annum, we observed a little church-yard, where the graves are
accustomed to be all sowed with sage.

     [Gough says, "It is the custom at this day all over Wales to strew
     the graves, both within and without the church, with green herbs,
     branches of box, flowers, rushes, and flags, for one year, after
     which such as can afford it lay down a stone."--Brand's Popular
     Antiquities, edited W. C. Hazlitt, vol. ii., p. 218.]

At Southampton we went to the Mayor's and there dined, and had sturgeon of
their own catching the last week, which do not happen in twenty years, and
it was well ordered.  They brought us also some caveare, which I attempted
to order, but all to no purpose, for they had neither given it salt
enough, nor are the seedes of the roe broke, but are all in berryes. The
towne is one most gallant street, and is walled round with stone, &c., and
Bevis's picture upon one of the gates; many old walls of religious houses,
and the key, well worth seeing.  After dinner to horse again, being in
nothing troubled but the badness of my hat, which I borrowed to save my
beaver.  Home by night and wrote letters to London, and so with Sir W. Pen
to the Dock to bed.

27th (Sunday).  Sir W. Pen got trimmed before me, and so took the coach to
Portsmouth to wait on my Lord Steward to church, and sent the coach for me
back again.  So I rode to church, and met my Lord Chamberlain upon the
walls of the garrison, who owned and spoke to me.  I followed him in the
crowd of gallants through the Queen's lodgings to chappell; the rooms
being all rarely furnished, and escaped hardly being set on fire
yesterday.  At chappell we had a most excellent and eloquent sermon. And
here I spoke and saluted Mrs. Pierce, but being in haste could not learn
of her where her lodgings are, which vexes me.  Thence took Ned Pickering
to dinner with us, and the two Marshes, father and Son, dined with us, and
very merry.  After dinner Sir W. Batten and I, the Doctor, and Ned
Pickering by coach to the Yard, and there on board the Swallow in the dock
hear our navy chaplain preach a sad sermon, full of nonsense and false
Latin; but prayed for the Right Honourable the principal officers.

     [Principal officers of the navy, of which body Pepys was one as
     Clerk of the Acts.]

After sermon took him to Mr. Tippets's to drink a glass of wine, and so at
4 back again by coach to Portsmouth, and then visited the Mayor, Mr.
Timbrell, our anchor-smith, who showed us the present they have for the
Queen; which is a salt-sellar of silver, the walls christall, with four
eagles and four greyhounds standing up at the top to bear up a dish; which
indeed is one of the neatest pieces of plate that ever I saw, and the case
is very pretty also.

     [A salt-cellar answering this description is preserved at the
     Tower.]

This evening came a merchantman in the harbour, which we hired at London
to carry horses to Portugall; but, Lord!  what running there was to the
seaside to hear what news, thinking it had come from the Queen.  In the
evening Sir George, Sir W. Pen and I walked round the walls, and thence we
two with the Doctor to the yard, and so to supper and to bed.

28th.  The Doctor and I begun philosophy discourse exceeding pleasant. He
offers to bring me into the college of virtuosoes--[The Royal
Society.]--and my Lord Brouncker's acquaintance, and to show me some
anatomy, which makes me very glad; and I shall endeavour it when I come to
London.  Sir W. Pen much troubled upon letters came last night. Showed me
one of Dr. Owen's

     [John Owen, D.D., a learned Nonconformist divine, and a voluminous
     theological writer, born 1616, made Dean of Christ Church in 1653 by
     the Parliament, and ejected in 1659-60.  He died at Ealing in 1683.]

to his son,--[William Penn, the celebrated Quaker.]--whereby it appears
his son is much perverted in his opinion by him; which I now perceive is
one thing that hath put Sir William so long off the hooks.  By coach to
the Pay-house, and so to work again, and then to dinner, and to it again,
and so in the evening to the yard, and supper and bed.

29th.  At the pay all the morning, and so to dinner; and then to it again
in the afternoon, and after our work was done, Sir G. Carteret, Sir W. Pen
and I walked forth, and I spied Mrs. Pierce and another lady passing by.
So I left them and went to the ladies, and walked with them up and down,
and took them to Mrs. Stephens, and there gave them wine and sweetmeats,
and were very merry; and then comes the Doctor, and we carried them by
coach to their lodging, which was very poor, but the best they could get,
and such as made much mirth among us.  So I appointed one to watch when
the gates of the town were ready to be shut, and to give us notice; and so
the Doctor and I staid with them playing and laughing, and at last were
forced to bid good night for fear of being locked into the town all night.
So we walked to the yard, designing how to prevent our going to London
tomorrow, that we might be merry with these ladies, which I did.  So to
supper and merrily to bed.

30th.  This morning Sir G. Carteret came down to the yard, and there we
mustered over all the men and determined of some regulations in the yard,
and then to dinner, all the officers of the yard with us, and after dinner
walk to Portsmouth, there to pay off the Success, which we did pretty
early, and so I took leave of Sir W. Pen, he desiring to know whither I
went, but I would not tell him.  I went to the ladies, and there took them
and walked to the Mayor's to show them the present, and then to the Dock,
where Mr. Tippets made much of them, and thence back again, the Doctor
being come to us to their lodgings, whither came our supper by my
appointment, and we very merry, playing at cards and laughing very merry
till 12 o'clock at night, and so having staid so long (which we had
resolved to stay till they bade us be gone), which yet they did not do but
by consent, we bade them good night, and so past the guards, and went to
the Doctor's lodgings, and there lay with him, our discourse being much
about the quality of the lady with Mrs. Pierce, she being somewhat old and
handsome, and painted and fine, and had a very handsome maid with her,
which we take to be the marks of a bawd.  But Mrs. Pierce says she is a
stranger to her and met by chance in the coach, and pretends to be a
dresser.  Her name is Eastwood.  So to sleep in a bad bed about one
o'clock in the morning.  This afternoon after dinner comes Mr. Stephenson,
one of the burgesses of the town, to tell me that the Mayor and burgesses
did desire my acceptance of a burgess-ship, and were ready at the Mayor's
to make me one.  So I went, and there they were all ready, and did with
much civility give me my oath, and after the oath, did by custom shake me
all by the hand.  So I took them to a tavern and made them drink, and
paying the reckoning, went away.  They having first in the tavern made Mr.
Waith also a burgess, he coming in while we were drinking.  It cost me a
piece in gold to the Town Clerk, and 10s. to the Bayliffes, and spent 6s.




     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     After taking leave of my wife, which we could hardly do kindly
     Agreed at L3 a year (she would not serve under)
     All the fleas came to him and not to me
     Badge of slavery upon the whole people (taxes)
     Did much insist upon the sin of adultery
     Discoursed much against a man's lying with his wife in Lent
     Fearing that Sarah would continue ill, wife and I removed
     Parliament hath voted 2s. per annum for every chimney in England
     Peruques of hair, as the fashion now is for ladies to wear
     Raising of our roofs higher to enlarge our houses
     See a dead man lie floating upon the waters
     Sermon; but, it being a Presbyterian one, it was so long
     To Mr. Holliard's in the morning, thinking to be let blood
     Up early and took my physique; it wrought all the morning well
     Whether he would have me go to law or arbitracon with him
     Whether she suspected anything or no I know not





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Diary of Samuel Pepys, March/April
1661/62, by Samuel Pepys

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***

***** This file should be named 4133.txt or 4133.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/4/1/3/4133/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
