Project Gutenberg's Diary of Samuel Pepys, May/June 1662, by Samuel Pepys

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Diary of Samuel Pepys, May/June 1662

Author: Samuel Pepys

Release Date: November 30, 2004 [EBook #4134]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***




Produced by David Widger





                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A.  F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                               MAY & JUNE
                                   1662

May 1st.  Sir G. Carteret, Sir W. Pen, and myself, with our clerks, set
out this morning from Portsmouth very early, and got by noon to
Petersfield; several officers of the Yard accompanying us so far.  Here we
dined and were merry.  At dinner comes my Lord Carlingford from London,
going to Portsmouth: tells us that the Duchess of York is brought to bed
of a girl,--[Mary, afterwards Queen of England.]--at which I find nobody
pleased; and that Prince Rupert and the Duke of Buckingham are sworn of
the Privy Councell.  He himself made a dish with eggs of the butter of the
Sparagus, which is very fine meat, which I will practise hereafter.  To
horse again after dinner, and got to Gilford, where after supper I to bed,
having this day been offended by Sir W. Pen's foolish talk, and I
offending him with my answers.  Among others he in discourse complaining
of want of confidence, did ask me to lend him a grain or two, which I told
him I thought he was better stored with than myself, before Sir George.
So that I see I must keep a greater distance than I have done, and I hope
I may do it because of the interest which I am making with Sir George.  To
bed all alone, and my Will in the truckle bed.

     [According to the original Statutes of Corpus Christi Coll. Oxon,
     a Scholar slept in a truckle bed below each Fellow.  Called also
     "a trindle bed."  Compare Hall's description of an obsequious tutor:

                              "He lieth in a truckle bed
                    While his young master lieth o'er his head."

                                                  Satires, ii.  6, 5.

     The bed was drawn in the daytime under the high bed of the tutor.
     See Wordsworth's "University Life in the Eighteenth Century."--M. B.]

2nd.  Early to coach again and to Kingston, where we baited a little, and
presently to coach again and got early to London, and I found all well at
home, and Mr. Hunt and his wife had dined with my wife to-day, and been
very kind to my wife in my absence.  After I had washed myself, it having
been the hottest day that has been this year, I took them all by coach to
Mrs. Hunt's, and I to Dr. Clerke's lady, and gave her her letter and
token.  She is a very fine woman, and what with her person and the number
of fine ladies that were with her, I was much out of countenance, and
could hardly carry myself like a man among them; but however, I staid till
my courage was up again, and talked to them, and viewed her house, which
is most pleasant, and so drank and good-night.  And so to my Lord's
lodgings, where by chance I spied my Lady's coach, and found her and my
Lady Wright there, and so I spoke to them, and they being gone went to Mr.
Hunt's for my wife, and so home and to bed.

3rd.  Sir W. Pen and I by coach to St. James's, and there to the Duke's
Chamber, who had been a-hunting this morning and is come back again.
Thence to Westminster, where I met Mr. Moore, and hear that Mr. Watkins'
is suddenly dead since my going.  To dinner to my Lady Sandwich, and Sir
Thomas Crew's children coming thither, I took them and all my Ladys to the
Tower and showed them the lions

     [The Tower Menagerie was not abolished until the reign of
     William IV.]

and all that was to be shown, and so took them to my house, and there made
much of them, and so saw them back to my Lady's.  Sir Thomas Crew's
children being as pretty and the best behaved that ever I saw of their
age.  Thence, at the goldsmith's, took my picture in little,--[Miniature
by Savill]--which is now done, home with me, and pleases me exceedingly
and my wife.  So to supper and to bed, it being exceeding hot.

4th (Lord's day).  Lay long talking with my wife, then Mr. Holliard came
to me and let me blood, about sixteen ounces, I being exceedingly full of
blood and very good.  I begun to be sick; but lying upon my back I was
presently well again, and did give him 5s. for his pains, and so we
parted, and I, to my chamber to write down my journall from the beginning
of my late journey to this house.  Dined well, and after dinner, my arm
tied up with a black ribbon, I walked with my wife to my brother Tom's;
our boy waiting on us with his sword, which this day he begins to wear, to
outdo Sir W. Pen's boy, who this day, and Six W. Batten's too, begin to
wear new livery; but I do take mine to be the neatest of them all.  I led
my wife to Mrs. Turner's pew, and the church being full, it being to hear
a Doctor who is to preach a probacon sermon, I went out to the Temple and
there walked, and so when church was done went to Mrs. Turner's, and after
a stay there, my wife and I walked to Grays Inn, to observe fashions of
the ladies, because of my wife's making some clothes. Thence homewards,
and called in at Antony Joyce's, where we found his wife brought home sick
from church, and was in a convulsion fit.  So home and to Sir W. Pen's and
there supped, and so to prayers at home and to bed.

5th.  My arme not being well, I staid within all the morning, and dined
alone at home, my wife being gone out to buy some things for herself, and
a gown for me to dress myself in.  And so all the afternoon looking over
my papers, and at night walked upon the leads, and so to bed.

6th.  This morning I got my seat set up on the leads, which pleases me
well.  So to the office, and thence to the Change, but could not meet with
my uncle Wight.  So home to dinner and then out again to several places to
pay money and to understand my debts, and so home and walked with my wife
on the leads, and so to supper and to bed.  I find it a hard matter to
settle to business after so much leisure and pleasure.

7th.  Walked to Westminster; where I understand the news that Mr. Montagu
is this last night come to the King with news, that he left the Queen and
fleet in the Bay of Biscay, coming this wayward; and that he believes she
is now at the Isle of Scilly.  So at noon to my Lord Crew's and there
dined, and after dinner Sir Thos. Crew and I talked together, and among
other instances of the simple light discourse that sometimes is in the
Parliament House, he told me how in the late business of Chymny money,
when all occupiers were to pay, it was questioned whether women were under
that name to pay, and somebody rose and said that they were not occupiers,
but occupied.  Thence to Paul's Church Yard; where seeing my Lady's
Sandwich and Carteret, and my wife (who this day made a visit the first
time to my Lady Carteret), come by coach, and going to Hide Park, I was
resolved to follow them; and so went to Mrs. Turner's: and thence found
her out at the Theatre, where I saw the last act of the "Knight of the
Burning Pestle," which pleased me not at all.  And so after the play done,
she and The. Turner and Mrs. Lucin and I, in her coach to the Park; and
there found them out, and spoke to them; and observed many fine ladies,
and staid till all were gone almost.  And so to Mrs. Turner's, and there
supped, and so walked home, and by and by comes my wife home, brought by
my Lady Carteret to the gate, and so to bed.

8th.  At the office all the morning doing business alone, and then to the
Wardrobe, where my, Lady going out with the children to dinner I staid
not, but returned home, and was overtaken in St. Paul's Churchyard by Sir
G. Carteret in his coach, and so he carried me to the Exchange, where I
staid awhile.  He told me that the Queen and the fleet were in Mount's Bay
on Monday last, and that the Queen endures her sickness pretty well. He
also told me how Sir John Lawson hath done some execution upon the Turks
in the Straight, of which I am glad, and told the news the first on the
Exchange, and was much followed by merchants to tell it.  So home and to
dinner, and by and by to the office, and after the rest gone (my Lady
Albemarle being this day at dinner at Sir W. Batten's) Sir G. Carteret
comes, and he and I walked in the garden, and, among other discourse,
tells me that it is Mr. Coventry that is to come to us as a Commissioner
of the Navy; at which he is much vexed, and cries out upon Sir W. Pen, and
threatens him highly.  And looking upon his lodgings, which are now
enlarging, he in passion cried, "Guarda mi spada; for, by God, I may
chance to keep him in Ireland, when he is there:" for Sir W. Pen is going
thither with my Lord Lieutenant.  But it is my design to keep much in with
Sir George; and I think I have begun very well towards it.  So to the
office, and was there late doing business, and so with my head full of
business I to bed.

9th.  Up and to my office, and so to dinner at home, and then to several
places to pay my debts, and then to Westminster to Dr. Castle, who
discoursed with me about Privy Seal business, which I do not much mind, it
being little worth, but by Watkins's--[clerk of the Privy Seal]--late
sudden death we are like to lose money.  Thence to Mr. de Cretz, and there
saw some good pieces that he hath copyed of the King's pieces, some of
Raphael and Michael Angelo; and I have borrowed an Elizabeth of his
copying to hang up in my house, and sent it home by Will.  Thence with Mr.
Salisbury, who I met there, into Covent Garden to an alehouse, to see a
picture that hangs there, which is offered for 20s., and I offered
fourteen--but it is worth much more money--but did not buy it, I having no
mind to break my oath.  Thence to see an Italian puppet play that is
within the rayles there, which is very pretty, the best that ever I saw,
and great resort of gallants.  So to the Temple and by water home, and so
walk upon the leads, and in the dark there played upon my flageolette, it
being a fine still evening, and so to supper and to bed.  This day I paid
Godfrey's debt of 40 and odd pounds.  The Duke of York went last night to
Portsmouth; so that I believe the Queen is near.

10th.  By myself at the office all the morning drawing up instructions for
Portsmouth yard in those things wherein we at our late being there did
think fit to reform, and got them signed this morning to send away
to-night, the Duke being now there.  At noon to the Wardrobe; there dined.
My Lady told me how my Lady Castlemaine do speak of going to lie in at
Hampton Court; which she and all our ladies are much troubled at, because
of the King's being forced to show her countenance in the sight of the
Queen when she comes.  Back to the office and there all afternoon, and in
the evening comes Sir G. Carteret, and he and I did hire a ship for
Tangier, and other things together; and I find that he do single me out to
join with me apart from the rest, which I am much glad of.  So home, and
after being trimmed, to bed.

11th (Lord's day).  To our church in the morning, where, our Minister
being out of town, a dull, flat Presbiter preached.  Dined at home, and my
wife's brother with us, we having a good dish of stewed beef of Jane's own
dressing, which was well done, and a piece of sturgeon of a barrel sent me
by Captain Cocke.  In the afternoon to White Hall; and there walked an
hour or two in the Park, where I saw the King now out of mourning, in a
suit laced with gold and silver, which it was said was out of fashion.
Thence to the Wardrobe; and there consulted with the ladies about our
going to Hampton Court to-morrow, and thence home, and after settled
business there my wife and I to the Wardrobe, and there we lay all night
in Captain Ferrers' chambers, but the bed so soft that I could not sleep
that hot night.

12th.  Mr. Townsend called us up by four o'clock; and by five the three
ladies, my wife and I, and Mr. Townsend, his son and daughter, were got to
the barge and set out.  We walked from Mortlake to Richmond, and so to
boat again.  And from Teddington to Hampton Court Mr. Townsend and I
walked again.  And then met the ladies, and were showed the whole house by
Mr. Marriott; which is indeed nobly furnished, particularly the Queen's
bed, given her by the States of Holland; a looking-glass sent by the
Queen-mother from France, hanging in the Queen's chamber, and many brave
pictures.  So to Mr. Marriott's, and there we rested ourselves and drank.
And so to barge again, and there we had good victuals and wine, and were
very merry; and got home about eight at night very well.  So my wife and I
took leave of my Ladies, and home by a hackney-coach, the easiest that
ever I met with, and so to bed.

14th.  All the morning at Westminster and elsewhere about business, and
dined at the Wardrobe; and after dinner, sat talking an hour or two alone
with my Lady.  She is afeard that my Lady Castlemaine will keep still with
the King, and I am afeard she will not, for I love her well.  Thence to my
brother's, and finding him in a lie about the lining of my new morning
gown, saying that it was the same with the outside, I was very angry with
him and parted so.  So home after an hour stay at Paul's Churchyard, and
there came Mr. Morelock of Chatham, and brought me a stately cake, and I
perceive he has done the same to the rest, of which I was glad; so to bed.

15th.  To Westminster; and at the Privy Seal I saw Mr. Coventry's seal for
his being Commissioner with us, at which I know not yet whether to be glad
or otherwise.  So doing several things by the way, I walked home, and
after dinner to the office all the afternoon.  At night, all the bells of
the town rung, and bonfires made for the joy of the Queen's arrival, who
came and landed at Portsmouth last night.  But I do not see much thorough
joy, but only an indifferent one, in the hearts of people, who are much
discontented at the pride and luxury of the Court, and running in debt.

16th.  Up early, Mr. Hater and I to the office, and there I made an end of
my book of contracts which I have been making an abstract of.  Dined at
home, and spent most of the day at the office.  At night to supper and
bed.

17th.  Upon a letter this morning from Mr. Moore, I went to my cozen
Turner's chamber, and there put him drawing a replication to Tom Trice's
answer speedily.  So to Whitehall and there met Mr. Moore, and I walked
long in Westminster Hall, and thence with him to the Wardrobe to dinner,
where dined Mrs. Sanderson, the mother of the maids, and after dinner my
Lady and she and I on foot to Pater Noster Row to buy a petticoat against
the Queen's coming for my Lady, of plain satin, and other things; and
being come back again, we there met Mr. Nathaniel Crew

     [Nathaniel Crew, born 1633, fifth son of John, first Lord Crew; he
     himself became third Lord Crew in 1697.  Sub-Rector of Lincoln
     College, Oxford, 1659.  Took orders in 1664, and was Rector of
     Lincoln College in 1668; Dean of Chichester, 1669; Bishop of Oxford,
     1671; Bishop of Durham, 1674; sworn of the Privy Council in 1676.
     He was very subservient to James II., and at the Revolution was
     excepted from the general pardon of May, 1690, but he was allowed to
     keep possession of the bishopric of Durham.]

at the Wardrobe with a young gentleman, a friend and fellow student of
his, and of a good family, Mr. Knightly, and known to the Crews, of whom
my Lady privately told me she hath some thoughts of a match for my Lady
Jemimah.  I like the person very well, and he hath L2000 per annum. Thence
to the office, and there we sat, and thence after writing letters to all
my friends with my Lord at Portsmouth, I walked to my brother Tom's to see
a velvet cloak, which I buy of Mr. Moore.  It will cost me L8 10s.; he
bought it for L6 10s., but it is worth my money.  So home and find all
things made clean against to-morrow, which pleases me well.  So to bed.

18th (Whitsunday).  By water to White Hall, and thereto chappell in my pew
belonging to me as Clerk of the Privy Seal; and there I heard a most
excellent sermon of Dr. Hacket, Bishop of Lichfield and Coventry, upon
these words: "He that drinketh this water shall never thirst."  We had an
excellent anthem, sung by Captain Cooke and another, and brave musique.
And then the King came down and offered, and took the sacrament upon his
knees; a sight very well worth seeing.  Hence with Sir G. Carteret to his
lodging to dinner with his Lady and one Mr. Brevin, a French Divine, we
were very merry, and good discourse, and I had much talk with my Lady.
After dinner, and so to chappell again; and there had another good anthem
of Captain Cooke's.  Thence to the Councell-chamber; where the King and
Councell sat till almost eleven o'clock at night, and I forced to walk up
and down the gallerys till that time of night.  They were reading all the
bills over that are to pass to-morrow at the House, before the King's
going out of town and proroguing the House.  At last the Councell risen,
and Sir G. Carteret telling me what the Councell hath ordered about the
ships designed to carry horse from Ireland to Portugall, which is now
altered.  I got a coach and so home, sending the boat away without me. At
home I found my wife discontented at my being abroad, but I pleased her.
She was in her new suit of black sarcenet and yellow petticoat very
pretty.  So to bed.

19th.  Long in bed, sometimes scolding with my wife, and then pleased
again, and at last up, and put on my riding cloth suit, and a camelott
coat new, which pleases me well enough.  To the Temple about my
replication, and so to my brother Tom's, and there hear that my father
will be in town this week.  So home, the shops being but some shut and
some open.  I hear that the House of Commons do think much that they
should be forced to huddle over business this morning against the
afternoon, for the King to pass their Acts, that he may go out of town.

     [To ears accustomed to the official words of speeches from the
     throne at the present day, the familiar tone of the following
     extracts from Charles's speech to the Commons, on the 1st of March;
     will be amusing: "I will conclude with putting you in mind of the
     season of the year, and the convenience of your being in the
     country, in many respects, for the good and welfare of it; for you
     will find much tares have been sowed there in your absence.  The
     arrival of my wife, who I expect some time this month, and the
     necessity of my own being out of town to meet her, and to stay some
     time before she comes hither, makes it very necessary that the
     Parliament be adjourned before Easter, to meet again in the winter .
     .  .  .  .  The mention of my wife's arrival puts me in mind to
     desire you to put that compliment upon her, that her entrance into
     the town may be with more decency than the ways will now suffer it
     to be; and, to that purpose, I pray you would quickly pass such laws
     as are before you, in order to the amending those ways, and that she
     may not find Whitehall surrounded with water."  Such a bill passed
     the Commons on the 24th June.  From Charles's Speech, March 1st,
     1662.--B.]

But he, I hear since, was forced to stay till almost nine o'clock at night
before he could have done, and then he prorogued them; and so to Gilford,
and lay there.  Home, and Mr. Hunt dined with me, and were merry.  After
dinner Sir W. Pen and his daughter, and I and my wife by coach to the
Theatre, and there in a box saw "The Little Thief" well done.  Thence to
Moorefields, and walked and eat some cheesecake and gammon of bacon, but
when I was come home I was sick, forced to vomit it up again.  So my wife
walking and singing upon the leads till very late, it being pleasant and
moonshine, and so to bed.

10th.  Sir W. Pen and I did a little business at the office, and so home
again.  Then comes Dean Fuller after we had dined, but I got something for
him, and very merry we were for an hour or two, and I am most pleased with
his company and goodness.  At last parted, and my wife and I by coach to
the Opera, and there saw the 2nd part of "The Siege of Rhodes," but it is
not so well done as when Roxalana was there, who, it is said, is now owned
by my Lord of Oxford.

     [For note on Mrs. Davenport, who was deceived by a pretended
     marriage with the Earl of Oxford, see ante.  Lord Oxford's first
     wife died in 1659.  He married, in 1672, his second wife, Diana
     Kirke, of whom nothing more need be said than that she bore an
     inappropriate Christian name.]

Thence to Tower-wharf, and there took boat, and we all walked to Halfeway
House, and there eat and drank, and were pleasant, and so finally home
again in the evening, end so good night, this being a very pleasant life
that we now lead, and have long done; the Lord be blessed, and make us
thankful.  But, though I am much against too much spending, yet I do think
it best to enjoy some degree of pleasure now that we have health, money,
and opportunity, rather than to leave pleasures to old age or poverty,
when we cannot have them so properly.

21st.  My wife and I by water to Westminster, and after she had seen her
father (of whom lately I have heard nothing at all what he does or her
mother), she comes to me to my Lord's lodgings, where she and I staid
walking in White Hall garden.  And in the Privy-garden saw the finest
smocks and linnen petticoats of my Lady Castlemaine's, laced with rich
lace at the bottom, that ever I saw; and did me good to look upon them. So
to Wilkinson's, she and I and Sarah to dinner, where I had a good quarter
of lamb and a salat.  Here Sarah told me how the King dined at my Lady
Castlemaine's, and supped, every day and night the last week; and that the
night that the bonfires were made for joy of the Queen's arrivall, the
King was there; but there was no fire at her door, though at all the rest
of the doors almost in the street; which was much observed: and that the
King and she did send for a pair of scales and weighed one another; and
she, being with child, was said to be heaviest. But she is now a most
disconsolate creature, and comes not out of doors, since the King's going.
But we went to the Theatre to "The French Dancing Master," and there with
much pleasure gazed upon her (Lady Castlemaine); but it troubles us to see
her look dejectedly and slighted by people already.  The play pleased us
very well; but Lacy's part, the Dancing Master, the best in the world.
Thence to my brother Tom's, in expectation to have met my father to-night
come out of the country, but he is not yet come, but here we found my
uncle Fenner and his old wife, whom I had not seen since the wedding
dinner, nor care to see her.  They being gone, my wife and I went and saw
Mrs. Turner, whom we found not well, and her two boys Charles and Will
come out of the country, grown very plain boys after three years being
under their father's care in Yorkshire.  Thence to Tom's again, and there
supped well, my she cozen Scott being there and my father being not come,
we walked home and to bed.

22d.  This morning comes an order from the Secretary of State, Nicholas,
for me to let one Mr. Lee, a Councellor, to view what papers I have
relating to passages of the late times, wherein Sir H. Vane's hand is
employed, in order to the drawing up his charge; which I did, and at noon
he, with Sir W. Pen and his daughter, dined with me, and he to his work
again, and we by coach to the Theatre and saw "Love in a Maze."  The play
hath little in it but Lacy's part of a country fellow, which he did to
admiration.  So home, and supped with Sir W. Pen, where Sir W. Batten and
Captn. Cocke came to us, to whom I have lately been a great stranger. This
night we had each of us a letter from Captain Teddiman from the Streights,
of a peace made upon good terms, by Sir J. Lawson, with the Argier men,
which is most excellent news?  He hath also sent each of us some
anchovies, olives, and muscatt; but I know not yet what that is, and am
ashamed to ask.  After supper home, and to bed, resolving to make up this
week in seeing plays and pleasure, and so fall to business next week again
for a great while.

23rd.  At the office good part of the morning, and then about noon with my
wife on foot to the Wardrobe.  My wife went up to the dining room to my
Lady Paulina, and I staid below talking with Mr. Moore in the parley,
reading of the King's and Chancellor's late speeches at the proroguing of
the Houses of Parliament.  And while I was reading, news was brought me
that my Lord Sandwich is come and gone up to my Lady, which put me into
great suspense of joy, so I went up waiting my Lord's coming out of my
Lady's chamber, which by and by he did, and looks very well, and my soul
is glad to see him.  He very merry, and hath left the King and Queen at
Portsmouth, and is come up to stay here till next Wednesday, and then to
meet the King and Queen at Hampton Court.  So to dinner, Mr. Browne, Clerk
of the House of Lords, and his wife and brother there also; and my Lord
mighty merry; among other things, saying that the Queen is a very
agreeable lady, and paints still.  After dinner I showed him my letter
from Teddiman about the news from Argier, which pleases him exceedingly;
and he writ one to the Duke of York about it, and sent it express.  There
coming much company after dinner to my Lord, my wife and I slunk away to
the Opera, where we saw "Witt in a Constable," the first time that it is
acted; but so silly a play I never saw I think in my life.  After it was
done, my wife and I to the puppet play in Covent Garden, which I saw the
other day, and indeed it is very pleasant.  Here among the fidlers I first
saw a dulcimere

     [The dulcimer (or psaltery) consisted of a flat box, acting as a
     resonating chamber, over which strings of wire were stretched: These
     were struck by little hammers.]

played on with sticks knocking of the strings, and is very pretty.  So by
water home, and supped with Sir William Pen very merry, and so to bed.

24th.  To the Wardrobe, and there again spoke with my Lord, and saw W.
Howe, who is grown a very pretty and is a sober fellow.  Thence abroad
with Mr. Creed, of whom I informed myself of all I had a mind to know.
Among other things, the great difficulty my Lord hath been in all this
summer for lack of good and full orders from the King; and I doubt our
Lords of the Councell do not mind things as the late powers did, but their
pleasures or profit more.  That the Juego de Toros is a simple sport, yet
the greatest in Spain.  That the Queen hath given no rewards to any of the
captains or officers, but only to my Lord Sandwich; and that was a bag of
gold, which was no honourable present, of about L1400 sterling.  How
recluse the Queen hath ever been, and all the voyage never come upon the
deck, nor put her head out of her cabin; but did love my Lord's musique,
and would send for it down to the state-room, and she sit in her cabin
within hearing of it.  That my Lord was forced to have some clashing with
the Council of Portugall about payment of the portion, before he could get
it; which was, besides Tangier and a free trade in the Indys, two millions
of crowns, half now, and the other half in twelve months.  But they have
brought but little money; but the rest in sugars and other commoditys, and
bills of exchange.  That the King of Portugall is a very fool almost, and
his mother do all, and he is a very poor Prince.  After a morning draft at
the Star in Cheapside, I took him to the Exchange, thence home, but my
wife having dined, I took him to Fish Street, and there we had a couple of
lobsters, and dined upon them, and much discourse.  And so I to the
office, and that being done, Sir W. Pen and I to Deptford by water to
Captain Rooth's to see him, he being very sick, and by land home, calling
at Halfway house, where we eat and drank. So home and to bed.

25th (Lord's day).  To trimming myself, which I have this week done every
morning, with a pumice stone,--[Shaving with pumice stone.]--which I
learnt of Mr. Marsh, when I was last at Portsmouth; and I find it very
easy, speedy, and cleanly, and shall continue the practice of it.  To
church, and heard a good sermon of Mr. Woodcocke's at our church; only in
his latter prayer for a woman in childbed, he prayed that God would
deliver her from the hereditary curse of child-bearing, which seemed a
pretty strange expression.  Dined at home, and Mr. Creed with me.  This
day I had the first dish of pease I have had this year.  After discourse
he and I abroad, and walked up and down, and looked into many churches,
among others Mr. Baxter's at Blackfryers.  Then to the Wardrobe, where I
found my Lord takes physic, so I did not see him, but with Captn. Ferrers
in Mr. George Montagu's coach to Charing Cross; and there at the Triumph
tavern he showed me some Portugall ladys, which are come to town before
the Queen.  They are not handsome, and their farthingales a strange dress.

     [Farthingales had gone out of fashion in England during the reign of
     Charles I., and therefore their use by the Portuguese ladies
     astonished the English.  Evelyn also remarks in his Diary on this
     ugly custom (May 30th, 1662).]

Many ladies and persons of quality come to see them.  I find nothing in
them that is pleasing; and I see they have learnt to kiss and look freely
up and down already, and I do believe will soon forget the recluse
practice of their own country.  They complain much for lack of good water
to drink.  So to the Wardrobe back on foot and supped with my Lady, and so
home, and after a walk upon the leads with my wife, to prayers and bed.
The King's guards and some City companies do walk up and down the town
these five or six days; which makes me think, and they do say, there are
some plots in laying.  God keep us.

26th.  Up by four o'clock in the morning, and fell to the preparing of
some accounts for my Lord of Sandwich.  By and by, by appointment comes
Mr. Moore, and, by what appears to us at present, we found that my Lord is
above L7,000 in debt, and that he hath money coming into him that will
clear all, and so we think him clear, but very little money in his purse.
So to my Lord's, and after he was ready, we spent an hour with him, giving
him an account thereof; and he having some L6,000 in his hands, remaining
of the King's, he is resolved to make use of that, and get off of it as
well as he can, which I like well of, for else I fear he will scarce get
beforehand again a great while.  Thence home, and to the Trinity House;
where the Brethren (who have been at Deptford choosing a new Maister;
which is Sir J. Minnes, notwithstanding Sir W. Batten did contend highly
for it: at which I am not a little pleased, because of his proud lady)
about three o'clock came hither, and so to dinner.  I seated myself close
by Mr. Prin, who, in discourse with me, fell upon what records he hath of
the lust and wicked lives of the nuns heretofore in England, and showed me
out of his pocket one wherein thirty nuns for their lust were ejected of
their house, being not fit to live there, and by the Pope's command to be
put, however, into other nunnerys.  I could not stay to end dinner with
them, but rose, and privately went out, and by water to my brother's, and
thence to take my wife to the Redd Bull, where we saw "Doctor Faustus,"
but so wretchedly and poorly done, that we were sick of it, and the worse
because by a former resolution it is to be the last play we are to see
till Michaelmas.  Thence homewards by coach, through Moorefields, where we
stood awhile, and saw the wrestling. At home, got my lute upon the leads,
and there played, and so to bed.

27th.  To my Lord this morning, and thence to my brother's, where I found
my father, poor man, come, which I was glad to see.  I staid with him till
noon, and then he went to my cozen Scott's to dinner, who had invited him.
He tells me his alterations of the house and garden at Brampton, which
please me well.  I could not go with him, and so we parted at Ludgate, and
I home to dinner, and to the office all the afternoon, and musique in my
chamber alone at night, and so to bed.

28th.  Up early to put things in order in my chamber, and then to my
Lord's, with whom I spoke about several things, and so up and down in
several places about business with Mr. Creed, among others to Mr. Wotton's
the shoemaker, and there drank our morning draft, and then home about
noon, and by and by comes my father by appointment to dine with me, which
we did very merrily, I desiring to make him as merry as I can, while the
poor man is in town.  After dinner comes my uncle Wight and sat awhile and
talked with us, and thence we three to the Mum House at Leadenhall, and
there sat awhile.  Then I left them, and to the Wardrobe, where I found my
Lord gone to Hampton Court.  Here I staid all the afternoon till late with
Creed and Captain Ferrers, thinking whether we should go to-morrow
together to Hampton Court, but Ferrers his wife coming in by and by to the
house with the young ladies (with whom she had been abroad), she was
unwilling to go, whereupon I was willing to put off our going, and so
home, but still my mind was hankering after our going to-morrow.  So to
bed.

29th.  At home all the morning.  At noon to the Wardrobe, and dined with
my Lady, and after dinner staid long talking with her; then homeward, and
in Lumbard Street was called out of a window by Alderman Backwell, where I
went, and saluted his lady, a very pretty woman.  Here was Mr. Creed, and
it seems they have been under some disorder in fear of a fire at the next
door, and had been removing their goods, but the fire was over before I
came.  Thence home, and with my wife and the two maids, and the boy, took
boat and to Foxhall,

     [Foxhall, Faukeshall, or Vauxhall, a manor in Surrey, properly
     Fulke's.  Hall, and so called from Fulke de Breaute, the notorious
     mercenary follower of King John.  The manor house was afterwards
     known as Copped or Copt Hall.  Sir Samuel Morland obtained a lease
     of the place, and King Charles made him Master of Mechanics, and
     here "he (Morland), anno 1667, built a fine room," says Aubrey, "the
     inside all of looking-glass and fountains, very pleasant to behold."
     The gardens were formed about 1661, and originally called the "New
     Spring Gardens," to distinguish them from the "Old Spring Gardens"
     at Charing Cross, but according to the present description by Pepys
     there was both an Old and a New Spring Garden at Vauxhall.
     Balthazar Monconys, who visited England early in the reign of
     Charles II., describes the 'Jardins Printemps' at Lambeth as having
     lawns and gravel walks, dividing squares of twenty or thirty yards
     enclosed with hedges of gooseberry trees, within which were planted
     roses.]

where I had not been a great while.  To the Old Spring Garden, and there
walked long, and the wenches gathered pinks.  Here we staid, and seeing
that we could not have anything to eat, but very dear, and with long stay,
we went forth again without any notice taken of us, and so we might have
done if we had had anything.  Thence to the New one, where I never was
before, which much exceeds the other; and here we also walked, and the boy
crept through the hedge and gathered abundance of roses, and, after a long
walk, passed out of doors as we did in the other place, and here we had
cakes and powdered beef--[salt beef]--and ale, and so home again by water
with much pleasure.  This day, being the King's birth-day, was very
solemnly observed; and the more, for that the Queen this day comes to
Hampton Court.  In the evening, bonfires were made, but nothing to the
great number that was heretofore at the burning of the Rump.  So to bed.

30th.  This morning I made up my accounts, and find myself 'de claro'
worth about L530, and no more, so little have I increased it since my last
reckoning; but I confess I have laid out much money in clothes. Upon a
suddaine motion I took my wife, and Sarah and Will by water, with some
victuals with us, as low as Gravesend, intending to have gone into the
Hope to the Royal James, to have seen the ship and Mr. Shepley, but
meeting Mr. Shepley in a hoy, bringing up my Lord's things, she and I went
on board, and sailed up with them as far as half-way tree, very glad to
see Mr. Shepley.  Here we saw a little Turk and a negroe, which are
intended for pages to the two young ladies.  Many birds and other pretty
noveltys there was, but I was afeard of being louzy, and so took boat
again, and got to London before them, all the way, coming and going,
reading in the "Wallflower" with great pleasure.  So home, and thence to
the Wardrobe, where Mr. Shepley was come with the things.  Here I staid
talking with my Lady, who is preparing to go to-morrow to Hampton Court.
So home, and at ten o'clock at night Mr. Shepley came to sup with me.  So
we had a dish of mackerell and pease, and so he bid us good night, going
to lie on board the hoy, and I to bed.

31st.  Lay long in bed, and so up to make up my Journall for these two or
three days past.  Then came Anthony Joyce, who duns me for money for the
tallow which he served in lately by my desire, which vexes me, but I must
get it him the next by my promise.  By and by to White Hall, hearing that
Sir G. Carteret was come to town, but I could not find him, and so back to
Tom's, and thence I took my father to my house, and there he dined with
me, discoursing of our businesses with uncle Thomas and T. Trice. After
dinner he departed and I to the office where we met, and that being done I
walked to my Brother's and the Wardrobe and other places about business,
and so home, and had Sarah to comb my head clean, which I found so foul
with powdering and other troubles, that I am resolved to try how I can
keep my head dry without powder; and I did also in a suddaine fit cut off
all my beard, which I had been a great while bringing up, only that I may
with my pumice-stone do my whole face, as I now do my chin, and to save
time, which I find a very easy way and gentile.  So she also washed my
feet in a bath of herbs, and so to bed.  This month ends with very fair
weather for a great while together.  My health pretty well, but only wind
do now and then torment me .  .  .  extremely.  The Queen is brought a few
days since to Hampton Court; and all people say of her to be a very fine
and handsome lady, and very discreet; and that the King is pleased enough
with her which, I fear, will put Madam Castlemaine's nose out of joynt.
The Court is wholly now at Hampton.  A peace with Argier is lately made;
which is also good news.  My father is lately come to town to see us, and
though it has cost and will cost more money, yet I am pleased with the
alteraeons on my house at Brampton.  My Lord Sandwich is lately come with
the Queen from sea, very well and in good repute.  Upon an audit of my
estate I find myself worth about L530 'de claro'.  The Act for Uniformity
is lately printed,

     ["An Act for the Uniformity of public prayers and administration of
     sacraments and other rites and ceremonies, and for establishing the
     form of making, ordaining, and consecrating bishops, priests, and
     deacons in the Church of England."]

which, it is thought, will make mad work among the Presbyterian ministers.
People of all sides are very much discontented; some thinking themselves
used, contrary to promise, too hardly; and the other, that they are not
rewarded so much as they expected by the King.  God keep us all.  I have
by a late oath obliged myself from wine and plays, of which I find good
effect.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                   JUNE
                                   1662

June 1st (Lord's day).  At church in the morning.  A stranger made a very
good sermon.  Dined at home, and Mr. Spong came to see me; so he and I sat
down a little to sing some French psalms, and then comes Mr. Shepley and
Mr. Moore, and so we to dinner, and after dinner to church again, where a
Presbyter made a sad and long sermon, which vexed me, and so home, and so
to walk on the leads, and supper and to prayers and bed.

2nd.  Up early about business and then to the Wardrobe with Mr. Moore, and
spoke to my Lord about the exchange of the crusados

     [Cruzado, a Portuguese coin of 480 reis.  It is named from a cross
     which it bears on one side, the arms of Portugal being on the other.
     It varied in value at different periods from 2s. 3d. to 4s.]

into sterling money, and other matters.  So to my father at Tom's, and
after some talk with him away home, and by and by comes my father to
dinner with me, and then by coach, setting him down in Cheapside, my wife
and I to Mrs. Clarke's at Westminster, the first visit that ever we both
made her yet.  We found her in a dishabille, intending to go to Hampton
Court to-morrow.  We had much pretty discourse, and a very fine lady she
is.  Thence by water to Salisbury Court, and Mrs. Turner not being at
home, home by coach, and so after walking on the leads and supper to bed.
This day my wife put on her slasht wastecoate, which is very pretty.

3rd.  Up by four o'clock and to my business in my chamber, to even
accounts with my Lord and myself, and very fain I would become master of
L1000, but I have not above L530 toward it yet.  At the office all the
morning, and Mr. Coventry brought his patent and took his place with us
this morning.  Upon our making a contract, I went, as I use to do, to draw
the heads thereof, but Sir W. Pen most basely told me that the Comptroller
is to do it, and so begun to employ Mr. Turner about it, at which I was
much vexed, and begun to dispute; and what with the letter of the Duke's
orders, and Mr. Barlow's letter, and the practice of our predecessors,
which Sir G. Carteret knew best when he was Comptroller, it was ruled for
me.  What Sir J. Minnes will do when he comes I know not, but Sir W. Pen
did it like a base raskall, and so I shall remember him while I live.
After office done, I went down to the Towre Wharf, where Mr. Creed and
Shepley was ready with three chests of the crusados, being about L6000,
ready to bring to shore to my house, which they did, and put it in my
further cellar, and Mr. Shepley took the key.  I to my father and Dr.
Williams and Tom Trice, by appointment, in the Old Bayly, to Short's, the
alehouse, but could come to no terms with T. Trice.  Thence to the
Wardrobe, where I found my Lady come from Hampton Court, where the Queen
hath used her very civilly; and my Lady tells me is a most pretty woman,
at which I am glad.  Yesterday (Sir R. Ford told me) the Aldermen of the
City did attend her in their habits, and did present her with a gold Cupp
and L1000 in gold therein.  But, he told me, that they are so poor in
their Chamber, that they were fain to call two or three Aldermen to raise
fines to make up this sum, among which was Sir W. Warren.  Home and to the
office, where about 8 at night comes Sir G. Carteret and Sir W. Batten,
and so we did some business, and then home and to bed, my mind troubled
about Sir W. Pen, his playing the rogue with me to-day, as also about the
charge of money that is in my house, which I had forgot; but I made the
maids to rise and light a candle, and set it in the dining-room, to scare
away thieves, and so to sleep.

4th.  Up early, and Mr. Moore comes to me and tells me that Mr. Barnwell
is dead, which troubles me something, and the more for that I believe we
shall lose Mr. Shepley's company.  By and by Sir W. Batten and I by water
to Woolwich; and there saw an experiment made of Sir R. Ford's Holland's
yarn (about which we have lately had so much stir; and I have much
concerned myself for our ropemaker, Mr. Hughes, who has represented it as
bad), and we found it to be very bad, and broke sooner than, upon a fair
triall, five threads of that against four of Riga yarn; and also that some
of it had old stuff that had been tarred, covered over with new hemp,
which is such a cheat as hath not been heard of.  I was glad of this
discovery, because I would not have the King's workmen discouraged (as Sir
W. Batten do most basely do) from representing the faults of merchants'
goods, where there is any.  After eating some fish that we had bought upon
the water at Falconer's, we went to Woolwich, and there viewed our frames
of our houses, and so home, and I to my Lord's, who I find resolved to buy
Brampton Manor of Sir Peter Ball,

     [Sir Peter Ball was the Queen's Attorney-General, and Evelyn
     mentions, in his Diary (January 11th, 1661-62), having received from
     him the draft of an act against the nuisance of the smoke of
     London.]

at which I am glad.  Thence to White Hall, and showed Sir G. Carteret the
cheat, and so to the Wardrobe, and there staid and supped with my Lady. My
Lord eating nothing, but writes letters to-night to several places, he
being to go out of town to-morrow.  So late home and to bed.

5th.  To the Wardrobe, and there my Lord did enquire my opinion of Mr.
Moore, which I did give to the best advantage I could, and by that means
shall get him joined with Mr. Townsend in the Wardrobe business.  He did
also give me all Mr. Shepley's and Mr. Moore's accounts to view, which I
am glad of, as being his great trust in me, and I would willingly keep up
a good interest with him.  So took leave of him (he being to go this day)
and to the office, where they were just sat down, and I showed them
yesterday's discovery, and have got Sir R. Ford to be my enemy by it; but
I care not, for it is my duty, and so did get his bill stopped for the
present.  To dinner, and found Dr. Thos. Pepys at my house; but I was
called from dinner by a note from Mr. Moore to Alderman Backwell's, to see
some thousands of my Lord's crusados weighed, and we find that 3,000 come
to about L530 or 40 generally.  Home again and found my father there; we
talked a good while and so parted.  We met at the office in the afternoon
to finish Mr. Gauden's accounts, but did not do them quite.  In the
evening with Mr. Moore to Backwell's with another 1,200 crusados and saw
them weighed, and so home and to bed.

6th.  At my office all alone all the morning, and the smith being with me
about other things, did open a chest that hath stood ever since I came to
the office, in my office, and there we found a modell of a fine ship,
which I long to know whether it be the King's or Mr. Turner's.  At noon to
the Wardrobe by appointment to meet my father, who did come and was well
treated by my Lady, who tells me she has some thoughts to send her two
little boys to our house at Brampton, but I have got leave for them to go
along with me and my wife to Hampton Court to-morrow or Sunday. Thence to
my brother Tom's, where we found a letter from Pall that my mother is
dangerously ill in fear of death, which troubles my father and me much,
but I hope it is otherwise, the letter being four days old since it was
writ.  Home and at my office, and with Mr. Hater set things in order till
evening, and so home and to bed by daylight.  This day at my father's
desire I lent my brother Tom L20, to be repaid out of the proceeds of
Sturtlow when we can sell it.  I sent the money all in new money by my boy
from Alderman Backwell's.

7th.  To the office, where all the morning, and I find Mr. Coventry is
resolved to do much good, and to enquire into all the miscarriages of the
office.  At noon with him and Sir W. Batten to dinner at Trinity House;
where, among others, Sir J. Robinson, Lieutenant of the Tower, was, who
says that yesterday Sir H. Vane had a full hearing at the King's Bench,
and is found guilty; and that he did never hear any man argue more simply
than he in all his life, and so others say.  My mind in great trouble
whether I should go as I intended to Hampton Court to-morrow or no.  At
last resolved the contrary, because of the charge thereof, and I am afraid
now to bring in any accounts for journeys, and so will others I suppose
be, because of Mr. Coventry's prying into them.  Thence sent for to Sir G.
Carteret's, and there talked with him a good while.  I perceive, as he
told me, were it not that Mr. Coventry had already feathered his nest in
selling of places, he do like him very well, and hopes great good from
him.  But he complains so of lack of money, that my heart is very sad,
under the apprehension of the fall of the office.  At my office all the
afternoon, and at night hear that my father is gone into the country, but
whether to Richmond as he intended, and thence to meet us at Hampton Court
on Monday, I know not, or to Brampton.  At which I am much troubled.  In
the evening home and to bed.

8th (Lord's day).  Lay till church-time in bed, and so up and to church,
and there I found Mr. Mills come home out of the country again, and
preached but a lazy sermon.  Home and dined with my wife, and so to church
again with her.  Thence walked to my Lady's, and there supped with her,
and merry, among other things, with the parrott which my Lord hath brought
from the sea, which speaks very well, and cries Pall so pleasantly, that
made my Lord give it my Lady Paulina; but my Lady, her mother, do not like
it.  Home, and observe my man Will to walk with his cloak flung over his
shoulder, like a Ruffian, which, whether it was that he might not be seen
to walk along with the footboy, I know not, but I was vexed at it; and
coming home, and after prayers, I did ask him where he learned that
immodest garb, and he answered me that it was not immodest, or some such
slight answer, at which I did give him two boxes on the ears, which I
never did before, and so was after a little troubled at it.

9th.  Early up and at the office with Mr. Hater, making my alphabet of
contracts, upon the dispatch of which I am now very intent, for that I am
resolved much to enquire into the price of commodities.  Dined at home,
and after dinner to Greatorex's, and with him and another stranger to the
Tavern, but I drank no wine.  He recommended Bond, of our end of the town,
to teach me to measure timber, and some other things that I would learn,
in order to my office.  Thence back again to the office, and there T.
Hater and I did make an end of my alphabet, which did much please me. So
home to supper and to bed.

10th.  At the office all the morning, much business; and great hopes of
bringing things, by Mr. Coventry's means, to a good condition in the
office.  Dined at home, Mr. Hunt with us; to the office again in the
afternoon, but not meeting, as was intended, I went to my brother's and
bookseller's, and other places about business, and paid off all for books
to this day, and do not intend to buy any more of any kind a good while,
though I had a great mind to have bought the King's works, as they are new
printed in folio, and present it to my Lord; but I think it will be best
to save the money.  So home and to bed.

     [There is a beautiful copy of "The Workes of King Charles the
     Martyr, and Collections of Declarations, Treaties, &c."  (2 vols.
     folio, 1662), in the Pepysian Library, with a very interesting note
     in the first volume by Pepys (dated October 7th, 1700), to the
     effect that he had collated it with a copy in Lambeth Library,
     presented by Dr. Zachary Cradock, Provost of Eton.  "This book being
     seized on board an English ship was delivered, by order of the
     Inquisition of Lisbon, to some of the English Priests to be perused
     and corrected according to the Rules of the 'Index Expurgatorius.'
     Thus corrected it was given to Barnaby Crafford, English merchant
     there, and by him it was given to me, the English preacher resident
     there A.D. 1670, and by me as I then received it to the Library at
     Lambeth to be there preserved.  Nov. 2, 1678.  'Ita testor', Zach.
     Cradock.--From which (through the favour of the most Reverend Father
     in God and my most honoured Friend his Grace the present Archbishop
     of Canterbury) I have this 7th of October, 1700, had an opportunity
     given me there (assisted by my clerk, Thomas Henderson), leisurely to
     overlook, and with my uttermost attention to note the said
     Expurgations through each part of this my own Book."  Whole
     sentences in the book are struck through, as well as such words as
     Martyr, Defender of the Faith, More than Conqueror, &c.]

11th.  At the office all the morning, Sir W. Batten, Sir W. Pen, and I
about the Victualler's accounts.  Then home to dinner and to the office
again all the afternoon, Mr. Hater and I writing over my Alphabet fair, in
which I took great pleasure to rule the lines and to have the capitall
words wrote with red ink.  So home and to supper.  This evening Savill the
Paynter came and did varnish over my wife's picture and mine, and I paid
him for my little picture L3, and so am clear with him.  So after supper
to bed.  This day I had a letter from my father that he is got down well,
and found my mother pretty well again.  So that I am vexed with all my
heart at Pall for writing to him so much concerning my mother's illness
(which I believe was not so great), so that he should be forced to hasten
down on the sudden back into the country without taking leave, or having
any pleasure here.

12th.  This morning I tried on my riding cloth suit with close knees, the
first that ever I had; and I think they will be very convenient, if not
too hot to wear any other open knees after them.  At the office all the
morning, where we had a full Board, viz., Sir G. Carteret, Sir John
Mennes, Sir W. Batten, Mr. Coventry, Sir W. Pen, Mr. Pett, and myself.
Among many other businesses, I did get a vote signed by all, concerning my
issuing of warrants, which they did not smell the use I intend to make of
it; but it is to plead for my clerks to have their right of giving out all
warrants, at which I am not a little pleased.  But a great difference
happened between Sir G. Carteret and Mr. Coventry, about passing the
Victualler's account, and whether Sir George is to pay the Victualler his
money, or the Exchequer; Sir George claiming it to be his place to save
his threepences.  It ended in anger, and I believe will come to be a
question before the King and Council.  I did what I could to keep myself
unconcerned in it, having some things of my own to do before I would
appear high in anything.  Thence to dinner, by Mr. Gauden's invitation, to
the Dolphin, where a good dinner; but what is to myself a great wonder;
that with ease I past the whole dinner without drinking a drop of wine.
After dinner to the office, my head full of business, and so home, and it
being the longest day in the year,--[That is, by the old style. The new
style was not introduced until 1752]--I made all my people go to bed by
daylight.  But after I was a-bed and asleep, a note came from my brother
Tom to tell me that my cozen Anne Pepys, of Worcestershire, her husband is
dead, and she married again, and her second husband in town, and intends
to come and see me to-morrow.

13th.  Up by 4 o'clock in the morning, and read Cicero's Second Oration
against Catiline, which pleased me exceedingly; and more I discern therein
than ever I thought was to be found in him; but I perceive it was my
ignorance, and that he is as good a writer as ever I read in my life. By
and by to Sir G. Carteret's, to talk with him about yesterday's difference
at the office; and offered my service to look into any old books or papers
that I have, that may make for him.  He was well pleased therewith, and
did much inveigh against Mr. Coventry; telling me how he had done him
service in the Parliament, when Prin had drawn up things against him for
taking of money for places; that he did at his desire, and upon his,
letters, keep him off from doing it.  And many other things he told me, as
how the King was beholden to him, and in what a miserable condition his
family would be, if he should die before he hath cleared his accounts.
Upon the whole, I do find that he do much esteem of me, and is my friend,
and I may make good use of him.  Thence to several places about business,
among others to my brother's, and there Tom Beneere the barber trimmed me.
Thence to my Lady's, and there dined with her, Mr. Laxton, Gibbons, and
Goldgroove with us, and after dinner some musique, and so home to my
business, and in the evening my wife and I, and Sarah and the boy, a most
pleasant walk to Halfway house, and so home and to bed.

14th.  Up by four o'clock in the morning and upon business at my office.
Then we sat down to business, and about 11 o'clock, having a room got
ready for us, we all went out to the Tower-hill; and there, over against
the scaffold, made on purpose this day, saw Sir Henry Vane brought.

     [Sir Harry Vane the younger was born 1612.  Charles signed on June
     12th a warrant for the execution of Vane by hanging at Tyburn on the
     14th, which sentence on the following day "upon humble suit made" to
     him, Charles was "graciously pleased to mitigate," as the warrant
     terms it, for the less ignominious punishment of beheading on Tower
     Hill, and with permission that the head and body should be given to
     the relations to be by them decently and privately interred.--
     Lister's Life of Clarendon, ii, 123.]

A very great press of people.  He made a long speech, many times
interrupted by the Sheriff and others there; and they would have taken his
paper out of his hand, but he would not let it go.  But they caused all
the books of those that writ after him to be given the Sheriff; and the
trumpets were brought under the scaffold that he might not be heard. Then
he prayed, and so fitted himself, and received the blow; but the scaffold
was so crowded that we could not see it done.  But Boreman, who had been
upon the scaffold, came to us and told us, that first he began to speak of
the irregular proceeding against him; that he was, against Magna Charta,
denied to have his exceptions against the indictment allowed; and that
there he was stopped by the Sheriff.  Then he drew out his, paper of
notes, and begun to tell them first his life; that he was born a
gentleman, that he was bred up and had the quality of a gentleman, and to
make him in the opinion of the world more a gentleman, he had been, till
he was seventeen years old, a good fellow, but then it pleased God to lay
a foundation of grace in his heart, by which he was persuaded, against his
worldly interest, to leave all preferment and go abroad, where he might
serve God with more freedom.  Then he was called home, and made a member
of the Long Parliament; where he never did, to this day, any thing against
his conscience, but all for the glory of God.  Here he would have given
them an account of the proceedings of the Long Parliament, but they so
often interrupted him, that at last he was forced to give over: and so
fell into prayer for England in generall, then for the churches in
England, and then for the City of London: and so fitted himself for the
block, and received the blow.  He had a blister, or issue, upon his neck,
which he desired them not hurt: he changed not his colour or speech to the
last, but died justifying himself and the cause he had stood for; and
spoke very confidently of his being presently at the right hand of Christ;
and in all, things appeared the most resolved man that ever died in that
manner, and showed more of heat than cowardize, but yet with all humility
and gravity.  One asked him why he did not pray for the King.  He
answered, "Nay," says he, "you shall see I can pray for the King: I pray
God bless him!"  The King had given his body to his friends; and,
therefore, he told them that he hoped they would be civil to his body when
dead; and desired they would let him die like a gentleman and a Christian,
and not crowded and pressed as he was. So to the office a little, and so
to the Trinity-house all of us to dinner; and then to the office again all
the afternoon till night.  So home and to bed.  This day, I hear, my Lord
Peterborough is come unexpected from Tangier, to give the King an account
of the place, which, we fear, is in none of the best condition.  We had
also certain news to-day that the Spaniard is before Lisbon with thirteen
sail; six Dutch, and the rest his own ships; which will, I fear, be ill
for Portugall.  I writ a letter of all this day's proceedings to my Lord,
at Hinchingbroke, who, I hear, is very well pleased with the work there.

15th (Lord's day).  To church in the morning and home to dinner, where
come my brother Tom and Mr. Fisher, my cozen, Nan Pepys's second husband,
who, I perceive, is a very good-humoured man, an old cavalier.  I made as
much of him as I could, and were merry, and am glad she hath light of so
good a man.  They gone, to church again; but my wife not being dressed as
I would have her, I was angry, and she, when she was out of doors in her
way to church, returned home again vexed.  But I to church, Mr. Mills, an
ordinary sermon.  So home, and found my wife and Sarah gone to a neighbour
church, at which I was not much displeased.  By and by she comes again,
and, after a word or two, good friends.  And then her brother came to see
her, and he being gone she told me that she believed he was married and
had a wife worth L500 to him, and did inquire how he might dispose the
money to the best advantage, but I forbore to advise her till she could
certainly tell me how things are with him, being loth to meddle too soon
with him.  So to walk upon the leads, and to supper, and to bed.

16th.  Up before four o'clock, and after some business took Will forth,
and he and I walked over the Tower Hill, but the gate not being open we
walked through St. Catharine's and Ratcliffe (I think it is) by the
waterside above a mile before we could get a boat, and so over the water
in a scull (which I have not done a great while), and walked finally to
Deptford, where I saw in what forwardness the work is for Sir W. Batten's
house and mine, and it is almost ready.  I also, with Mr. Davis, did view
my cozen Joyce's tallow, and compared it with the Irish tallow we bought
lately, and found ours much more white, but as soft as it; now what is the
fault, or whether it be or no a fault, I know not.  So walked home again
as far as over against the Towre, and so over and home, where I found Sir
W. Pen and Sir John Minnes discoursing about Sir John Minnes's house and
his coming to live with us, and I think he intends to have Mr. Turner's
house and he to come to his lodgings, which I shall be very glad of.  We
three did go to Mr. Turner's to view his house, which I think was to the
end that Sir John Minnes might see it.  Then by water with my wife to the
Wardrobe, and dined there; and in the afternoon with all the children by
water to Greenwich, where I showed them the King's yacht, the house, and
the park, all very pleasant; and so to the tavern, and had the musique of
the house, and so merrily home again.  Will and I walked home from the
Wardrobe, having left my wife at the Tower Wharf coming by, whom I found
gone to bed not very well . . . .  So to bed.

17th.  Up, and Mr. Mayland comes to me and borrowed 30s. of me to be paid
again out of the money coming to him in the James and Charles for his late
voyage.  So to the office, where all the morning.  So home to dinner, my
wife not being well, but however dined with me.  So to the office, and at
Sir W. Batten's, where we all met by chance and talked, and they drank
wine; but I forebore all their healths.  Sir John Minnes, I perceive, is
most excellent company.  So home and to bed betimes by daylight.

18th.  Up early; and after reading a little in Cicero, I made me ready and
to my office, where all the morning very busy.  At noon Mr. Creed came to
me about business, and he and I walked as far as Lincoln's Inn Fields
together.  After a turn or two in the walks we parted, and I to my Lord
Crew's and dined with him; where I hear the courage of Sir H. Vane at his
death is talked on every where as a miracle.  Thence to Somerset House to
Sir J. Winter's chamber by appointment, and met Mr. Pett, where he and I
read over his last contract with the King for the Forest of Dean, whereof
I took notes because of this new one that he is now in making.  That done
he and I walked to Lilly's, the painter's, where we saw among other rare
things, the Duchess of York, her whole body, sitting instate in a chair,
in white sattin, and another of the King, that is not finished; most rare
things.  I did give the fellow something that showed them us, and promised
to come some other time, and he would show me Lady Castlemaine's, which I
could not then see, it being locked up!  Thence to Wright's, the
painter's: but, Lord! the difference that is between their two works.
Thence to the Temple, and there spoke with my cozen Roger, who gives me
little hopes in the business between my Uncle Tom and us. So Mr. Pett (who
staid at his son's chamber) and I by coach to the old Exchange, and there
parted, and I home and at the office till night.  My windows at my office
are made clean to-day and a casement in my closet. So home, and after some
merry discourse in the kitchen with my wife and maids as I now-a-days
often do, I being well pleased with both my maids, to bed.

19th.  Up by five o'clock, and while my man Will was getting himself ready
to come up to me I took and played upon my lute a little.  So to dress
myself, and to my office to prepare things against we meet this morning.
We sat long to-day, and had a great private business before us about
contracting with Sir W. Rider, Mr. Cutler, and Captain Cocke, for 500 ton
of hemp, which we went through, and I am to draw up the conditions.  Home
to dinner, where I found Mr. Moore, and he and I cast up our accounts
together and evened them, and then with the last chest of crusados to
Alderman Backwell's, by the same token his lady going to take coach stood
in the shop, and having a gilded glassfull of perfumed comfits given her
by Don Duarte de Silva, the Portugall merchant, that is come over with the
Queen, I did offer at a taste, and so she poured some out into my hand,
and, though good, yet pleased me the better coming from a pretty lady.  So
home and at the office preparing papers and things, and indeed my head has
not been so full of business a great while, and with so much pleasure, for
I begin to see the pleasure it gives.  God give me health.  So to bed.

20th.  Up by four or five o'clock, and to the office, and there drew up
the agreement between the King and Sir John Winter about the Forrest of
Deane; and having done it, he came himself (I did not know him to be the
Queen's Secretary before, but observed him to be a man of fine parts); and
we read it, and both liked it well.  That done, I turned to the Forrest of
Deane, in Speede's Mapps, and there he showed me how it lies; and the
Lea-bayly, with the great charge of carrying it to Lydny, and many other
things worth my knowing; and I do perceive that I am very short in my
business by not knowing many times the geographical part of my business.
At my office till Mr. Moore took me out and at my house looked over our
papers again, and upon our evening accounts did give full discharges one
to the other, and in his and many other accounts I perceive I shall be
better able to give a true balance of my estate to myself within a day or
two than I have been this twelve months.  Then he and I to Alderman
Backwell's and did the like there, and I gave one receipt for all the
money I have received thence upon the receipt of my Lord's crusados.  Then
I went to the Exchange, and hear that the merchants have a great fear of a
breach with the Spaniard; for they think he will not brook our having
Tangier, Dunkirk, and Jamaica; and our merchants begin to draw home their
estates as fast as they can.  Then to Pope's Head Ally, and there bought
me a pair of tweezers, cost me 14s., the first thing like a bawble I have
bought a good while, but I do it with some trouble of mind, though my
conscience tells me that I do it with an apprehension of service in my
office to have a book to write memorandums in, and a pair of compasses in
it; but I confess myself the willinger to do it because I perceive by my
accounts that I shall be better by L30 than I expected to be.  But by
tomorrow night I intend to see to the bottom of all my accounts.  Then
home to dinner, where Mr. Moore met me.  Then he went away, and I to the
office and dispatch much business.  So in the evening, my wife and I and
Jane over the water to the Halfway-house, a pretty, pleasant walk, but the
wind high.  So home again and to bed.

21st. Up about four o'clock, and settled some private business of my own,
then made me ready and to the office to prepare things for our meeting
to-day.  By and by we met, and at noon Sir W. Pen and I to the Trinity
House; where was a feast made by the Wardens, when great good cheer, and
much, but ordinary company.  The Lieutenant of the Tower, upon my
demanding how Sir H. Vane died, told me that he died in a passion; but all
confess with so much courage as never man died.  Thence to the office,
where Sir W. Rider, Capt. Cocke, and Mr. Cutler came by appointment to
meet me to confer about the contract between us and them for 500 tons of
hemp.  That being done, I did other business and so went home, and there
found Mr. Creed, who staid talking with my wife and me an hour or two, and
I put on my riding cloth suit, only for him to see how it is, and I think
it will do very well.  He being gone, and I hearing from my wife and the
maids' complaints made of the boy, I called him up, and with my whip did
whip him till I was not able to stir, and yet I could not make him confess
any of the lies that they tax him with.  At last, not willing to let him
go away a conqueror, I took him in task again, and pulled off his frock to
his shirt, and whipped him till he did confess that he did drink the whey,
which he had denied, and pulled a pink, and above all did lay the
candlestick upon the ground in his chamber, which he had denied this
quarter of a year.  I confess it is one of the greatest wonders that ever
I met with that such a little boy as he could possibly be able to suffer
half so much as he did to maintain a lie.  I think I must be forced to put
him away.  So to bed, with my arm very weary.

22nd (Lord's day).  This day I first put on my slasht doublet, which I
like very well.  Mr. Shepley came to me in the morning, telling me that he
and my Lord came to town from Hinchinbroke last night.  He and I spend an
hour in looking over his account, and then walked to the Wardrobe, all the
way discoursing of my Lord's business.  He tells me to my great wonder
that Mr. Barnwell is dead L500 in debt to my Lord.  By and by my Lord came
from church, and I dined, with some others, with him, he very merry, and
after dinner took me aside and talked of state and other matters.  By and
by to my brother Tom's and took him out with me homewards (calling at the
Wardrobe to talk a little with Mr. Moore), and so to my house, where I
paid him all I owed him, and did make the L20 I lately lent him up to L40,
for which he shall give bond to Mr. Shepley, for it is his money.  So my
wife and I to walk in the garden, where all our talk was against Sir W.
Pen, against whom I have lately had cause to be much prejudiced.  By and
by he and his daughter came out to walk, so we took no notice of them a
great while, at last in going home spoke a word or two, and so good night,
and to bed.  This day I am told of a Portugall lady, at Hampton Court,
that hath dropped a child already since the Queen's coming, but the king
would not have them searched whose it is; and so it is not commonly known
yet.  Coming home to-night, I met with Will. Swan, who do talk as high for
the Fanatiques as ever he did in his life; and do pity my Lord Sandwich
and me that we should be given up to the wickedness of the world; and that
a fall is coming upon us all; for he finds that he and his company are the
true spirit of the nation, and the greater part of the nation too, who
will have liberty of conscience in spite of this "Act of Uniformity," or
they will die; and if they may not preach abroad, they will preach in
their own houses.  He told me that certainly Sir H. Vane must be gone to
Heaven, for he died as much a martyr and saint as ever man did; and that
the King hath lost more by that man's death, than he will get again a good
while.  At all which I know not what to think; but, I confess, I do think
that the Bishops will never be able to carry it so high as they do.

23rd.  Up early, this morning, and my people are taking down the hangings
and things in my house because of the great dust that is already made by
the pulling down of Sir W. Batten's house, and will be by my own when I
come to it.  To my office, and there hard at work all the morning.  At
noon to the Exchange to meet Dr. Williams, who sent me this morning notice
of his going into the country tomorrow, but could not find him, but
meeting with Frank Moore, my Lord Lambeth's man formerly, we, and two or
three friends of his did go to a tavern, and there they drank, but I
nothing but small beer.  In the next room one was playing very finely of
the dulcimer, which well played I like well, but one of our own company, a
talking fellow, did in discourse say much of this Act against Seamen,

     [In 1662 was passed "An Act for providing of carriage by land and by
     water for the use of His Majesty's Navy and Ordinance" (13-14 Gar.
     II., cap. 20), which gave power for impressing seamen, &c.]

for their being brought to account; and that it was made on purpose for my
Lord Sandwich, who was in debt L100,000, and hath been forced to have
pardon oftentimes from Oliver for the same: at which I was vexed at him,
but thought it not worth my trouble to oppose what he said, but took leave
and went home, and after a little dinner to my office again, and in the
evening Sir W. Warren came to me about business, and that being done,
discoursing of deals, I did offer to go along with him among his deal
ships, which we did to half a score, where he showed me the difference
between Dram, Swinsound, Christiania, and others, and told me many
pleasant notions concerning their manner of cutting and sawing them by
watermills, and the reason how deals become dearer and cheaper, among
others, when the snow is not so great as to fill up the values that they
may pass from hill to hill over the snow, then it is dear carriage.  From
on board he took me to his yard, where vast and many places of deals,
sparrs, and bulks, &c., the difference between which I never knew before,
and indeed am very proud of this evening's work.  He had me into his
house, which is most pretty and neat and well furnished.  After a glass,
not of wine, for I would not be tempted to drink any, but a glass of mum,
I well home by water, but it being late was forced to land at the Custom
House, and so home and to bed, and after I was a-bed, letters came from
the Duke for the fitting out of four ships forthwith from Portsmouth (I
know not yet for what) so I was forced to make Will get them wrote, and
signed them in bed and sent them away by express.  And so to sleep.

24th (Midsummer day).  Up early and to my office, putting things in order
against we sit.  There came to me my cozen Harry Alcocke, whom I much
respect, to desire (by a letter from my father to me, where he had been
some days) my help for him to some place.  I proposed the sea to him, and
I think he will take it, and I hope do well.  Sat all the morning, and I
bless God I find that by my diligence of late and still, I do get ground
in the office every day.  At noon to the Change, where I begin to be known
also, and so home to dinner, and then to the office all the afternoon
dispatching business.  At night news is brought me that Field the rogue
hath this day cast me at Guildhall in L30 for his imprisonment, to which I
signed his commitment with the rest of the officers; but they having been
parliament-men, that he hath begun the law with me; and threatens more,
but I hope the Duke of York will bear me out.  At night home, and Mr.
Spong came to me, and so he and I sat singing upon the leads till almost
ten at night and so he went away (a pretty, harmless, and ingenious man),
and I to bed, in a very great content of mind, which I hope by my care
still in my business will continue to me.

25th.  Up by four o'clock, and put my accounts with my Lord into a very
good order, and so to my office, where having put many things in order I
went to the Wardrobe, but found my Lord gone to Hampton Court.  After
discourse with Mr. Shepley we parted, and I into Thames Street, beyond the
Bridge, and there enquired among the shops the price of tarre and oyle,
and do find great content in it, and hope to save the King money by this
practice.  So home to dinner, and then to the Change, and so home again,
and at the office preparing business against to-morrow all the afternoon.
At night walked with my wife upon the leads, and so to supper and to bed.
My wife having lately a great pain in her ear, for which this night she
begins to take physique, and I have got cold and so have a great deal of
my old pain.

26th.  Up and took physique, but such as to go abroad with, only to loosen
me, for I am bound.  So to the office, and there all the morning sitting
till noon, and then took Commissioner Pett home to dinner with me, where
my stomach was turned when my sturgeon came to table, upon which I saw
very many little worms creeping, which I suppose was through the staleness
of the pickle.  He being gone, comes Mr. Nicholson, my old fellow-student
at Magdalene, and we played three or four things upon the violin and
basse, and so parted, and I to my office till night, and there came Mr.
Shepley and Creed in order to settling some accounts of my Lord to-night,
and so to bed.

27th.  Up early, not quite rid of my pain.  I took more physique, and so
made myself ready to go forth.  So to my Lord, who rose as soon as he
heard I was there; and in his nightgown and shirt stood talking with me
alone two hours,.  I believe, concerning his greatest matters of state and
interest.  Among other things, that his greatest design is, first, to get
clear of all debts to the King for the Embassy money, and then a pardon.
Then, to get his land settled; and then to, discourse and advise what is
best for him, whether to keep his sea employment longer or no. For he do
discern that the Duke would be willing to have him out, and that by
Coventry's means.  And here he told me, how the terms at Argier were
wholly his; and that he did plainly tell Lawson and agree with him, that
he would have the honour of them, if they should ever be agreed to; and
that accordingly they did come over hither entitled, "Articles concluded
on by Sir J. Lawson, according to instructions received from His Royal
Highness James Duke of York, &c., and from His Excellency the Earle of
Sandwich."  (Which however was more than needed; but Lawson tells my Lord
in his letter, that it was not he, but the Council of Warr that would have
"His Royal Highness" put into the title, though he did not contribute one
word to it.)  But the Duke of York did yesterday propose them to the
Council, to be printed with this title: "Concluded on, by Sir J. Lawson,
Knt."  and my Lord quite left out.  Here I find my Lord very politique;
for he tells me, that he discerns they design to set up Lawson as much as
they can and that he do counterplot them by setting him up higher still;
by which they will find themselves spoiled of their design, and at last
grow jealous of Lawson.  This he told me with much pleasure; and that
several of the Duke's servants, by name my Lord Barkeley [of Stratton],
Mr. Talbot, and others, had complained to my Lord, of Coventry, and would
have him out.  My Lord do acknowledge that his greatest obstacle is
Coventry.  He did seem to hint such a question as this: "Hitherto I have
been supported by the King and Chancellor against the Duke; but what if it
should come about, that it should be the Duke and Chancellor against the
King?" which, though he said it in these plain words, yet I could not
fully understand it; but may more here after.  My Lord did also tell me,
that the Duke himself at Portsmouth did thank my Lord for all his pains
and care; and that he perceived it must be the old Captains that must do
the business; and that the new ones would spoil all.  And that my Lord did
very discreetly tell the Duke (though quite against his judgement and
inclination), that, however, the King's new captains ought to be borne
with a little and encouraged. By which he will oblige that party, and
prevent, as much as may be, their envy; but he says that certainly things
will go to rack if ever the old captains should be wholly out, and the new
ones only command.  Then we fell to talk of Sir J. Minnes, of whom my Lord
hath a very slight opinion, and that at first he did come to my Lord very
displeased and sullen, and had studied and turned over all his books to
see whether it had ever been that two flags should ride together in the
main-top, but could not find it, nay, he did call his captains on board to
consult them.  So when he came by my Lord's side, he took down his flag,
and all the day did not hoist it again, but next day my Lord did tell him
that it was not so fit to ride without a flag, and therefore told him that
he should wear it in the fore-top, for it seems my Lord saw his
instructions, which were that he should not wear his flag in the maintop
in the presence of the Duke or my Lord. But that after that my Lord did
caress him, and he do believe him as much his friend as his interest will
let him.  I told my Lord of the late passage between Swan and me, and he
told me another lately between Dr. Dell and himself when he was in the
country.  At last we concluded upon dispatching all his accounts as soon
as possible, and so I parted, and to my office, where I met Sir W. Pen,
and he desired a turn with me in the garden, where he told me the day now
was fixed for his going into Ireland;--[Penn was Governor of
Kinsale.-B.]--and that whereas I had mentioned some service he could do a
friend of mine there, Saml. Pepys,

     [Mentioned elsewhere as "My cousin in Ireland."  He was son of Lord
     Chief Justice Richard Pepys.]

he told me he would most readily do what I would command him, and then
told me we must needs eat a dish of meat together before he went, and so
invited me and my wife on Sunday next.  To all which I did give a cold
consent, for my heart cannot love or have a good opinion of him since his
last playing the knave with me, but he took no notice of our difference at
all, nor I to him, and so parted, and I by water to Deptford, where I
found Sir W. Batten alone paying off the yard three quarters pay.  Thence
to dinner, where too great a one was prepared, at which I was very much
troubled, and wished I had not been there.  After dinner comes Sir J.
Minnes and some captains with him, who had been at a Councill of Warr
to-day, who tell us they have acquitted Captain Hall, who was accused of
cowardice in letting of old Winter, the Argier pyrate, go away from him
with a prize or two; and also Captain Diamond of the murder laid to him of
a man that he had struck, but he lived many months after, till being
drunk, he fell into the hold, and there broke his jaw and died, but they
say there are such bawdy articles against him as never were heard of
.  .  .  .  To the pay again, where I left them, and walked to Redriffe,
and so home, and there came Mr. Creed and Shepley to me, and staid till
night about my Lord's accounts, our proceeding to set them in order, and
so parted and I to bed.  Mr. Holliard had been with my wife to-day, and
cured her of her pain in her ear by taking out a most prodigious quantity
of hard wax that had hardened itself in the bottom of the ear, of which I
am very glad.

28th.  Up to my Lord's and my own accounts, and so to the office, where
all the forenoon sitting, and at noon by appointment to the Mitre, where
Mr. Shepley gave me and Mr. Creed, and I had my uncle Wight with us, a
dish of fish.  Thence to the office again, and there all the afternoon
till night, and so home, and after talking with my wife to bed.  This day
a genteel woman came to me, claiming kindred of me, as she had once done
before, and borrowed 10s. of me, promising to repay it at night, but I
hear nothing of her.  I shall trust her no more.  Great talk there is of a
fear of a war with the Dutch; and we have order to pitch upon twenty ships
to be forthwith set out; but I hope it is but a scarecrow to the world, to
let them see that we can be ready for them; though, God knows! the King is
not able to set out five ships at this present without great difficulty,
we neither having money, credit, nor stores.  My mind is now in a
wonderful condition of quiet and content, more than ever in all my life,
since my minding the business of my office, which I have done most
constantly; and I find it to be the very effect of my late oaths against
wine and plays, which, if God please, I will keep constant in, for now my
business is a delight to me, and brings me great credit, and my purse
encreases too.

29th (Lord's day).  Up by four o'clock, and to the settling of my own
accounts, and I do find upon my monthly ballance, which I have undertaken
to keep from month to month, that I am worth L650, the greatest sum that
ever I was yet master of.  I pray God give me a thankfull, spirit, and
care to improve and encrease it.  To church with my wife, who this day put
on her green petticoat of flowred satin, with fine white and gimp lace of
her own putting on, which is very pretty.  Home with Sir W. Pen to dinner
by appointment, and to church again in the afternoon, and then home, Mr.
Shepley coming to me about my Lord's accounts, and in the evening parted,
and we to supper again to Sir W. Pen.  Whatever the matter is, he do much
fawn upon me, and I perceive would not fall out with me, and his daughter
mighty officious to my wife, but I shall never be deceived again by him,
but do hate him and his traitorous tricks with all my heart.  It was an
invitation in order to his taking leave of us to-day, he being to go for
Ireland in a few days.  So home and prayers, and to bed.

30th.  Up betimes, and to my office, where I found Griffen's girl making
it clean, but, God forgive me! what a mind I had to her, but did not
meddle with her.  She being gone, I fell upon boring holes for me to see
from my closet into the great office, without going forth, wherein I
please myself much.  So settled to business, and at noon with my wife to
the Wardrobe, and there dined, and staid talking all the afternoon with my
Lord, and about four o'clock took coach with my wife and Lady, and went
toward my house, calling at my Lady Carteret's, who was within by chance
(she keeping altogether at Deptford for a month or two), and so we sat
with her a little.  Among other things told my Lady how my Lady Fanshaw is
fallen out with her only for speaking in behalf of the French, which my
Lady wonders at, they having been formerly like sisters, but we see there
is no true lasting friendship in the world.  Thence to my house, where I
took great pride to lead her through the Court by the hand, she being very
fine, and her page carrying up her train.  She staid a little at my house,
and then walked through the garden, and took water, and went first on
board the King's pleasure boat, which pleased her much. Then to Greenwich
Park; and with much ado she was able to walk up to the top of the hill,
and so down again, and took boat, and so through bridge to Blackfryers,
and home, she being much pleased with the ramble in every particular of
it.  So we supped with her, and then walked home, and to bed.

                              OBSERVATIONS.

This I take to be as bad a juncture as ever I observed.  The King and his
new Queen minding their pleasures at Hampton Court.  All people
discontented; some that the King do not gratify them enough; and the
others, Fanatiques of all sorts, that the King do take away their liberty
of conscience; and the height of the Bishops, who I fear will ruin all
again.  They do much cry up the manner of Sir H. Vane's death, and he
deserves it.  They clamour against the chimney-money, and say they will
not pay it without force.  And in the mean time, like to have war abroad;
and Portugall to assist, when we have not money to pay for any ordinary
layings-out at home.  Myself all in dirt about building of my house and
Sir W. Batten's a story higher.  Into a good way, fallen on minding my
business and saving money, which God encrease; and I do take great delight
in it, and see the benefit of it.  In a longing mind of going to see
Brampton, but cannot get three days time, do what I can.  In very good
health, my wife and myself.




     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     Afeard of being louzy
     Afeard that my Lady Castlemaine will keep still with the King
     Afraid now to bring in any accounts for journeys
     As much his friend as his interest will let him
     Comb my head clean, which I found so foul with powdering
     Deliver her from the hereditary curse of child-bearing
     Discontented at the pride and luxury of the Court
     Enjoy some degree of pleasure now that we have health, money
     God forgive me! what a mind I had to her
     Hard matter to settle to business after so much leisure
     Holes for me to see from my closet into the great office
     I know not yet what that is, and am ashamed to ask
     King dined at my Lady Castlemaine's, and supped, every day
     Lady Castlemaine do speak of going to lie in at Hampton Court
     Let me blood, about sixteen ounces, I being exceedingly full
     Lust and wicked lives of the nuns heretofore in England
     Only wind do now and then torment me .  .  .  extremely
     See her look dejectedly and slighted by people already
     She also washed my feet in a bath of herbs, and so to bed
     Sir W. Pen did it like a base raskall, and so I shall remember
     Slight answer, at which I did give him two boxes on the ears
     They were not occupiers, but occupied (women)
     Trumpets were brought under the scaffold that he not be heard
     Up and took physique, but such as to go abroad with
     Will put Madam Castlemaine's nose out of joynt
     With my whip did whip him till I was not able to stir





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Diary of Samuel Pepys, May/June 1662
by Samuel Pepys

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***

***** This file should be named 4134.txt or 4134.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/4/1/3/4134/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
