The Project Gutenberg EBook of Diary of Samuel Pepys, September/October
1662, by Samuel Pepys

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Diary of Samuel Pepys, September/October 1662

Author: Samuel Pepys

Release Date: November 30, 2004 [EBook #4136]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***




Produced by David Widger





                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A.  F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                           SEPTEMBER & OCTOBER
                                  1662

September 1st.  Up betimes at my lodging and to my office and among my
workmen, and then with Sir W. Batten and Sir W. Pen by coach to St.
James's, this being the first day of our meeting there by the Duke's
order; but when we come, we found him going out by coach with his Duchess,
and he told us he was to go abroad with the Queen to-day (to Durdans, it
seems, to dine with my Lord Barkeley, where I have been very merry when I
was a little boy); so we went and staid a little at Mr. Coventry's
chamber, and I to my Lord Sandwich's, who is gone to wait upon the King
and Queen today.  And so Mr. Paget being there, Will Howe and I and he
played over some things of Locke's that we used to play at sea, that
pleased us three well, it being the first music I have heard a great
while, so much has my business of late taken me off from all my former
delights.  By and by by water home, and there dined alone, and after
dinner with my brother Tom's two men I removed all my goods out of Sir W.
Pen's house into one room that I have with much ado got ready at my house,
and so I am to be quit of any further obligation to him.  So to my office,
but missing my key, which I had in my hand just now, makes me very angry
and out of order, it being a thing that I hate in others, and more in
myself, to be careless of keys, I thinking another not fit to be trusted
that leaves a key behind their hole.  One thing more vexes me: my wife
writes me from the country that her boy plays the rogue there, and she is
weary of him, and complains also of her maid Sarah, of which I am also
very sorry.  Being thus out of temper, I could do little at my office, but
went home and eat a bit, and so to my lodging to bed.

2nd.  Up betimes and got myself ready alone, and so to my office, my mind
much troubled for my key that I lost yesterday, and so to my workmen and
put them in order, and so to my office, and we met all the morning, and
then dined at Sir W. Batten's with Sir W. Pen, and so to my office again
all the afternoon, and in the evening wrote a letter to Mr. Cooke, in the
country, in behalf of my brother Tom, to his mistress, it being the first
of my appearing in it, and if she be as Tom sets her out, it may be very
well for him.  So home and eat a bit, and so to my lodging to bed.

3rd.  Up betimes, but now the days begin to shorten, and so whereas I used
to rise by four o'clock, it is not broad daylight now till after five
o'clock, so that it is after five before I do rise.  To my office, and
about 8 o'clock I went over to Redriffe, and walked to Deptford, where I
found Mr. Coventry and Sir W. Pen beginning the pay, it being my desire to
be there to-day because it is the first pay that Mr. Coventry has been at,
and I would be thought to be as much with Mr. Coventry as I can.  Here we
staid till noon, and by that time paid off the Breda, and then to dinner
at the tavern, where I have obtained that our commons is not so large as
they used to be, which I am glad to see.  After dinner by water to the
office, and there we met and sold the Weymouth, Successe, and Fellowship
hulkes, where pleasant to see how backward men are at first to bid; and
yet when the candle is going out, how they bawl and dispute afterwards who
bid the most first.  And here I observed one man cunninger than the rest
that was sure to bid the last man, and to carry it; and inquiring the
reason, he told me that just as the flame goes out the smoke descends,
which is a thing I never observed before, and by that he do know the
instant when to bid last, which is very pretty.  In our discourse in the
boat Mr. Coventry told us how the Fanatiques and the Presbyters, that did
intend to rise about this time, did choose this day as the most auspicious
to them in their endeavours against monarchy: it being fatal twice to the
King, and the day of Oliver's death.

     [Cromwell had considered the 3rd of September as the most fortunate
     day of his life, on account of his victories at Dunbar and
     Worcester.  It was also remarkable for the great storm that occurred
     at the time of his death; and as being the day on which the Fire of
     London, in 1666, burnt with the greatest fury.--B.]

But, blessed be God! all is likely to be quiet, I hope.  After the sale I
walked to my brother's, in my way meeting with Dr. Fairbrother, of whom I
enquired what news in Church matters.  He tells me, what I heard confirmed
since, that it was fully resolved by the King's new Council that an
indulgence should be granted the Presbyters; but upon the Bishop of
London's speech

     [Gilbert Sheldon, born July 19th, 1598; Fellow of All Souls, Oxford,
     1622; Warden, 1635; Bishop of London, 1660-63; Archbishop of
     Canterbury, 1663.  Died November 9th, 1677.]

(who is now one of the most powerful men in England with the King), their
minds were wholly turned.  And it is said that my Lord Albemarle did
oppose him most; but that I do believe is only in appearance.  He told me
also that most of the Presbyters now begin to wish they had complied, now
they see that no Indulgence will be granted them, which they hoped for;
and that the Bishop of London hath taken good care that places are
supplied with very good and able men, which is the only thing that will
keep all quiet.  I took him in the tavern at Puddle dock, but neither he
nor I drank any of the wine we called for, but left it, and so after
discourse parted, and Mr. Townsend not being at home I went to my
brother's, and there heard how his love matter proceeded, which do not
displease me, and so by water to White Hall to my Lord's lodgings, where
he being to go to Hinchingbroke to-morrow morning, I staid and fiddled
with Will.  Howe some new tunes very pleasant, and then my Lord came in
and had much kind talk with him, and then to bed with Mr. Moore there
alone.  So having taken my leave of my Lord before I went to bed, I
resolved to rise early and be gone without more speaking to him--

4th.  Which I did, and by water betimes to the Tower and so home, where I
shifted myself, being to dine abroad, and so being also trimmed, which is
a thing I have very seldom done of late, I gat to my office and then met
and sit all the morning, and at noon we all to the Trinity House, where we
treated, very dearly, I believe, the officers of the Ordnance; where was
Sir W. Compton and the rest and the Lieutenant of the Tower.  We had much
and good music, which was my best entertainment.  Sir Wm. Compton I heard
talk with great pleasure of the difference between the fleet now and in
Queen Elisabeth's days; where, in 88, she had but 36 sail great and small,
in the world; and ten rounds of powder was their allowance at that time
against the Spaniard.  After Sir W. Compton and Mr. Coventry, and some of
the best of the rest were gone, I grew weary of staying with Sir Williams
both, and the more for that my Lady Batten and her crew, at least half a
score, come into the room, and I believe we shall pay size for it; but
'tis very pleasant to see her in her hair under her hood, and how by
little and little she would fain be a gallant; but, Lord! the company she
keeps about her are like herself, that she may be known by them what she
is.  Being quite weary I stole from them and to my office, where I did
business till 9 at night, and so to my lodgings to bed.

5th.  Up by break of day at 5 o'clock, and down by water to Woolwich: in
my way saw the yacht lately built by our virtuosoes (my Lord Brunkard and
others, with the help of Commissioner Pett also) set out from Greenwich
with the little Dutch bezan, to try for mastery; and before they got to
Woolwich the Dutch beat them half-a-mile (and I hear this afternoon, that,
in coming home, it got above three miles); which all our people are glad
of.  Here I staid and mustered the yard and looked into the storehouses;
and so walked all alone to Greenwich, and thence by water to Deptford, and
there examined some stores, and did some of my own business in hastening
my work there, and so walked to Redriffe, being by this time pretty weary
and all in a sweat; took boat there for the Tower, which made me a little
fearful, it being a cold, windy morning.  So to my lodgings and there
rubbed myself clean, and so to Mr. Bland's, the merchant, by invitation, I
alone of all our company of this office; where I found all the officers of
the Customs, very grave fine gentlemen, and I am very glad to know them;
viz.--Sir Job Harvy, Sir John Wolstenholme, Sir John Jacob, Sir Nicholas
Crisp, Sir John Harrison, and Sir John Shaw: very good company.  And among
other pretty discourse, some was of Sir Jerom Bowes, Embassador from
Queene Elizabeth to the Emperor of Russia;

     [In 1583; the object of his mission being to persuade the Muscovite
     (Ivan IV. the Terrible) to a peace with John, King of Sweden.  He
     was also employed to confirm the trade of the English with Russia,
     and having incurred some personal danger, was received with favour
     on his return by the Queen.  He died in 1616.]

who, because some of the noblemen there would go up the stairs to the
Emperor before him, he would not go up till the Emperor had ordered those
two men to be dragged down stairs, with their heads knocking upon every
stair till they were killed.  And when he was come up, they demanded his
sword of him before he entered the room.  He told them, if they would have
his sword, they should have his boots too.  And so caused his boots to be
pulled off, and his night-gown and night-cap and slippers to be sent for;
and made the Emperor stay till he could go in his night-dress, since he
might not go as a soldier.  And lastly, when the Emperor in contempt, to
show his command of his subjects, did command one to leap from the window
down and broke his neck in the sight of our Embassador, he replied that
his mistress did set more by, and did make better use of the necks of her
subjects but said that, to show what her subjects would do for her, he
would, and did, fling down his gantlett before the Emperor; and challenged
all the nobility there to take it up, in defence of the Emperor against
his Queen: for which, at this very day, the name of Sir Jerom Bowes is
famous and honoured there.  After dinner I came home and found Sir John
Minnes come this day, and I went to him to Sir W. Batten's, where it
pleased me to see how jealous Sir Williams both are of my going down to
Woolwich, &c., and doing my duty as I nowadays do, and of my dining with
the Commission of the Customs.  So to my office, and there till 9 at
night, and so to my lodgings to bed.  I this day heard that Mr. Martin
Noell is knighted by the King, which I much wonder at; but yet he is
certainly a very useful man.

6th.  Lay long, that is, till 6 and past before I rose, in order to sweat
a little away the cold which I was afraid I might have got yesterday, but
I bless God I am well.  So up and to my office, and then we met and sat
till noon, very full of business.  Then Sir John Minnes, both Sir Williams
and I to the Trinity House, where we had at dinner a couple of venison
pasties, of which I eat but little, being almost cloyed, having been at
five pasties in three days, namely, two at our own feast, and one
yesterday, and two to-day.  So home and at the office all the afternoon,
busy till nine at night, and so to my lodging and to bed.  This afternoon
I had my new key and the lock of my office door altered, having lost my
key the other day, which vexed me.

7th (Lord's day).  Up betimes and round about by the streets to my office,
and walked in the garden and in my office till my man Will rose, and then
sent to tell Sir J. Minnes that I would go with him to Whitehall, which
anon we did, in his coach, and to the Chapell, where I heard a good sermon
of the Dean of Ely's, upon returning to the old ways, and a most excellent
anthem, with symphonys between, sung by Captain Cooke.  Then home with Mr.
Fox and his lady; and there dined with them, where much company come to
them.  Most of our discourse was what ministers are flung out that will
not conform: and the care of the Bishop of London that we are here
supplied with very good men.  Thence to my Lord's, where nobody at home
but a woman that let me in, and Sarah above, whither I went up to her and
played and talked with her .  .  .  After I had talked an hour or two with
her I went and gave Mr. Hunt a short visit, he being at home alone, and
thence walked homewards, and meeting Mr. Pierce, the chyrurgeon, he took
me into Somersett House; and there carried me into the Queen-Mother's
presence-chamber, where she was with our own Queen sitting on her left
hand (whom I did never see before); and though she be not very charming,
yet she hath a good, modest, and innocent look, which is pleasing.  Here I
also saw Madam Castlemaine, and, which pleased me most, Mr. Crofts, the
King's bastard, a most pretty spark of about 15 years old, who, I
perceive, do hang much upon my Lady Castlemaine, and is always with her;
and, I hear, the Queens both of them are mighty kind to him.

     [James, the son of Charles II. by Lucy Walter, daughter of William
     Walter, of Roch Castle, co.  Pembroke.  He was born April 9th, 1649,
     and landed in England with the Queen-Mother, July 28th, 1662, when
     he bore the name of Crofts, after Lord Crofts, his governor.  He was
     created Duke of Monmouth, February 14th, 1663, and married Lady Anne
     Scott, daughter and heiress of Francis, second Earl of Buccleuch, on
     April 20th following.  In 1673 he took the name of Scott, and was
     created Duke of Buccleuch.]

By and by in comes the King, and anon the Duke and his Duchess; so that,
they being all together, was such a sight as I never could almost have
happened to see with so much ease and leisure.  They staid till it was
dark, and then went away; the King and his Queen, and my Lady Castlemaine
and young Crofts, in one coach and the rest in other, coaches.  Here were
great store of great ladies, but very few handsome.  The King and Queen
were very merry; and he would have made the Queen-Mother believe that his
Queen was with child, and said that she said so.  And the young Queen
answered, "You lye;" which was the first English word that I ever heard
her say which made the King good sport; and he would have taught her to
say in English, "Confess and be hanged."  The company being gone I walked
home with great content as I can be in for seeing the greatest rarity, and
yet a little troubled that I should see them before my wife's coming home,
I having made a promise that I would not, nor did I do it industriously
and by design, but by chance only.  To my office, to fit myself for
waiting on the Duke to-morrow morning with the rest of our company, and so
to my lodgings and to bed.

8th.  Up betimes and to my office preparing an account to give the Duke
this morning of what we have of late done at the office.  About 7 o'clock
I went forth thinking to go along with Sir John Minnes and the rest, and I
found them gone, which did vex me, so I went directly to the old Swan and
took boat before them to Sir G. Carteret's lodgings at Whitehall, and
there staying till he was dressed talking with him, he and I to St.
James's, where Sir Williams both and Sir John were come, and so up with
Mr. Coventry to the Duke; who, after he was out of his bed, did send for
us in; and, when he was quite ready, took us into his closet, and there
told us that he do intend to renew the old custom for the Admirals to have
their principal officers to meet them once a-week, to give them an account
what they have done that week; which I am glad of: and so the rest did
tell his Royal Highness that I could do it best for the time past.  And so
I produced my short notes, and did give him an account of all that we have
of late done; and proposed to him several things for his commands, which
he did give us, and so dismissed us.  The rest to Deptford, I to the
Exchequer to meet Mr. Townsend, where I hear he is gone to the Sun tavern,
and there found him with some friends at breakfast, which I eat with him,
and so we crossed the water together, and in walking I told him my brother
Tom's intentions for a wife, which he would do me all favour in to Mr.
Young, whose kinswoman he do look after.  We took boat again at the
Falcon, and there parted, and I to the old Swan, and so to the Change, and
there meeting Sir W. Warren did step to a tavern, and there sat and talked
about price of masts and other things, and so broke up and to my office to
see what business, and so we took water again, and at the Tower I over to
Redriffe, and there left him in the boat and walked to Deptford, and there
up and down the yard speaking with people, and so Sir W. Pen coming out of
the payhouse did single me out to tell me Sir J. Minnes' dislike of my
blinding his lights over his stairs (which indeed is very bad) and
blocking up the house of office on the leads.  Which did trouble me.  So I
went into the payhouse and took an occasion of speaking with him alone,
and did give him good satisfaction therein, so as that I am well pleased
and do hope now to have my closet on the leads without any more trouble,
for he do not object against my having a door upon the leads, but that all
my family should not make it a thoroughfare, which I am contented with.
So to the pay, and in the evening home in the barge, and so to my office,
and after doing some business there to my lodgings, and so to bed.

9th.  At my office betimes, and by and by we sat, and at noon Mr.
Coventry, Sir J. Minnes, Mr. Pett, and myself by water to Deptford, where
we met Sir G. C., Sir W. B., and Sir W. P. At the pay of a ship, and we
dined together on a haunch of good venison boiled, and after dinner
returned again to the office, and there met several tradesmen by our
appointment to know of them their lowest rates that they will take for
their several provisions that they sell to us, for I do resolve to know
that, and to buy no dearer, that so when we know the lowest rate, it shall
be the Treasurer's fault, and not ours, that we pay dearer.  This
afternoon Sir John Minnes, Mr. Coventry, and I went into Sir John's
lodgings, where he showed us how I have blinded all his lights, and
stopped up his garden door, and other things he takes notice of that he
resolves to abridge me of, which do vex me so much that for all this
evening and all night in my bed, so great a fool I am, and little master
of my passion, that I could not sleep for the thoughts of my losing the
privilege of the leads, and other things which in themselves are small and
not worth half the trouble.  The more fool am I, and must labour against
it for shame, especially I that used to preach up Epictetus's rule:

     ["Some things are in our power, others are not" Pepys means,
     "I ought not to vex myself about what I cannot control."]

Late at my office, troubled in mind, and then to bed, but could hardly
sleep at night.

10th.  Up and to my house, and there contrived a way how Sir John Minnes
shall come into the leads, and yet I save part of the closet I hoped for,
which, if it will not please him, I am a madman to be troubled at it. To
my office, and then at my house among my lazy workmen all day.  In the
afternoon to the Wardrobe to speak with Mr. Townsend, who tells me that he
has spoke with Mr. Young about my brother Tom's business, and finds that
he has made enquiry of him, and do hear him so well spoken of that he
doubts not that the business will take with ordinary endeavours.  So to my
brother's, and there finding both door and hatch open, I went in and
knocked 3 or 4 times, and nobody came to me, which troubled me mightily;
at last came Margaret, who complained of Peter, who by and by came in, and
I did rattle him soundly for it.  I did afterwards take occasion to talk
seriously alone with Margaret, who I find a very discreet, good woman, and
tells me, upon my demand, that her master is a very good husband, and
minds his business well, but his fault is that he has not command over his
two men, but they do what they list, and care not for his commands, and
especially on Sundays they go whither they please, and not to church,
which vexes me mightily, and I am resolved to school [him] soundly for it,
it being so much unlike my father, that I cannot endure it in myself or
him.  So walked home and in my way at the Exchange found my uncle Wight,
and he and I to an alehouse to drink a cup of beer, and so away, and I
home and at the office till 9 o'clock and past, and so to my lodgings.  I
forgot that last night Mr. Cooke came to me to make his peace for inviting
my brother lately out of town without my leave, but he do give me such a
character of the lady that he has found out for him that I do much rejoice
at, and did this night write a letter to her, which he enclosed in one of
his, and by the report that I hear of her I confess I am much pleased with
the match.

11th.  Up, but not so soon as I have of late practised, my little trouble
of mind and the shortness of the days making me to lie a little longer
than I used to do, but I must make it up by sitting up longer of nights.
To my office, whither my brother Tom, whom I chide sufficiently for
yesterday's work.  So we sat at the office all the morning, some of us at
Deptford paying the ordinary there; at noon Sir W. Pen took me to his
lodgings to dinner, and after dinner I to my office again, and now and
then to see how my work goes on, and so to my office late, and so to my
lodgings, and after staying up till past 12 at night, at my musique upon
my lute, to bed.  This night Tom came to show me a civil letter sent him
from his mistress.  I am pleased well enough with the business.

12th.  Up betimes and to my office, and up to my workmen, which goes on
slowly and troubles me much.  Besides, my mind is troubled till I see how
Sir John Minnes will carry himself to me about my lodgings, for all my
fear is that he will get my best chamber from me, for as for the leads I
care not a farthing for them.  At my office all the morning, Mr. Lewes
teaching me to understand the method of making up Purser's accounts, which
is very needful for me and very hard.  Dined at home all in dirt, and my
mind weary of being thus out of order, but I hope in God it will away, but
for the present I am very melancholy, as I have been a great while.  All
the afternoon till 9 at night at my office, and then home and eat an egg
or two, and so to my lodgings and to bed.  This day, by letters from my
father, I hear that Captain Ferrers, who is with my Lord in the country,
was at Brampton (with Mr. Creed) to see him; and that a day or two ago,
being provoked to strike one of my Lord's footmen, the footman drew his
sword, and hath almost cut the fingers of one of his hands off; which I am
sorry for: but this is the vanity of being apt to command and strike.

13th.  Up betimes and to my office, and we sat all the morning, and then
at noon dined alone at home, and so among my work folks studying how to
get my way sure to me to go upon the leads, which I fear at last I must be
contented to go without, but, however, my mind is troubled still about it.
We met again in the afternoon to set accounts even between the King and
the masters of ships hired to carry provisions to Lisbon, and in the
evening Mr. Moore came to me and did lie with me at my lodgings.  It is
great pleasure to me his company and discourse, and did talk also about my
law business, which I must now fall upon minding again, the term coming on
apace.  So to bed.

14th (Lord's day).  Up very early, and Mr. Moore taking leave of me the
barber came and trimmed me (I having him now to come to me again after I
have used a pumice-stone a good while, not but what I like this where I
cannot conveniently have a barber, but here I cannot keep my hair dry
without one), and so by water to White Hall, by the way hearing that the
Bishop of London had given a very strict order against boats going on
Sundays, and as I come back again, we were examined by the masters of the
company in another boat; but I told them who I was.  But the door not
being open to Westminster stairs there, called in at the Legg and drank a
cup of ale and a toast, which I have not done many a month before, but it
served me for my two glasses of wine to-day.  Thence to St. James's to Mr.
Coventry, and there staid talking privately with him an hour in his
chamber of the business of our office, and found him to admiration good
and industrious, and I think my most true friend in all things that are
fair.  He tells me freely his mind of every man and in every thing. Thence
to White Hall chapel, where sermon almost done, and I heard Captain
Cooke's new musique.  This the first day of having vialls and other
instruments to play a symphony between every verse of the anthem; but the
musique more full than it was the last Sunday, and very fine it is.

     [Charles II. determined to form his own chapel on the model of that
     at Versailles.  Twenty-four instrumentalists were engaged, and this
     was the first day upon which they were brought into requisition.
     Evelyn alludes to the change in his Diary, but he puts the date down
     as the 21st instead of the 14th.  "Instead of the antient, grave and
     solemn wind musiq accompanying the organ, was introduc'd a concert
     of 24 violins between every pause after the French fantastical light
     way, better suiting a tavern or playhouse than a church.  This was
     the first time of change, and now we no more heard the cornet which
     gave life to the organ, that instrument quite left off in which the
     English were so skilful."  A list of the twenty-four fiddlers in
     1674, taken from an Exchequer document, "The names of the Gents of
     his Majesties Private Musick paid out of the Exchequer," is printed
     in North's "Memoires of Musick," ed.  Rimbault, 1846, p. 98 (note).]

But yet I could discern Captain Cooke to overdo his part at singing, which
I never did before.  Thence up into the Queen's presence, and there saw
the Queen again as I did last Sunday, and some fine ladies with her; but,
my troth, not many.  Thence to Sir G. Carteret's, and find him to have
sprained his foot and is lame, but yet hath been at chappell, and my Lady
much troubled for one of her daughters that is sick.  I dined with them,
and a very pretty lady, their kinswoman, with them.  My joy is, that I do
think I have good hold on Sir George and Mr. Coventry.  Sir George told me
of a chest of drawers that were given Sir W. B. by Hughes the rope-maker,
whom he has since put out of his employment, and now the fellow do cry out
upon Sir W. for his cabinet.  So home again by water and to church, and
from church Sir Williams both and Sir John Minnes into the garden, and
anon Sir W. Pen and I did discourse about my lodgings and Sir J. Minnes,
and I did open all my mind to him, and he told me what he had heard, and I
do see that I shall hardly keep my best lodging chamber, which troubles
me, but I did send for Goodenough the plasterer, who tells me that it did
ever belong to my lodgings, but lent by Mr. Payles to Mr. Smith, and so I
will strive hard for it before I lose it.  So to supper with them at Sir
W. Batten's, and do counterfeit myself well pleased, but my heart is
troubled and offended at the whole company.  So to my office to prepare
notes to read to the Duke to-morrow morning, and so to my lodgings and to
bed, my mind a little eased because I am resolved to know the worst
concerning my lodgings tomorrow.  Among other things Sir W. Pen did tell
me of one of my servants looking into Sir J. Minnes' window when my Lady
Batten lay there, which do much trouble them, and me also, and I fear will
wholly occasion my loosing the leads.  One thing more he told me of my
Jane's cutting off a carpenter's long mustacho, and how the fellow cried,
and his wife would not come near him a great while, believing that he had
been among some of his wenches.  At which I was merry, though I perceive
they discourse of it as a crime of hers, which I understand not.

15th.  Up betimes to meet with the plasterer and bricklayer that did first
divide our lodgings, and they do both tell me that my chamber now in
dispute did ever belong to my lodgings, which do put me into good quiet of
mind.  So by water with Sir Wm. Pen to White Hall; and, with much ado, was
fain to walk over the piles through the bridge, while Sir W. Batten and
Sir J. Minnes were aground against the bridge, and could not in a great
while get through.  At White Hall we hear that the Duke of York is gone
a-hunting to-day; and so we returned: they going to the Duke of
Albemarle's, where I left them (after I had observed a very good picture
or two there), and so home, and there did resolve to give up my endeavours
for access to the leads, and to shut up my doors lest the being open might
give them occasion of longing for my chamber, which I am in most fear
about.  So to Deptford, and took my Lady Batten and her daughter and Mrs.
Turner along with me, they being going through the garden thither, they to
Mr. Unthwayte's and I to the Pay, and then about 3 o'clock went to dinner
(Sir W. Pen and I), and after dinner to the Pay again, and at night by
barge home all together, and so to my lodgings and to bed, my mind full of
trouble about my house.

16th.  Up and to my workmen, and then to the office, and there we sat till
noon; then to the Exchange, and in my way met with the housekeeper of this
office, and he did give me so good an account of my chamber in my house
about which I am so much troubled that I am well at ease in my mind.  At
my office all the afternoon alone.  In the evening Sir J. M. and I walked
together a good while in the garden, very pleasant, and takes no notice
that he do design any further trouble to me about my house.  At night eat
a bit of bread and cheese, and so to my lodgings and to bed, my mind ill
at ease for these particulars: my house in dirt, and like to lose my best
chamber.  My wife writes me from the country that she is not pleased there
with my father nor mother, nor any of her servants, and that my boy is
turned a very rogue.  I have L30 to pay to the cavaliers: then a doubt
about my being forced to leave all my business here, when I am called to
the court at Brampton; and lastly, my law businesses, which vex me to my
heart what I shall be able to do next term, which is near at hand.

17th.  At my office all the morning, and at noon to the Exchange, where
meeting Mr. Moore and Mr. Stucky, of the Wardrobe, we to an ordinary to
dinner, and after dinner Mr. Moore and I about 3 o'clock to Paul's school,
to wait upon Mr. Crumlum (Mr. Moore having a hopeful lad, a kinsman of
his, there at school), who we take very luckily, and went up to his
chamber with him, where there was also an old fellow student of Mr.
Crumlum's, one Mr. Newell, come to see him, of whom he made so much, and
of me, that the truth is he with kindness did drink more than I believe he
used to do, and did begin to be a little impertinent, the more when after
all he would in the evening go forth with us and give us a bottle of wine
abroad, and at the tavern met with an acquaintance of his that did
occasion impertinent discourse, that though I honour the man, and he do
declare abundance of learning and worth, yet I confess my opinion is much
lessened of him, and therefore let it be a caution to myself not to love
drink, since it has such an effect upon others of greater worth in my own
esteem.  I could not avoid drinking of 5 glasses this afternoon with him,
and after I had parted with him Mr. Moore and I to my house, and after we
had eaten something to my lodgings, where the master of the house, a very
ordinary fellow, was ready to entertain me and took me into his
dining-room where his wife was, a pretty and notable lady, too fine surely
for him, and too much wit too.  Here I was forced to stay with them a good
while and did drink again, there being friends of theirs with them.  At
last being weary of his idle company, I bid good-night and so to my
chamber and Mr. [Moore] and I to bed, neither of us well pleased with our
afternoon's work, merely from our being witnesses of Mr. Crumlum's
weakness.  This day my boy is come from Brampton, and my wife I think the
next week.

18th.  At the office all the morning, and at noon Sir G. Carteret, Mr.
Coventry, and I by invitation to dinner to Sheriff Maynell's, the great
money-man; he, Alderman Backwell, and much noble and brave company, with
the privilege of their rare discourse, which is great content to me above
all other things in the world.  And after a great dinner and much
discourse, we arose and took leave, and home to the business of my office,
where I thank God I take delight, and in the evening to my lodging and to
bed.  Among other discourse, speaking concerning the great charity used in
Catholic countrys, Mr. Ashburnham did tell us, that this last year, there
being great want of corn in Paris, and so a collection made for the poor,
there was two pearls brought in, nobody knew from whom (till the Queen,
seeing them, knew whose they were, but did not discover it), which were
sold for 200,000 crownes.

19th.  Up betimes and to my office, and at 9 o'clock, none of the rest
going, I went alone to Deptford, and there went on where they left last
night to pay Woolwich yard, and so at noon dined well, being chief at the
table, and do not see but every body begins to give me as much respect and
honour as any of the rest.  After dinner to Pay again, and so till 9 at
night, my great trouble being that I was forced to begin an ill practice
of bringing down the wages of servants, for which people did curse me,
which I do not love.  At night, after I had eaten a cold pullet, I walked
by brave moonshine, with three or four armed men to guard me, to Redriffe,
it being a joy to my heart to think of the condition that I am now in,
that people should of themselves provide this for me, unspoke to.  I hear
this walk is dangerous to walk alone by night, and much robbery committed
here.  So from thence by water home, and so to my lodgings to bed.

20th.  Up betimes and to my office, where I found my brother Tom, who
tells me that his mistress's mother has wrote a letter to Mr. Lull of her
full satisfaction about Tom, of which I was glad, and do think the
business will take.  All this morning we sat at the office, Sir J. Minnes
and I.  And so dined at home, and among my workmen all the afternoon, and
in the evening Tom brought Mr. Lull to me, a friend of his mistress, a
serious man, with whom I spoke, and he gives me a good account of her and
of their satisfaction in Tom, all which pleases me well.  We walked a good
while in the garden together, and did give him a glass of wine at my
office, and so parted.  So to write letters by the post and news of this
to my father concerning Tom, and so home to supper and to my lodgings and
to bed.  To-night my barber sent me his man to trim me, who did live in
King Street in Westminster lately, and tells me that three or four that I
knew in that street, tradesmen, are lately fallen mad, and some of them
dead, and the others continue mad.  They live all within a door or two one
of another.

21st (Lord's day).  Got up betimes and walked to St. James's, and there to
Mr. Coventry, and sat an hour with him, talking of business of the office
with great pleasure, and I do perceive he do speak his whole mind to me.
Thence to the Park, where by appointment I met my brother Tom and Mr.
Cooke, and there spoke about Tom's business, and to good satisfaction.
The Queen coming by in her coach, going to her chappell at St. James's'
(the first time it hath been ready for her), I crowded after her, and I
got up to the room where her closet is; and there stood and saw the fine
altar, ornaments, and the fryers in their habits, and the priests come in
with their fine copes and many other very fine things. I heard their
musique too; which may be good, but it did not appear so to me, neither as
to their manner of singing, nor was it good concord to my ears, whatever
the matter was.  The Queene very devout: but what pleased me best was to
see my dear Lady Castlemaine, who, tho' a Protestant, did wait upon the
Queen to chappell.  By and by, after mass was done, a fryer with his cowl
did rise up and preach a sermon in Portuguese; which I not understanding,
did go away, and to the King's chappell, but that was done; and so up to
the Queen's presence-chamber, where she and the King was expected to dine:
but she staying at St. James's, they were forced to remove the things to
the King's presence [chamber]; and there he dined alone, and I with Mr.
Fox very finely; but I see I must not make too much of that liberty for my
honour sake only, not but that I am very well received.  After dinner to
Tom's, and so home, and after walking a good while in the garden I went to
my uncle Wight's, where I found my aunt in mourning and making sad stories
for the loss of her dear sister Nicholls, of which I should have been very
weary but that pretty Mrs. Margaret Wight came in and I was much pleased
with her company, and so all supper did vex my aunt talking in
commendation of the mass which I had been at to-day, but excused it
afterwards that it was only to make mirth.  And so after supper broke up
and home, and after putting my notes in order against to-morrow I went to
bed.

22nd.  Up betimes among my workmen, hastening to get things ready against
my wife's coming, and so with Sir J. M., Sir W. B., and Sir W. P., by
coach to St. James's, and there with the Duke.  I did give him an account
of all things past of late; but I stood in great pain, having a great fit
of the colic, having catched cold yesterday by putting off my stockings to
wipe my toes, but at last it lessened, and then I was pretty well again,
but in pain all day more or less.  Thence I parted from them and walked to
Greatorex's, and there with him did overlook many pretty things, new
inventions, and have bespoke a weather glass of him.  Thence to my Lord
Crew's, and dined with the servants, he having dined; and so, after
dinner, up to him, and sat an hour talking with him of publique, and my
Lord's private businesses, with much content.  So to my brother Tom's,
where Mr. Cooke expected me, and did go with me to see Mr. Young and Mr.
Lull in Blackfryers, kindred of Tom's mistress, where I was very well
used, and do find things to go in the business to my good content. Thence
to Mr. Townsend, and did there talk with Mr. Young himself also, and then
home and to my study, and so to my lodgings and to bed.

23rd.  Up betimes and with my workmen, taking some pleasure to see my work
come towards an end, though I am vexed every day enough with their delay.
We met and sat all the morning, dined at home alone, and with my workmen
all the afternoon, and in the evening by water and land to Deptford to
give order for things about my house, and came back again by coach with
Sir G. Carteret and Sir W. Batten (who has been at a Pay to-day), and to
my office and did some business, and so to supper and to my lodgings, and
so to bed.  In our coming home Sir G. Carteret told me how in most
cabaretts in France they have writ upon the walls in fair letters to be
read, "Dieu te regarde," as a good lesson to be in every man's mind, and
have also, as in Holland, their poor's box; in both which places at the
making all contracts and bargains they give so much, which they call God's
penny.

24th.  Up betimes and among my workmen, and among them all the morning
till noon, and then to my Lord Crew's, and there dined alone with him, and
among other things he do advise me by all means to keep my Lord Sandwich
from proceeding too far in the business of Tangier.  First, for that he is
confident the King will not be able to find money for the building the
Mole; and next, for that it is to be done as we propose it by the reducing
of the garrison; and then either my Lord must oppose the Duke of York, who
will have the Irish regiment under the command of Fitzgerald continued, or
else my Lord Peterborough, who is concerned to have the English continued,
and he, it seems, is gone back again merely upon my Lord Sandwich's
encouragement.  Thence to Mr. Wotton, the shoemaker's, and there bought a
pair of boots, cost me 30s., and he told me how Bird hath lately broke his
leg, while he was fencing in "Aglaura," upon the stage, and that the new
theatre of all will be ready against term.  So to my brother's, and there
discoursed with him and Mr. Cooke about their journey to Tom's mistress
again, and I did speak with Mr. Croxton about measuring of silk flags.  So
by water home and to my workmen, and so at night till late at my office,
inditing a letter from Tom to his mistress upon his sending her a watch
for a token, and so home and to supper, and to my lodgings and to bed.  It
is my content that by several hands to-day I hear that I have the name of
good-natured man among the poor people that come to the office.

25th.  Up betimes and to my workmen, and then to the office, where we sat
all the morning.  So home to dinner alone and then to my workmen till
night, and so to my office till bedtime, and so after supper to my
lodgings and to bed.  This evening I sat awhile at Sir W. Batten's with
Sir J. Minnes, &c., where he told us among many other things how in
Portugal they scorn to make a seat for a house of office, but they do
.  .  .  . all in pots and so empty them in the river.  I did also
hear how the woman, formerly nurse to Mrs. Lemon (Sir W. Batten's
daughter), her child was torn to pieces by two doggs at Walthamstow this
week, and is dead, which is very strange.

26th.  Up betimes and among my workmen.  By and by to Sir W. Batten, who
with Sir J. M. are going to Chatham this morning, and I was in great pain
till they were gone that I might see whether Sir John do speak any thing
of my chamber that I am afraid of losing or no.  But he did not, and so my
mind is a little at more ease.  So all day long till night among my
workmen, and in the afternoon did cause the partition between the entry
and the boy's room to be pulled down to lay it all into one, which I hope
will please me and make my coming in more pleasant.  Late at my office at
night writing a letter of excuse to Sir G. Carteret that I cannot wait
upon him to-morrow morning to Chatham as I promised, which I am loth to do
because of my workmen and my wife's coming to town to-morrow.  So to my
lodgings and to bed.

27th.  Up betimes and among my workmen, and with great pleasure see the
posts in the entry taken down beyond expectation, so that now the boy's
room being laid into the entry do make my coming in very handsome, which
was the only fault remaining almost in my house.  We sat all the morning,
and in the afternoon I got many jobbs done to my mind, and my wife's
chamber put into a good readiness against her coming, which she did at
night, for Will did, by my leave to go, meet her upon the road, and at
night did bring me word she was come to my brother's, by my order.  So I
made myself ready and put things at home in order, and so went thither to
her.  Being come, I found her and her maid and dogg very well, and herself
grown a little fatter than she was.  I was very well pleased to see her,
and after supper to bed, and had her company with great content and much
mutual love, only I do perceive that there has been falling out between my
mother and she, and a little between my father and she; but I hope all is
well again, and I perceive she likes Brampton House and seat better than
ever I did myself, and tells me how my Lord hath drawn a plot of some
alteracions to be made there, and hath brought it up, which I saw and like
well.  I perceive my Lord and Lady have been very kind to her, and Captn.
Ferrers so kind that I perceive I have some jealousy of him, but I know
what is the Captain's manner of carriage, and therefore it is nothing to
me.  She tells me of a Court like to be in a little time, which troubles
me, for I would not willingly go out of town.

28th (Lord's day).  Waked early, and fell talking one with another with
great pleasure of my house at Brampton and that here, and other matters.
She tells me what a rogue my boy is, and strange things he has been found
guilty of, not fit to name, which vexes [me], but most of all the unquiett
life that my mother makes my father and herself lead through her want of
reason.  At last I rose, and with Tom to the French Church at the Savoy,
where I never was before--a pretty place it is--and there they have the
Common Prayer Book read in French, and, which I never saw before, the
minister do preach with his hat off, I suppose in further conformity with
our Church.  So to Tom's to dinner with my wife, and there came Mr. Cooke,
and Joyce Norton do also dine there, and after dinner Cooke and I did talk
about his journey and Tom's within a day or two about his mistress.  And I
did tell him my mind and give him my opinion in it.  So I walked home and
found my house made a little clean, and pleases me better and better, and
so to church in the afternoon, and after sermon to my study, and there did
some things against to-morrow that I go to the Duke's, and so walked to
Tom's again, and there supped and to bed with good content of mind.

29th (Michaelmas day).  This day my oaths for drinking of wine and going
to plays are out, and so I do resolve to take a liberty to-day, and then
to fall to them again.  Up and by coach to White Hall, in my way taking up
Mr. Moore, and walked with him, talking a good while about business, in
St. James's Park, and there left him, and to Mr. Coventry's, and so with
him and Sir W. Pen up to the Duke, where the King came also and staid till
the Duke was ready.  It being Collarday, we had no time to talk with him
about any business.  They went out together.  So we parted, and in the
park Mr. Cooke by appointment met me, to whom I did give my thoughts
concerning Tom's match and their journey tomorrow, and did carry him by
water to Tom's, and there taking up my wife, maid, dog, and him, did carry
them home, where my wife is much pleased with my house, and so am I fully.
I sent for some dinner and there dined, Mrs. Margaret Pen being by, to
whom I had spoke to go along with us to a play this afternoon, and then to
the King's Theatre, where we saw "Midsummer's Night's Dream," which I had
never seen before, nor shall ever again, for it is the most insipid
ridiculous play that ever I saw in my life.  I saw, I confess, some good
dancing and some handsome women, which was all my pleasure.  Thence set my
wife down at Madam Turner's, and so by coach home, and having delivered
Pegg Pen to her father safe, went home, where I find Mr. Deane, of
Woolwich, hath sent me the modell he had promised me; but it so far
exceeds my expectations, that I am sorry almost he should make such a
present to no greater a person; but I am exceeding glad of it, and shall
study to do him a courtesy for it.  So to my office and wrote a letter to
Tom's mistress's mother to send by Cooke to-morrow. Then came Mr. Moore
thinking to have looked over the business of my Brampton papers against
the Court, but my mind was so full of other matters (as it is my nature
when I have been a good while from a business, that I have almost forgot
it, I am loth to come to it again) that I could not set upon it, and so he
and I past the evening away in discourse, and to my lodgings and to bed.

30th.  We rose, and he about his business, and I to my house to look over
my workmen; but good God! how I do find myself by yesterday's liberty hard
to be brought to follow business again, but however, I must do it,
considering the great sweet and pleasure and content of mind that I have
had since I did leave drink and plays, and other pleasures, and followed
my business.  So to my office, where we sat till noon, and then I to
dinner with Sir W. Pen, and while we were at it coming my wife to the
office, and so I sent for her up, and after dinner we took coach and to
the Duke's playhouse, where we saw "The Duchess of Malfy" well performed,
but Betterton and Ianthe to admiration.  That being done, home again, by
coach, and my wife's chamber got ready for her to lie in to-night, but my
business did call me to my office, so that staying late I did not lie with
her at home, but at my lodgings.  Strange to see how easily my mind do
revert to its former practice of loving plays and wine, having given
myself a liberty to them but these two days; but this night I have again
bound myself to Christmas next, in which I desire God to bless me and
preserve me, for under God I find it to be the best course that ever I
could take to bring myself to mind my business.  I have also made up this
evening my monthly ballance, and find that, notwithstanding the loss of
L30 to be paid to the loyall and necessitous cavaliers by act of
Parliament,

     [Two acts were passed in 1662 for this purpose, viz., 13 and 14 Car.
     II. cap. 8: "An act for distribution of threescore thousand pounds
     amongst the truly loyal and indigent commission officers, and for
     assessing of offices and distributing the monies thereby raised for
     their further supply;" and cap.  9, "An act for the relief of poor
     and maimed officers and soldiers who have faithfully served his
     Majesty and his royal father in the late wars."]

yet I am worth about L680, for which the Lord God be praised.  My
condition at present is this:--I have long been building, and my house to
my great content is now almost done.  But yet not so but that I shall have
dirt, which troubles me too, for my wife has been in the country at
Brampton these two months, and is now come home a week or two before the
house is ready for her.  My mind is somewhat troubled about my best
chamber, which I question whether I shall be able to keep or no.  I am
also troubled for the journey which I must needs take suddenly to the
Court at Brampton, but most of all for that I am not provided to
understand my business, having not minded it a great while, and at the
best shall be able but to make a bad matter of it, but God, I hope, will
guide all to the best, and I am resolved to-morrow to fall hard to it.  I
pray God help me therein, for my father and mother and all our well-doings
do depend upon my care therein.  My Lord Sandwich has lately been in the
country, and very civil to my wife, and hath himself spent some pains in
drawing a plot of some alterations in our house there, which I shall
follow as I get money.  As for the office, my late industry hath been
such, as I am become as high in reputation as any man there, and good hold
I have of Mr. Coventry and Sir G. Carteret, which I am resolved, and it is
necessary for me, to maintain by all fair means. Things are all quiett,
but the King poor, and no hopes almost of his being otherwise, by which
things will go to rack, especially in the Navy. The late outing of the
Presbyterian clergy by their not renouncing the Covenant as the Act of
Parliament commands, is the greatest piece of state now in discourse.  But
for ought I see they are gone out very peaceably, and the people not so
much concerned therein as was expected. My brother Tom is gone out of town
this day, to make a second journey to his mistress at Banbury, of which I
have good expectations, and pray God to bless him therein.  My mind, I
hope, is settled to follow my business again, for I find that two days'
neglect of business do give more discontent in mind than ten times the
pleasure thereof can repair again, be it what it will.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                 OCTOBER
                                   1662

October 1st.  Up with my mind pretty well at rest about my accounts and
other business, and so to my house and there put my work to business, and
then down to Deptford to do the same there, and so back and with my
workmen all the afternoon, and my wife putting a chamber in order for us
to lie in.  At night to look over some Brampton papers against the Court
which I expect every day to hear of, and that done home and with my wife
to bed, the first time I have lain there these two months and more, which
I am now glad to do again, and do so like the chamber as it is now ordered
that all my fear is my not keeping it.  But I hope the best, for it would
vex me to the heart to lose it.

2nd.  Up and to the office, where we sat till noon, and then to dinner,
and Mr. Moore came and dined with me, and after dinner to look over my
Brampton papers, which was a most necessary work, though it is not so much
to my content as I could wish.  I fear that it must be as it can, and not
as I would.  He being gone I to my workmen again, and at night by coach
towards Whitehall took up Mr. Moore and set him at my Lord's, and myself,
hearing that there was a play at the Cockpit (and my Lord Sandwich, who
came to town last night, at it), I do go thither, and by very great
fortune did follow four or five gentlemen who were carried to a little
private door in a wall, and so crept through a narrow place and come into
one of the boxes next the King's, but so as I could not see the King or
Queene, but many of the fine ladies, who yet are really not so handsome
generally as I used to take them to be, but that they are finely dressed.
Here we saw "The Cardinall," a tragedy I had never seen before, nor is
there any great matter in it.  The company that came in with me into the
box, were all Frenchmen that could speak no English, but Lord! what sport
they made to ask a pretty lady that they got among them that understood
both French and English to make her tell them what the actors said.
Thence to my Lord's, and saw him, and staid with him half an hour in his
chamber talking about some of mine and his own business, and so up to bed
with Mr. Moore in the chamber over my Lord's.

3rd.  Rose, and without taking leave or speaking to my Lord went out early
and walked home, calling at my brother's and Paul's Churchyard, but bought
nothing because of my oath, though I had a great mind to it.  At my
office, and with my workmen till noon, and then dined with my wife upon
herrings, the first I have eat this year, and so to my workmen again.  By
and by comes a gentleman to speak with my wife, and I found him to be a
gentleman that had used her very civilly in her coming up out of the
country, on which score I showed him great respect, and found him a very
ingenious gentleman, and sat and talked with him a great while. He gone,
to my workmen again, and in the evening comes Captain Ferrers, and sat and
talked a great while, and told me the story of his receiving his cut in
the hand by falling out with one of my Lord's footmen.  He told me also of
the impertinence and mischief that Ned Pickering has made in the country
between my Lord and all his servants almost by his finding of faults,
which I am vexed to hear, it being a great disgrace to my Lord to have the
fellow seen to be so great still with him.  He brought me a letter from my
father, that appoints the day for the Court at Brampton to be the 13th of
this month; but I perceive he has kept the letter in his pocket these
three days, so that if the day had been sooner, I might have been spilt.
So that it is a great folly to send letters of business by any friend that
require haste.  He being gone I to my office all the evening, doing
business there till bedtime, it being now my manner since my wife is come
to spend too much of my daytime with her and the workmen and do my office
business at night, which must not be after the work of the house is done.
This night late I had notice that Dekins, the merchant, is dead this
afternoon suddenly, for grief that his daughter, my Morena, who has long
been ill, is given over by the Doctors.  For both which I am very sorry.
So home and to bed.

4th.  To my office all the morning, after I was up (my wife beginning to
make me lie long a mornings), where we sat till noon, and then dined at
home, and after a little with my workmen to my office till 9 at night,
among other things examining the particulars of the miscarriage of the
Satisfaction, sunk the other day on the Dutch coast through the negligence
of the pilott.

5th (Lord's day).  Lay long in bed talking with my wife, and among other
things fell out about my maid Sarah, whom my wife would fain put away,
when I think her as good a servant as ever came into a house, but it seems
my wife would have one that would dress a head well, but we were friends
at last.  I to church; and this day the parson has got one to read with a
surplice on.  I suppose himself will take it up hereafter, for a cunning
fellow he is as any of his coat.  Dined with my wife, and then to talk
again above, chiefly about her learning to dance against her going next
year into the country, which I am willing she shall do.  Then to church to
a tedious sermon, and thence walked to Tom's to see how things are in his
absence in the country, and so home and in my wife's chamber till bedtime
talking, and then to my office to put things in order to wait on the Duke
to-morrow morning, and so home and to bed.

6th.  Sir W. Pen and I early to St. James's by water, where Mr. Coventry,
finding the Duke in bed, and not very well, we did not stay to speak with
him, but to White Hall, and there took boat and down to Woolwich we went.
In our way Mr. Coventry telling us how of late upon enquiry into the
miscarriages of the Duke's family, Mr. Biggs, his steward, is found very
faulty, and is turned out of his employment.  Then we fell to reading of a
book which I saw the other day at my Lord Sandwich's, intended for the
late King, finely bound up, a treatise concerning the benefit the
Hollanders make of our fishing, but whereas I expected great matters from
it, I find it a very impertinent [book], and though some things good, yet
so full of tautologies, that we were weary of it.  At Woolwich we mustered
the yard, and then to the Hart to dinner, and then to the Rope-yard, where
I did vex Sir W. Pen I know to appear so well acquainted, I thought better
than he, in the business of hemp; thence to Deptford, and there looked
over several businesses, and wakened the officers there; so walked to
Redriffe, and thence, landing Sir W. Pen at the Tower, I to White Hall
with Mr. Coventry, and so to my Lord Sandwich's lodgings, but my Lord was
not within, being at a ball this night with the King at my Lady
Castlemaine's at next door.  But here to my trouble I hear that Mr. Moore
is gone very sick to the Wardrobe this afternoon, which troubles me much
both for his own sake and for mine, because of my law business that he
does for me and also for my Lord's matters.  So hence by water, late as it
was, to the Wardrobe, and there found him in a high fever, in bed, and
much cast down by his being ill.  So thought it not convenient to stay,
but left him and walked home, and there weary went to supper, and then the
barber came to me, and after he had done, to my office to set down my
journall of this day, and so home and to bed.

7th.  At the office all the morning, dined at home with my wife.  After
dinner with her by coach to see Mr. Moore, who continues ill.  I took his
books of accounts, and did discourse with him about my Lord's and my own
businesses, and there being Mr. Battersby by, did take notice of my having
paid him the L100 borrowed of him, which they both did confess and promise
to return me my bond.  Thence by water with Will.  Howe to Westminster,
and there staying a little while in the Hall (my wife's father and mother
being abroad, and so she returning presently) thence by coach to my
Lord's, and there I left money for Captain Ferrers to buy me two bands.
So towards the New Exchange, and there while my wife was buying things I
walked up and down with Dr. Williams, talking about my law businesses, and
thence took him to my brother's, and there gave him a glass of wine, and
so parted, and then by coach with my wife home, and Sir J. M. and Sir W.
B. being come from Chatham Pay I did go see them for complaisance, and so
home and to bed.

8th.  Up and by water to my Lord Sandwich's, and was with him a good while
in his chamber, and among other things to my extraordinary joy, he did
tell me how much I was beholding to the Duke of York, who did yesterday of
his own accord tell him that he did thank him for one person brought into
the Navy, naming myself, and much more to my commendation, which is the
greatest comfort and encouragement that ever I had in my life, and do owe
it all to Mr. Coventry's goodness and ingenuity.  I was glad above measure
of this.  Thence to Mr. Moore, who, I hope, is better than he was, and so
home and dined at home, and all the afternoon busy at my office, and at
night by coach to my Lord's again, thinking to speak with him, but he is
at White Hall with the King, before whom the puppet plays I saw this
summer in Covent-garden are acted this night.  Hither this night my
scallop,

     [A lace band, the edges of which were indented with segments of
     circles, so as to resemble a scallop shell.  The word "scallop" was
     used till recently for a part of a lady's dress embroidered and cut
     to resemble a scallop shell.]

bought and got made by Captain Ferrers' lady, is sent, and I brought it
home, a very neat one.  It cost me about L3, and L3 more I have given him
to buy me another.  I do find myself much bound to go handsome, which I
shall do in linen, and so the other things may be all the plainer.  Here I
staid playing some new tunes to parts with Wm. Howe, and, my Lord not
coming home, I came home late on foot, my boy carrying a link, and so eat
a bit and to bed, my head full of ordering of businesses against my
journey to-morrow, that there may be nothing done to my wrong in my
absence.  This day Sir W. Pen did speak to me from Sir J. Minnes to desire
my best chamber of me, and my great joy is that I perceive he do not stand
upon his right, which I was much afraid of, and so I hope I shall do well
enough with him for it, for I will not part with it by fair means, though
I contrive to let him have another room for it.

9th.  Up early about my business to get me ready for my journey.  But
first to the office; where we sat all the morning till noon, and then
broke up; and I bid them adieu for a week, having the Duke's leave got me
by Mr. Coventry.  To whom I did give thanks for my newes yesterday of the
Duke's words to my Lord Sandwich concerning me, which he took well; and do
tell me so freely his love and value of me, that my mind is now in as
great a state of quiett as to my interest in the office, as I could ever
wish to be.  I should this day have dined at Sir W. Pen's at a venison
pasty with the rest of our fellows, but I could not get time, but sent for
a bit home, and so between one and two o'clock got on horseback at our
back gate, with my man Will with me, both well-mounted on two grey horses.
We rode and got to Ware before night; and so resolved to ride on to
Puckeridge, which we did, though the way was bad, and the evening dark
before we got thither, by help of company riding before us; and among
others, a gentleman that took up at the same inn, the Falcon, with me, his
name Mr. Brian, with whom I supped, and was very good company, and a
scholar.  He tells me, that it is believed the Queen is with child, for
that the coaches are ordered to ride very easily through the streets.
After supper we paid the reckoning together, and so he to his chamber and
I to bed, very well, but my feet being much cramped by my new hard boots
that I bought the other day of Wotton were in much pain.  Will lay in
another bed in the chamber with me.

10th.  Up, and between eight and nine mounted again; but my feet so
swelled with yesterday's pain, that I could not get on my boots, which
vexed me to the blood, but was forced to pay 4s. for a pair of old shoes
of my landlord's, and so rid in shoes to Cambridge; but the way so good
that but for a little rain I had got very well thither, and set up at the
Beare: and there being spied in the street passing through the town my
cozen Angier came to me, and I must needs to his house, which I did; and
there found Dr. Fairbrother, with a good dinner, a barrel of good oysters,
a couple of lobsters, and wine.  But, above all, telling me that this day
there is a Congregation for the choice of some officers in the University,
he after dinner gets me a gown, cap, and hood, and carries me to the
Schooles, where Mr. Pepper, my brother's tutor, and this day chosen
Proctor, did appoint a M.A. to lead me into the Regent House, where I sat
with them, and did [vote] by subscribing papers thus: "Ego Samuel Pepys
eligo Magistrum Bernardum Skelton, (and which was more strange, my old
schoolfellow and acquaintance, and who afterwards did take notice of me,
and we spoke together), alterum e taxatoribus hujus Academiae in annum
sequentem."  The like I did for one Biggs, for the other Taxor, and for
other officers, as the Vice-Proctor (Mr. Covell), for Mr. Pepper, and
which was the gentleman that did carry me into the Regent House.  This
being done, and the Congregation dissolved by the Vice-Chancellor, I did
with much content return to my Cozen Angier's, being much pleased of doing
this jobb of work, which I had long wished for and could never have had
such a time as now to do it with so much ease.  Thence to Trinity Hall,
and there staid a good while with Dr. John Pepys, who tells me that [his]
brother Roger has gone out of town to keep a Court; and so I was forced to
go to Impington, to take such advice as my old uncle and his son Claxton
could give me.  Which I did, and there supped and talked with them, but
not of my business till by and by after supper comes in, unlooked for, my
cozen Roger, with whom by and by I discoursed largely, and in short he
gives me good counsel, but tells me plainly that it is my best way to
study a composition with my uncle Thomas, for that law will not help us,
and that it is but a folly to flatter ourselves, with which, though much
to my trouble, yet I was well satisfied, because it told me what I am to
trust to, and so to bed.

11th.  Up betimes, and after a little breakfast, and a very poor one, like
our supper, and such as I cannot feed on, because of my she-cozen
Claxton's gouty hands; and after Roger had carried me up and down his
house and orchards, to show me them, I mounted, and rode to Huntingdon,
and so to Brampton; where I found my father and two brothers, and Mr.
Cooke, my mother and sister.  So we are now all together, God knows when
we shall be so again.  I walked up and down the house and garden, and find
my father's alteracions very handsome.  But not so but that there will be
cause enough of doing more if ever I should come to live there, but it is,
however, very well for a country being as any little thing in the country.
So to dinner, where there being nothing but a poor breast of mutton, and
that ill-dressed, I was much displeased, there being Mr. Cooke there, who
I invited to come over with my brother thither, and for whom I was
concerned to make much of.  I told my father and mother of it, and so had
it very well mended for the time after, as long as I staid, though I am
very glad to see them live so frugally.  But now to my business.  I found
my uncle Thomas come into the country, and do give out great words, and
forwarns all our people of paying us rent, and gives out that he will
invalidate the Will, it being but conditional, we paying debts and
legacies, which we have not done, but I hope we shall yet go through well
enough.  I settled to look over papers, and discourse of business against
the Court till the evening; and then rode to Hinchingbroke (Will with me),
and there to my Lady's chamber and saw her, but, it being night, and my
head full of business, staid not long, but drank a cup of ale below, and
so home again, and to supper, and to bed, being not quiet in mind till I
speak with Piggott, to see how his business goes, whose land lies
mortgaged to my late uncle, but never taken up by him, and so I fear the
heire at law will do it and that we cannot, but my design is to supplant
him by pretending bonds as well as a mortgage for the same money, and so
as executor have the benefit of the bonds.

12th (Lord's day).  Made myself fine with Captain Ferrers's lace band,
being lothe to wear my own new scallop, it is so fine; and, after the
barber had done with us, to church, where I saw most of the gentry of the
parish; among others, Mrs. Hanbury, a proper lady, and Mr. Bernard and his
Lady, with her father, my late Lord St. John, who looks now like a very
plain grave man.  Mr. Wells preached a pretty good sermon, and they say he
is pretty well in his witts again.  So home to dinner, and so to walk in
the garden, and then to Church again, and so home, there coming several
people about business, and among others Mr. Piggott, who gives me good
assurance of his truth to me and our business, in which I am very much
pleased, and tells me what my uncle Thomas said to him and what he
designs, which (in fine) is to be admitted to the estate as well as we,
which I must endeavour to oppose as well as I can.  So to supper, but my
mind is so full of our business that I am no company at all, and then
their drink do not please me, till I did send to Goody Stanks for some of
her's which is very small and fresh, with a little taste of wormewood,
which ever after did please me very well.  So after supper to bed,
thinking of business, but every night getting my brother John to go up
with me for discourse sake, while I was making unready.

     [That is, "undressing."  So of the French lords leaping over the
     walls in their shirts

         "Alenc.  How now, my lords!  what all unready so?
          Bast.  Unready!  ay, and glad we 'scaped so well."
                         Henry VI., act ii., sc. i.--M. B.]

13th.  Up to Hinchingbroke, and there with Mr. Sheply did look all over
the house, and I do, I confess, like well of the alteracions, and do like
the staircase, but there being nothing to make the outside more regular
and modern, I am not satisfied with it, but do think it to be too much to
be laid out upon it.  Thence with Sheply to Huntingdon to the Crown, and
there did sit and talk, and eat a breakfast of cold roast beef, and so he
to St. Ives Market, and I to Sir Robert Bernard's for council, having a
letter from my Lord Sandwich to that end.  He do give it me with much
kindness in appearance, and upon my desire do promise to put off my
uncle's admittance, if he can fairly, and upon the whole do make my case
appear better to me than my cozen Roger did, but not so but that we are
liable to much trouble, and that it will be best to come to an agreement
if possible.  With my mind here also pretty well to see things proceed so
well I returned to Brampton, and spent the morning in looking over papers
and getting my copies ready against to-morrow.  So to dinner, and then to
walk with my father and other business, when by and by comes in my uncle
Thomas and his son Thomas to see us, and very calm they were and we to
them.  And after a short How do you, and drinking a cup of beer, they went
away again, and so by and by my father and I to Mr. Phillips, and there
discoursed with him in order to to-morrow's business of the Court and
getting several papers ready, when presently comes in my uncle Thomas and
his son thither also, but finding us there I believe they were
disappointed and so went forth again, and went to the house that Prior has
lately bought of us (which was Barton's) and there did make entry and
forbade paying rent to us, as now I hear they have done everywhere else,
and that that was their intent in coming to see us this day.  I perceive
most of the people that do deal with us begin to be afraid that their
title to what they buy will not be good.  Which troubled me also I confess
a little, but I endeavoured to remove all as well as I could. Among other
things they make me afraid that Barton was never admitted to that that my
uncle bought of him, but I hope the contrary.  Thence home, and with my
father took a melancholy walk to Portholme, seeing the country-maids
milking their cows there, they being there now at grass, and to see with
what mirth they come all home together in pomp with their milk, and
sometimes they have musique go before them.  So back home again, and to
supper, and in comes Piggott with a counterfeit bond which by agreement
between us (though it be very just in itself) he has made, by which I
shall lay claim to the interest of the mortgage money, and so waiting with
much impatience and doubt the issue of to-morrow's Court, I to bed, but
hardly slept half an hour the whole night, my mind did so run with fears
of to-morrow.

14th.  Up, and did digest into a method all I could say in our defence, in
case there should be occasion, for I hear he will have counsel to plead
for him in the Court, and so about nine o'clock to the court at the
Lordshipp where the jury was called; and there being vacancies, they would
have had my father, in respect to him, [to] have been one of the Homage,
but he thought fit to refuse it, he not knowing enough the customs of the
town.  They being sworn and the charge given them, they fell to our
business, finding the heir-at-law to be my uncle Thomas; but Sir Robert
[Bernard] did tell them that he had seen how the estate was devised to my
father by my uncle's will, according to the custom of the manour, which
they would have denied, first, that it was not according to the custom of
the manour, proposing some difficulty about the half-acre of land which is
given the heir-at-law according to custom, which did put me into great
fear lest it might not be in my uncle's possession at his death, but
mortgaged with other to T. Trice (who was there, and was with my good will
admitted to Taylor's house mortgaged to him if not being worth the money
for which it was mortgaged, which I perceive he now, although he lately
bragged the contrary, yet is now sensible of, and would have us to redeem
it with money, and he would now resurrender it to us rather than the
heir-at-law) or else that it was part of Goody Gorum's in which she has a
life, and so might not be capable of being according to the custom given
to the heir-at-law, but Will Stanks tells me we are sure enough against
all that.  Then they fell to talk of Piggott's land mortgaged to my uncle,
but he never admitted to it, which they now as heir would have admitted
to.  But the steward, as he promised me, did find pretensions very kindly
and readily to put off their admittance, by which I find they are much
defeated, and if ever, I hope, will now listen to a treaty and agreement
with us, at our meeting at London.  So they took their leaves of the
steward and Court, and went away, and by and by, after other business many
brought in, they broke up to dinner.  So my father and I home with great
content to dinner; my mind now as full against the afternoon business,
which we sat upon after dinner at the Court, and did sue out a recovery,
and cut off the intayle; and my brothers there, to join therein.  And my
father and I admitted to all the lands; he for life, and I for myself and
my heirs in reversion, and then did surrender according to bargain to
Prior, Greene, and Shepheard the three cottages with their appurtenances
that they have bought of us, and that being done and taken leave of the
steward, I did with most compleat joy of mind go from the Court with my
father home, and in a quarter of an hour did get on horseback, with my
brother Tom, Cooke, and Will, all mounted, and without eating or drinking,
take leave of father, mother, Pall, to whom I did give 10s., but have
shown no kindness since I come, for I find her so very ill-natured that I
cannot love her, and she so cruel a hypocrite that she can cry when she
pleases, and John and I away, calling in at Hinchingbroke, and taking
leave in three words of my Lady, and the young ladies; and so by moonlight
most bravely all the way to Cambridge, with great pleasure, whither we
come at about nine o'clock, and took up at the Bear, but the house being
full of guests we had very ill lodging, which troubled me, but had a
supper, and my mind at good ease, and so to bed.  Will in another bed in
my chamber.

15th.  My mind, though out of trouble, yet intent upon my journey home,
being desirous to know how all my matters go there, I could hardly sleep,
but waked very early; and, when it was time, did call up Will, and we
rose, and musique (with a bandore

     [A musical instrument with wire strings, and sounded with a
     plectrum; used as a bass to the cittern.  The banjo is a
     modification of the bandore, as the name is a negro corruption of
     that word.]

for the base) did give me a levett;

     [A blast of trumpets, intended as a 'reveillee', from French lever.

                   "First he that led the Cavalcade
                    Wore a Sow-gelder's Flagellet,
                    On which he blew as strong a Levet
                    As well-feed Lawyer on his breviate."

                                   Hudibras, II. ii. v. 609.]

and so we got ready; and while breakfast was providing, I went forth (by
the way finding Mr. George Mountagu and his Lady, whom I saluted, going to
take their coach thus early to proceed on their journey, they having
lodged in the chamber just under me all this night) and showed Mr. Cooke
King's College Chapel, Trinity College, and St. John's College Library;
and that being done, to our inn again: where I met Dr. Fairbrother brought
thither by my brother Tom, and he did breakfast with us, a very
good-natured man he is, and told us how the room we were in was the room
where Cromwell and his associated officers did begin to plot and act their
mischiefs in these counties.  Having eat well, only our oysters proving
bad, we mounted, having a pair of boots that I borrowed and carried with
me from Impington, my own to be sent from Cambridge to London, and took
leave of all, and begun our journey about nine o'clock. After we had rode
about 10 miles we got out of our way into Royston road, which did vex me
cruelly, and the worst for that my brother's horse, which was lame
yesterday, grows worse to-day, that he could not keep pace with us.  At
last with much ado we got into the road again, having misguided also a
gentleman's man who had lost his master and thought us to be going the
same way did follow us, but coming into the road again we met with his
master, by his coat a divine, but I perceiving Tom's horse not able to
keep with us, I desired Mr. Cooke and him to take their own time, and Will
and I we rode before them keeping a good pace, and came to Ware about
three o'clock in the afternoon, the ways being every where but bad.  Here
I fell into acquaintance and eat and drank with the divine, but know not
who he is, and after an hour's bait to myself and horses he, though
resolved to have lodged there, yet for company would out again, and so we
remounted at four o'clock, and he went with me as far almost as Tibbald's
and there parted with us, taking up there for all night, but finding our
horses in good case and the night being pretty light, though by reason of
clouds the moon did not shine out, we even made shift from one place to
another to reach London, though both of us very weary.  And having left
our horses at their masters, walked home, found all things well, and with
full joy, though very weary, came home and went to bed, there happening
nothing since our going to my discontent in the least degree; which do so
please me, that I cannot but bless God for my journey, observing a whole
course of success from the beginning to the end of it, and I do find it to
be the reward of my diligence, which all along in this has been
extraordinary, for I have not had the least kind of divertisement
imaginable since my going forth, but merely carrying on my business which
God has been pleased to bless.  So to bed very hot and feverish by being
weary, but early morning the fever was over.

16th.  And so I rose in good temper, finding a good chimneypiece made in
my upper dining-room chamber, and the diningroom wainscoat in a good
forwardness, at which I am glad, and then to the office, where by T. Hater
I found all things to my mind, and so we sat at the office till noon, and
then at home to dinner with my wife.  Then coming Mr. Creede in order to
some business with Sir J. Minnes about his accounts, this afternoon I took
him to the Treasury office, where Sir John and I did stay late paying some
money to the men that are saved out of the Satisfaction that was lost the
other day.  The King gives them half-pay, which is more than is used in
such cases, for they never used to have any thing, and yet the men were
most outrageously discontented, and did rail and curse us till I was
troubled to hear it, and wished myself unconcerned therein.  Mr. Creede
seeing us engaged took leave of us. Here late, and so home, and at the
office set down my journey-journall to this hour, and so shut up my book,
giving God thanks for my good success therein, and so home, and to supper,
and to bed.  I hear Mr. Moore is in a way of recovery.  Sir H. Bennet made
Secretary of State in Sir Edward Nicholas's stead; not known whether by
consent or not.  My brother Tom and Cooke are come to town I hear this
morning, and he sends me word that his mistress's mother is also come to
treat with us about her daughter's portion and her jointure, which I am
willing should be out of Sturtlow lands.

17th.  This morning Tom comes to me, and I advise him how to deal with his
mistress's mother about his giving her a joynture, but I intend to speak
with her shortly, and tell her my mind.  Then to my Lord Sandwich by
water, and told him how well things do go in the country with me, of which
he was very glad, and seems to concern himself much for me.  Thence with
Mr. Creed to Westminster Hall, and by and by thither comes Captn. Ferrers,
upon my sending for him, and we three to Creed's chamber, and there sat a
good while and drank chocolate.  Here I am told how things go at Court;
that the young men get uppermost, and the old serious lords are out of
favour; that Sir H. Bennet, being brought into Sir Edward Nicholas's
place, Sir Charles Barkeley is made Privy Purse; a most vicious person,
and one whom Mr. Pierce, the surgeon, to-day (at which I laugh to myself),
did tell me that he offered his wife L300 per annum to be his mistress.
He also told me that none in Court hath more the King's ear now than Sir
Charles Barkeley, and Sir H. Bennet, and my Lady Castlemaine, whose
interest is now as great as ever and that Mrs. Haslerigge, the great
beauty, is got with child, and now brought to bed, and lays it to the King
or the Duke of York.

     [The child was owned by neither of the royal brothers.--B.]

He tells me too that my Lord St. Albans' is like to be Lord Treasurer: all
which things do trouble me much.  Here I staid talking a good while, and
so by water to see Mr. Moore, who is out of bed and in a way to be well,
and thence home, and with Commr. Pett by water to view Wood's masts that
he proffers to sell, which we found bad, and so to Deptford to look over
some businesses, and so home and I to my office, all our talk being upon
Sir J. M. and Sir W. B.'s base carriage against him at their late being at
Chatham, which I am sorry to hear, but I doubt not but we shall fling Sir
W. B. upon his back ere long.  At my office, I hearing Sir W. Pen was not
well, I went to him to see, and sat with him, and so home and to bed.

18th.  This morning, having resolved of my brother's entertaining his
mistress's mother to-morrow, I sent my wife thither to-day to lie there
to-night and to direct him in the business, and I all the morning at the
office, and the afternoon intent upon my workmen, especially my joyners,
who will make my dining room very pretty.  At night to my office to
dispatch business, and then to see Sir W. Pen, who continues in great
pain, and so home and alone to bed, but my head being full of my own and
my brother Tom's business I could hardly sleep, though not in much
trouble, but only multitude of thoughts.

19th (Lord's day).  Got me ready in the morning and put on my first new
laceband; and so neat it is, that I am resolved my great expense shall be
lacebands, and it will set off any thing else the more.  So walked to my
brother's, where I met Mr. Cooke, and discoursing with him do find that he
and Tom have promised a joynture of L50 to his mistress, and say that I
did give my consent that she should be joyntured in L30 per ann. for
Sturtlow, and the rest to be made up out of her portion.  At which I was
stark mad, and very angry the business should be carried with so much
folly and against my mind and all reason.  But I was willing to forbear
discovering of it, and did receive Mrs. Butler, her mother, Mr. Lull and
his wife, very civil people, very kindly, and without the least
discontent, and Tom had a good and neat dinner for us.  We had little
discourse of any business, but leave it to one Mr. Smith on her part and
myself on ours.  So we staid till sermon was done, and I took leave, and
to see Mr. Moore, who recovers well; and his doctor coming to him, one Dr.
Merrit, we had some of his very good discourse of anatomy, and other
things, very pleasant.  By and by, I with Mr. Townsend walked in the
garden, talking and advising with him about Tom's business, and he tells
me he will speak with Smith, and says I offer fair to give her L30
joynture and no more.  Thence Tom waiting for me homewards towards my
house, talking and scolding him for his folly, and telling him my mind
plainly what he has to trust to if he goes this way to work, for he shall
never have her upon the terms they demand of L50.  He left me, and I to my
uncle Wight, and there supped, and there was pretty Mistress Margt. Wight,
whom I esteem very pretty, and love dearly to look upon her.  We were very
pleasant, I droning with my aunt and them, but I am sorry to hear that the
news of the selling of Dunkirk

     [A treaty was signed on the 27th October by which Dunkirk was sold
     to France for five million livres, two of which were to be paid
     immediately, and the remaining three by eight bills at dates varying
     from three months to two years; during which time the King of
     England was to contribute the aid of a naval force, if necessary,
     for defence against Spain.  Subsequently the remaining three
     millions were reduced to 2,500,000 to be paid at Paris, and 254,000
     in London.  It is not known that Clarendon suggested the sale of
     Dunkirk, but it is certain that he adopted the measure with zeal.
     There is also no doubt that he got as much as France could be
     induced to give.--Lister's Life of Clarendon, ii. 173-4.]

is taken so generally ill, as I find it is among the merchants; and other
things, as removal of officers at Court, good for worse; and all things
else made much worse in their report among people than they are.  And this
night, I know not upon what ground, the gates of the City ordered to be
kept shut, and double guards every where.  So home, and after preparing
things against to-morrow for the Duke, to bed.  Indeed I do find every
body's spirit very full of trouble; and the things of the Court and
Council very ill taken; so as to be apt to appear in bad colours, if there
should ever be a beginning of trouble, which God forbid!

20th.  Up and in Sir J. Minnes's coach with him and Sir W. Batten to White
Hall, where now the Duke is come again to lodge: and to Mr. Coventry's
little new chamber there.  And by and by up to the Duke, who was making
himself ready; and there among other discourse young Killigrew did so
commend "The Villaine," a new play made by Tom Porter; and acted only on
Saturday at the Duke's house, as if there never had been any such play
come upon the stage.  The same yesterday was told me by Captain Ferrers;
and this morning afterwards by Dr. Clerke, who saw it.  Insomuch that
after I had done with the Duke, and thence gone with Commissioner Pett to
Mr. Lilly's, the great painter, who came forth to us; but believing that I
come to bespeak a picture, he prevented us by telling us, that he should
not be at leisure these three weeks; which methinks is a rare thing.  And
then to see in what pomp his table was laid for himself to go to dinner;
and here, among other pictures, saw the so much desired by me picture of
my Lady Castlemaine, which is a most blessed picture; and that that I must
have a copy of.  And having thence gone to my brother's, where my wife
lodged last night, and eat something there, I took her by coach to the
Duke's house, and there was the house full of company: but whether it was
in over-expecting or what, I know not, but I was never less pleased with a
play in my life.  Though there was good singing and dancing, yet no fancy
in the play, but something that made it less contenting was my conscience
that I ought not to have gone by my vow, and, besides, my business
commanded me elsewhere.  But, however, as soon as I came home I did pay my
crown to the poor's box, according to my vow, and so no harm as to that is
done, but only business lost and money lost, and my old habit of pleasure
wakened, which I will keep down the more hereafter, for I thank God these
pleasures are not sweet to me now in the very enjoying of them.  So by
coach home, and after a little business at my office, and seeing Sir W.
Pen, who continues ill, I went to bed.  Dunkirk, I am confirmed, is
absolutely sold; for which I am very sorry.

21st.  Up, and while I was dressing myself, my brother Tom being there I
did chide him for his folly in abusing himself about the match, for I
perceive he do endeavour all he can to get her, and she and her friends to
have more than her portion deserves, which now from 6 or L700 is come to
L450.  I did by several steps shew Tom how he would not be L100 the better
for her according to the ways he took to joynture her.  After having done
with him to the office, and there all the morning, and in the middle of
our sitting my workmen setting about the putting up of my rails upon my
leads, Sir J. Minnes did spy them and fell a-swearing, which I took no
notice of, but was vexed, and am still to the very heart for it, for fear
it should put him upon taking the closett and my chamber from me, which I
protest I am now afraid of.  But it is my very great folly to be so much
troubled at these trifles, more than at the loss of L100, or things of
greater concernment; but I forget the lesson I use to preach to others.
After dinner to my office with my head and heart full of troublesome
business, and thence by water with Mr. Smith, to Mr. Lechmore, the
Counsellor at the Temple, about Field's business; and he tells me plainly
that, there being a verdict against me, there is no help for it, but it
must proceed to judgment.  It is L30 damage to me for my joining with
others in committing Field to prison, we being not justices of the Peace
in the City, though in Middlesex; this troubled me, but I hope the King
will make it good to us.  Thence to Mr. Smith, the scrivener, upon Ludgate
Hill, to whom Mrs. Butler do committ her business concerning her daughter
and my brother.  He tells me her daughter's portion is but L400, at which
I am more troubled than before; and they find fault that his house is too
little.  So after I had told him my full mind, I went away to meet again
to-morrow, but I believe the business will be broke off, which for Tom's
sake I am much grieved for, but it cannot be helped without his ruin.
Thence to see Mr. Moore, who is pretty well again, and we read over and
discoursed about Mrs. Goldsborough's business, and her son coming by my
appointment thither, I did tell him our resolution as to her having her
estate reconveyed to her.  Hither also came my brother, and before Mr.
Moore I did advise and counsel him about his match, and how we had all
been abused by Mr. Cooke's folly.  So home and to my office, and there
settled many businesses, and so home and to supper, and so to bed, Sir W.
Pen being still in great pain.

22nd.  Up, and carrying my wife and her brother to Covent Garden, near
their father's new lodging, by coach, I to my Lord Sandwich's, who
receives me now more and more kindly, now he sees that I am respected in
the world; and is my most noble patron.  Here I staid and talked about
many things, with my Lord and Mr. Povy, being there about Tangier
business, for which the Commission is a taking out.  Hence (after talking
with Mr. Cooke, whom I met here about Mrs. Butler's portion, he do persist
to say that it will be worth L600 certain, when he knows as well as I do
now that it is but L400, and so I told him, but he is a fool, and has made
fools of us).  So I by water to my brother's, and thence to Mr. Smith's,
where I was, last night, and there by appointment met Mrs. Butler, with
whom I plainly discoursed and she with me.  I find she will give but L400,
and no more, and is not willing to do that without a joynture, which she
expects and I will not grant for that portion, and upon the whole I find
that Cooke has made great brags on both sides, and so has abused us both,
but know not how to help it, for I perceive she had much greater
expectations of Tom's house and being than she finds. But however we did
break off the business wholly, but with great love and kindness between
her and me, and would have been glad we had known one another's minds
sooner, without being misguided by this fellow to both our shames and
trouble.  For I find her a very discreet, sober woman, and her daughter, I
understand and believe, is a good lady; and if portions did agree, though
she finds fault with Tom's house, and his bad imperfection in his speech,
I believe we should well agree in other matters.  After taking a kind
farewell, I to Tom's, and there did give him a full account of this sad
news, with which I find he is much troubled, but do appear to me to be
willing to be guided herein, and apprehends that it is not for his good to
do otherwise, and so I do persuade [him] to follow his business again, and
I hope he will, but for Cooke's part and Dr. Pepys, I shall know them for
two fools another time. Hence, it raining hard, by coach home, being first
trimmed here by Benier, who being acquainted with all the players, do tell
me that Betterton is not married to Ianthe, as they say; but also that he
is a very sober, serious man, and studious and humble, following of his
studies, and is rich already with what he gets and saves, and then to my
office till late, doing great deal of business, and settling my mind in
pretty good order as to my business, though at present they are very many.
So home and to bed.  This night was buried, as I hear by the bells at
Barking Church, my poor Morena,

     [The burial of Elizabeth, daughter of John Dekins or Dickens, is
     recorded in the parish register of All Hallows, Barking, as having
     taken place on October 22nd.  See ante, October 3rd]

whose sickness being desperate, did kill her poor father; and he being
dead for sorrow, she could not recover, nor desire to live, but from that
time do languish more and more, and so is now dead and buried.

23rd.  Up and among my workmen, and so to the office, and there sitting
all the morning we stept all out to visit Sir W. Batten, who it seems has
not been well all yesterday, but being let blood is now pretty well, and
Sir W. Pen after office I went to see, but he continues in great pain of
the gout and in bed, cannot stir hand nor foot but with great pain.  So to
my office all the evening putting things public and private in order, and
so at night home and to supper and to bed, finding great content since I
am come to follow my business again, which God preserve in me.

24th.  After with great pleasure lying a great while talking and sporting
in bed with my wife (for we have been for some years now, and at present
more and more, a very happy couple, blessed be God), I got up and to my
office, and having done there some business, I by water, and then walked
to Deptford to discourse with Mr. Lowly and Davis about my late
conceptions about keeping books of the distinct works done in the yards,
against which I find no objection but their ignorance and unwillingness to
do anything of pains and what is out of their ordinary dull road, but I
like it well, and will proceed in it.  So home and dined there with my
wife upon a most excellent dish of tripes of my own directing, covered
with, mustard, as I have heretofore seen them done at my Lord Crew's, of
which I made a very great meal, and sent for a glass of wine for myself,
and so to see Sir W. Pen, who continues bed-rid in great pain, and hence
to the Treasury to Sir J. Minnes paying off of tickets, and at night home,
and in my study (after seeing Sir W. Batten, who also continues ill) I
fell to draw out my conceptions about books for the clerk that cheques in
the yard to keep according to the distinct works there, which pleases me
very well, and I am confident it will be of great use.  At 9 at night
home, and to supper, and to bed.  This noon came to see me and sat with me
a little after dinner Mr. Pierce, the chyrurgeon, who tells me how ill
things go at Court: that the King do show no countenance to any that
belong to the Queen; nor, above all, to such English as she brought over
with her, or hath here since, for fear they should tell her how he carries
himself to Mrs. Palmer;--[Lady Castlemaine.]--insomuch that though he has
a promise, and is sure of being made her chyrurgeon, he is at a loss what
to do in it, whether to take it or no, since the King's mind is so altered
in favour to all her dependants, whom she is fain to let go back into
Portugall (though she brought them from their friends against their wills
with promise of preferment), without doing any thing for them.  But he
tells me that her own physician did tell him within these three days that
the Queen do know how the King orders things, and how he carries himself
to my Lady Castlemaine and others, as well as any body; but though she
hath spirit enough, yet seeing that she do no good by taking notice of it,
for the present she forbears it in policy; of which I am very glad.  But I
pray God keep us in peace; for this, with other things, do give great
discontent to all people.

25th.  Up and to the office, and there with Mr. Coventry sat all the
morning, only we two, the rest being absent or sick.  Dined at home with
my wife upon a good dish of neats' feet and mustard, of which I made a
good meal.  All the afternoon alone at my office and among my workmen, who
(I mean the joyners) have even ended my dining room, and will be very
handsome and to my full content.  In the evening at my office about one
business or another, and so home and to bed, with my mind every day more
and more quiet since I come to follow my business, and shall be very happy
indeed when the trouble of my house is over.

26th (Lord's day).Up and put on my new Scallop, and is very fine.  To
church, and there saw the first time Mr. Mills in a surplice; but it
seemed absurd for him to pull it over his ears in the reading-pew, after
he had done, before all the church, to go up to the pulpitt, to preach
without it.  Home and dined, and Mr. Sympson, my joyner that do my
diningroom, and my brother Tom with me to a delicate fat pig.  Tom takes
his disappointment of his mistress to heart; but all will be well again in
a little time.  Then to church again, and heard a simple Scot preach most
tediously.  So home, and to see Sir W. Batten, who is pretty well again,
and then to my uncle Wight's to show my fine band and to see Mrs. Margaret
Wight, but she was not there.  All this day soldiers going up and down the
town, there being an alarm and many Quakers and others clapped up; but I
believe without any reason: only they say in Dorsetshire there hath been
some rising discovered.  So after supper home, and then to my study, and
making up my monthly account to myself. I find myself, by my expense in
bands and clothes this month, abated a little of my last, and that I am
worth L679 still; for which God be praised.  So home and to bed with
quiett mind, blessed be God, but afeard of my candle's going out, which
makes me write thus slubberingly.

27th.  Up, and after giving order to the plasterer now to set upon the
finishing of my house, then by water to wait upon the Duke, and walking in
the matted Gallery, by and by comes Mr. Coventry and Sir John Minnes, and
then to the Duke, and after he was ready, to his closet, where I did give
him my usual account of matters, and afterwards, upon Sir J. Minnes'
desire to have one to assist him in his employment, Sir W. Pen is
appointed to be his, and Mr. Pett to be the Surveyor's assistant.  Mr.
Coventry did desire to be excused, and so I hope (at least it is my
present opinion) to have none joined with me, but only Mr. Coventry do
desire that I would find work for one of his clerks, which I did not deny,
but however I will think of it, whether without prejudice to mine I can do
it.  Thence to my Lord Sandwich, who now-a-days calls me into his chamber,
and alone did discourse with me about the jealousy that the Court have of
people's rising; wherein he do much dislike my Lord Monk's being so eager
against a company of poor wretches, dragging them up and down the street;
but would have him rather to take some of the greatest ringleaders of
them, and punish them; whereas this do but tell the world the King's fears
and doubts.  For Dunkirk; he wonders any wise people should be so troubled
thereat, and scorns all their talk against it, for that he says it was not
Dunkirk, but the other places, that did and would annoy us, though we had
that, as much as if we had it not.  He also took notice of the new
Ministers of State, Sir H. Bennet and Sir Charles Barkeley, their bringing
in, and the high game that my Lady Castlemaine plays at Court (which I
took occasion to mention as that that the people do take great notice of),
all which he confessed.  Afterwards he told me of poor Mr. Spong, that
being with other people examined before the King and Council (they being
laid up as suspected persons; and it seems Spong is so far thought guilty
as that they intend to pitch upon him to put to the wracke or some other
torture), he do take knowledge of my Lord Sandwich, and said that he was
well known to Mr. Pepys.  But my Lord knows, and I told him, that it was
only in matter of musique and pipes, but that I thought him to be a very
innocent fellow; and indeed I am very sorry for him.  After my Lord and I
had done in private, we went out, and with Captain Cuttance and Bunn did
look over their draught of a bridge for Tangier, which will be brought by
my desire to our office by them to-morrow.  Thence to Westminster Hall,
and there walked long with Mr. Creed, and then to the great half-a-crown
ordinary, at the King's Head, near Charing Cross, where we had a most
excellent neat dinner and very high company, and in a noble manner.  After
dinner he and I into another room over a pot of ale and talked.  He showed
me our commission, wherein the Duke of York, Prince Rupert, Duke of
Albemarle, Lord Peterborough, Lord Sandwich, Sir G. Carteret, Sir William
Compton, Mr. Coventry, Sir R. Ford, Sir William Rider, Mr. Cholmley, Mr.
Povy, myself, and Captain Cuttance, in this order are joyned for the
carrying on the service of Tangier, which I take for a great honour to me.
He told me what great faction there is at Court; and above all, what is
whispered, that young Crofts is lawful son to the King, the King being
married to his mother.

     [There has been much confusion as to the name and parentage of
     Charles's mistress.  Lucy Walter was the daughter of William Walter
     of Roch Castle, co. Pembroke, and Mr. S. Steinman, in his "Althorp
     Memoirs" (privately printed, 1869), sets out her pedigree, which is
     a good one.  Roch Castle was taken and burnt by the Parliamentary
     forces in 1644, and Lucy was in London in 1648, where she made the
     acquaintance of Colonel Algernon Sidney.  She then fell into the
     possession of his brother, Colonel Robert Sidney.  In September of
     this same year she was taken up by Charles, Prince of Wales.
     Charles terminated his connection with her on October 30th, 1651,
     and she died in 1658, as appears by a document (administration entry
     in the Register of the Prerogative Court) met with by the late
     Colonel Chester.  William Erskine, who had served Charles as
     cupbearer in his wanderings, and was appointed Master of the
     Charterhouse in December, 1677, had the care of Lucy Walter, and
     buried her in Paris.  He declared that the king never had any
     intention of marrying her, and she did not deserve it.  Thomas Ross,
     the tutor of her son, put the idea of this claim into his head, and
     asked Dr. Cosin to certify to a marriage.  In consequence of this he
     was removed from his office, and Lord Crofts took his place
     (Steinman's "Althorp Memoirs").  Lucy Walter took the name of Barlow
     during her wanderings.]

How true this is, God knows; but I believe the Duke of York will not be
fooled in this of three crowns.  Thence to White Hall, and walked long in
the galleries till (as they are commanded to all strange persons), one
come to tell us, we not being known, and being observed to walk there four
or five hours (which was not true, unless they count my walking there in
the morning), he was commanded to ask who we were; which being told, he
excused his question, and was satisfied.  These things speak great fear
and jealousys.  Here we staid some time, thinking to stay out the play
before the King to-night, but it being "The Villaine," and my wife not
being there, I had no mind.  So walk to the Exchange, and there took many
turns with him; among other things, observing one very pretty Exchange
lass, with her face full of black patches, which was a strange sight.  So
bid him good-night and away by coach to Mr. Moore, with whom I staid an
hour, and found him pretty well and intends to go abroad tomorrow, and so
it raining hard by coach home, and having visited both Sir Williams, who
are both sick, but like to be well again, I to my office, and there did
some business, and so home and to bed.  At Sir W. Batten's I met with Mr.
Mills, who tells me that he could get nothing out of the maid hard by
(that did poyson herself) before she died, but that she did it because she
did not like herself, nor had not liked herself, nor anything she did a
great while.  It seems she was well-favoured enough, but crooked, and this
was all she could be got to say, which is very strange.

28th.  At the office sitting all the morning, and then home to dinner with
my wife, and after dinner she and I passing an hour or two in ridiculous
talk, and then to my office, doing business there till 9 at night, and so
home and to supper and to bed.  My house is now in its last dirt, I hope,
the plasterer and painter now being upon winding up all my trouble, which
I expect will now in a fortnight's time, or a little more, be quite over.

29th (Lord Mayor's day).  Intended to have made me fine, and by invitation
to have dined with the Lord Mayor to-day, but going to see Sir W. Batten
this morning, I found Sir G. Carteret and Sir J. Minnes going with Sir W.
Batten and myself to examine Sir G. Carteret's accounts for the last year,
whereupon I settled to it with them all the day long, only dinner time
(which Sir G. Carteret gave us), and by night did as good as finish them,
and so parted, and thence to my office, and there set papers in order and
business against to-morrow.  I received a letter this day from my father,
speaking more trouble about my uncle Thomas his business, and of
proceeding to lay claim to Brampton and all my uncle left, because it is
given conditional that we should pay legacys, which to him we have not yet
done, but I hope that will do us no hurt; God help us if it should, but it
disquiets my mind.  I have also a letter from my Lord Sandwich desiring me
upon matters of concernment to be with him early tomorrow morning, which I
wonder what it should be.  So my mind full of thoughts, and some trouble
at night, home and to bed.  Sir G. Carteret, who had been at the examining
most of the late people that are clapped up, do say that he do not think
that there hath been any great plotting among them, though they have a
good will to it; but their condition is so poor, and silly, and low, that
they do not fear them at all.

30th.  Could sleep but little to-night for thoughts of my business.  So up
by candlelight and by water to Whitehall, and so to my Lord Sandwich, who
was up in his chamber and all alone, did acquaint me with his business;
which was, that our old acquaintance Mr. Wade (in Axe Yard) hath
discovered to him L7,000 hid in the Tower, of which he was to have two for
discovery; my Lord himself two, and the King the other three, when it was
found; and that the King's warrant runs for me on my Lord's part, and one
Mr. Lee for Sir Harry Bennet, to demand leave of the Lieutenant of the
Tower for to make search.  After he had told me the whole business, I took
leave and hastened to my office, expecting to be called by a letter from
my Lord to set upon the business, and so there I sat with the officers all
the morning.  At noon when we were up comes Mr. Wade with my Lord's
letter, and tells me the whole business.  So we consulted for me to go
first to Sir H. Bennet, who is now with many of the Privy Counsellors at
the Tower, examining of their late prisoners, to advise with him when to
begin.  So I went; and the guard at the Tower Gate, making me leave my
sword at the gate, I was forced to stay so long in the ale-house hard by,
till my boy run home for my cloak, that my Lord Mayor that now is, Sir
John Robinson, Lieutenant of the Tower, with all his company, was gone
with their coaches to his house in Minchen Lane. So my cloak being come, I
walked thither; and there, by Sir G. Carteret's means, did presently speak
with Sir H. Bennet, who did show and give me the King's warrant to me and
Mr. Leigh, and another to himself, for the paying of L2,000 to my Lord,
and other two to the discoverers.  After a little discourse, dinner come
in; and I dined with them.  There was my Lord Mayor, my Lord Lauderdale,
Mr. Secretary Morris, to whom Sir H. Bennet would give the upper hand; Sir
Wm. Compton, Sir G. Carteret, and myself, and some other company, and a
brave dinner.  After dinner, Sir H. Bennet did call aside the Lord Mayor
and me, and did break the business to him, who did not, nor durst appear
the least averse to it, but did promise all assistance forthwith to set
upon it.  So Mr. Lee and I to our office, and there walked till Mr. Wade
and one Evett his guide did come, and W. Griffin, and a porter with his
picke-axes, &c.; and so they walked along with us to the Tower, and Sir H.
Bennet and my Lord Mayor did give us full power to fall to work.  So our
guide demands, a candle, and down into the cellars he goes, inquiring
whether they were the same that Baxter

     [Intended for John Barkstead, Lieutenant of the Tower under
     Cromwell.  Committed to the Tower (see March 17th, 1661-62).]

always had.  We went into several little cellars, and then went out
a-doors to view, and to the Cole Harbour; but none did answer so well to
the marks which was given him to find it by, as one arched vault.  Where,
after a great deal of council whether to set upon it now, or delay for
better and more full advice, we set to it, to digging we went to almost
eight o'clock at night, but could find nothing.  But, however, our guides
did not at all seem discouraged; for that they being confident that the
money is there they look for, but having never been in the cellars, they
could not be positive to the place, and therefore will inform themselves
more fully now they have been there, of the party that do advise them. So
locking the door after us, we left work to-night, and up to the Deputy
Governor (my Lord Mayor, and Sir H. Bennet, with the rest of the company
being gone an hour before); and he do undertake to keep the key of the
cellars, that none shall go down without his privity.  But, Lord! to see
what a young simple fantastique coxcombe is made Deputy Governor, would
make one mad; and how he called out for his night-gown of silk, only to
make a show to us; and yet for half an hour I did not think he was the
Deputy Governor, and so spoke not to him about the business, but waited
for another man; at last I broke our business to him; and he promising his
care, we parted.  And Mr. Leigh and I by coach to White Hall, where I did
give my Lord Sandwich an account of our proceedings, and some
encouragement to hope for something hereafter, and so bade him good-night,
and so by coach home again, where to my trouble I found that the painter
had not been here to-day to do any thing, which vexes me mightily.  So to
my office to put down my journal, and so home and to bed.  This morning,
walking with Mr. Coventry in the garden, he did tell me how Sir G.
Carteret had carried the business of the Victuallers' money to be paid by
himself, contrary to old practice; at which he is angry I perceive, but I
believe means no hurt, but that things maybe done as they ought.  He
expects Sir George should not bespatter him privately, in revenge, but
openly.  Against which he prepares to bedaub him, and swears he will do it
from the beginning, from Jersey to this day.  And as to his own taking of
too large fees or rewards for places that he had sold, he will prove that
he was directed to it by Sir George himself among others. And yet he did
not deny Sir G. Carteret his due, in saying that he is a man that do take
the most pains, and gives himself the most to do business of any man about
the Court, without any desire of pleasure or divertisements; which is very
true.  But which pleased me mightily, he said in these words, that he was
resolved, whatever it cost him, to make an experiment, and see whether it
was possible for a man to keep himself up in Court by dealing plainly and
walking uprightly, with any private game a playing: in the doing whereof,
if his ground do slip from under him, he will be contented; but he is
resolved to try, and never to baulke taking notice of any thing that is to
the King's prejudice, let it fall where it will; which is a most brave
resolucion.  He was very free with me; and by my troth, I do see more
reall worth in him than in most men that I do know.  I would not forget
two passages of Sir J. Minnes's at yesterday's dinner.  The one, that to
the question how it comes to pass that there are no boars seen in London,
but many sows and pigs; it was answered, that the constable gets them
a-nights.  The other, Thos. Killigrew's way of getting to see plays when
he was a boy.  He would go to the Red Bull, and when the man cried to the
boys, "Who will go and be a devil, and he shall see the play for nothing?"
then would he go in, and be a devil upon the stage, and so get to see
plays.

31st.  Lay pretty long in bed, and then up and among my workmen, the
carpenters being this day laying of my floor of my dining room, with whom
I staid a good while, and so to my office, and did a little business, and
so home to dinner, and after dinner all the afternoon with my carpenters,
making them lay all my boards but one in my dining room this day, which I
am confident they would have made two good days work of if I had not been
there, and it will be very pleasant.  At night to my office, and there
late doing of my office business, and so home to supper and bed.  Thus
ends this month, I and my family in good health, but weary heartily of
dirt, but now in hopes within two or three weeks to be out of it.  My head
troubled with much business, but especially my fear of Sir J. Minnes
claiming my bed-chamber of me, but I hope now that it is almost over, for
I perceive he is fitting his house to go into it the next week.  Then my
law businesses for Brampton makes me mad almost, for that I want time to
follow them, but I must by no means neglect them.  I thank God I do save
money, though it be but a little, but I hope to find out some job or other
that I may get a sum by to set me up.  I am now also busy in a discovery
for my Lord Sandwich and Sir H. Bennett by Mr. Wade's means of some of
Baxter's [Barkstead] money hid in one of his cellars in the Tower.  If we
get it it may be I may be 10 or L20 the better for it.  I thank God I have
no crosses, but only much business to trouble my mind with.  In all other
things as happy a man as any in the world, for the whole world seems to
smile upon me, and if my house were done that I could diligently follow my
business, I would not doubt to do God, and the King, and myself good
service.  And all I do impute almost wholly to my late temperance, since
my making of my vowes against wine and plays, which keeps me most happily
and contentfully to my business; which God continue!  Public matters are
full of discontent, what with the sale of Dunkirk, and my Lady
Castlemaine, and her faction at Court; though I know not what they would
have more than to debauch the king, whom God preserve from it!  And then
great plots are talked to be discovered, and all the prisons in town full
of ordinary people, taken from their meeting-places last Sunday.  But for
certain some plots there hath been, though not brought to a head.




     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     All made much worse in their report among people than they are
     Care not for his commands, and especially on Sundays
     Catched cold yesterday by putting off my stockings
     Hate in others, and more in myself, to be careless of keys
     I fear that it must be as it can, and not as I would
     Lying a great while talking and sporting in bed with my wife
     My Jane's cutting off a carpenter's long mustacho
     No good by taking notice of it, for the present she forbears
     Parson is a cunning fellow he is as any of his coat
     Pleasures are not sweet to me now in the very enjoying of them
     She so cruel a hypocrite that she can cry when she pleases
     Strange things he has been found guilty of, not fit to name
     Then to church to a tedious sermon
     When the candle is going out, how they bawl and dispute





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Diary of Samuel Pepys,
September/October 1662, by Samuel Pepys

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***

***** This file should be named 4136.txt or 4136.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/4/1/3/4136/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
