The Project Gutenberg EBook of Diary of Samuel Pepys, November/December
1662, by Samuel Pepys

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Diary of Samuel Pepys, November/December 1662

Author: Samuel Pepys

Release Date: November 30, 2004 [EBook #4137]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***




Produced by David Widger





                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A.  F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                           NOVEMBER & DECEMBER
                                  1662

November 1st.  Up and after a little while with my workmen I went to my
office, and then to our sitting all the morning.  At noon with Mr. Creede,
whom I found at my house, to the Trinity House, to a great dinner there,
by invitacion, and much company.  It seems one Captain Evans makes his
Elder Brother's dinner to-day.  Among other discourses one Mr. Oudant,
secretary to the late Princesse of Orange, did discourse of the
convenience as to keeping the highways from being deep, by their horses,
in Holland (and Flanders where the ground is as miry as ours is), going in
their carts and, waggons as ours in coaches, wishing the same here as an
expedient to make the ways better, and I think there is something in it,
where there is breadth enough.  Thence to my office, sent for to meet Mr.
Leigh again; from Sir H. Bennet.  And he and I, with Wade and his
intelligencer and labourers, to the Tower cellars, to make one tryall
more; where we staid two or three hours digging, and dug a great deal all
under the arches, as it was now most confidently directed, and so
seriously, and upon pretended good grounds, that I myself did truly expect
to speed; but we missed of all: and so we went away the second time like
fools.  And to our office, whither, a coach being come, Mr. Leigh goes
home to Whitehall; and I by appointment to the Dolphin Tavern, to meet
Wade and the other, Captn. Evett, who now do tell me plainly, that he that
do put him upon this is one that had it from Barkestead's own mouth, and
was advised with by him, just before the King's coming in, how to get it
out, and had all the signs told him how and where it lay, and had always
been the great confident of Barkestead even to the trusting him with his
life and all he had.  So that he did much convince me that there is good
ground for what we go about.  But I fear it may be that he did find some
conveyance of it away, without the help of this man, before he died.  But
he is resolved to go to the party once more, and then to determine what we
shall do further.  So we parted, and I to my office, where after sending
away my letters to the post I do hear that Sir J. Minnes is resolved to
turn part of our entry into a room and to divide the back yard between Sir
W. Pen and him, which though I do not see how it will annoy me much
particularly, yet it do trouble me a little for fear it should, but I do
not see how it can well unless in his desiring my coming to my back
stairs, but for that I shall do as well as himself or Sir W. Pen, who is
most concerned to look after it.

2nd (Lord's day).  Lay long with pleasure talking with my wife, in whom I
never had greater content, blessed be God! than now, she continuing with
the same care and thrift and innocence, so long as I keep her from
occasions of being otherwise, as ever she was in her life, and keeps the
house as well.  To church, where Mr. Mills, after he had read the service,
and shifted himself as he did the last day, preached a very ordinary
sermon.  So home to dinner with my wife.  Then up into my new rooms which
are, almost finished, and there walked with great content talking with my
wife till church time, and then to church, and there being a lazy preacher
I slept out the sermon, and so home, and after visiting the two Sir
Williams, who are both of them mending apace, I to my office preparing
things against to-morrow for the Duke, and so home and to bed, with some
pain, .  .  .  having taken cold this morning in sitting too long
bare-legged to pare my corns.  My wife and I spent a good deal of this
evening in reading "Du Bartas' Imposture" and other parts which my wife of
late has taken up to read, and is very fine as anything I meet with.

3d.  Up and with Sir J. Minnes in his coach to White Hall, to the Duke's;
but found him gone out a-hunting.  Thence to my Lord Sandwich, from whom I
receive every day more and more signs of his confidence and esteem of me.
Here I met with Pierce the chyrurgeon, who tells me that my Lady
Castlemaine is with child; but though it be the King's, yet her Lord being
still in town, and sometimes seeing of her, though never to eat or lie
together, it will be laid to him.  He tells me also how the Duke of York
is smitten in love with my Lady Chesterfield

     [Lady Elizabeth Butler, daughter of James Butler, first Duke of
     Ormond, second wife of Philip Stanhope, second Earl of Chesterfield.
     She died July, 1665 (see "Memoires de Grammont," chap. viii.).
     Peter Cunningham thinks that this banishment was only temporary,
     for, according to the Grammont Memoirs, she was in town when the
     Russian ambassador was in London, December, 1662, and January, 1662-
     63.  "It appears from the books of the Lord Steward's office .  .  .
     that Lord Chesterfield set out for the country on the 12th May,
     1663, and, from his 'Short Notes' referred to in the Memoirs before
     his Correspondence, that he remained at Bretby, in Derbyshire, with
     his wife, throughout the summer of that year" ("Story of Nell Gwyn,"
     1852, p. 189).]

(a virtuous lady, daughter to my Lord of Ormond); and so much, that the
duchess of York hath complained to the King and her father about it, and
my Lady Chesterfield is gone into the country for it.  At all which I am
sorry; but it is the effect of idleness, and having nothing else to employ
their great spirits upon.  Thence with Mr. Creede and Mr. Moore (who is
got upon his legs and come to see my Lord) to Wilkinson's, and there I did
give them and Mr. Howe their dinner of roast beef, cost me 5s., and after
dinner carried Mr. Moore as far as Paul's in a coach, giving him direction
about my law business, and there set him down, and I home and among my
workmen, who happened of all sorts to meet to their making an end of a
great many jobbs, so that after to-morrow I shall have but a little
plastering and all the painting almost to do, which was good content to
me.  At night to my office, and did business; and there came to me Mr.
Wade and Evett, who have been again with their prime intelligencer, a
woman, I perceive: and though we have missed twice, yet they bring such an
account of the probability of the truth of the thing, though we are not
certain of the place, that we shall set upon it once more; and I am
willing and hopefull in it.  So we resolved to set upon it again on
Wednesday morning; and the woman herself will be there in a disguise, and
confirm us in the place.  So they took leave for the night, and I to my
business, and then home to my wife and to supper and bed, my pain being
going away.  So by God's great blessing my mind is in good condition of
quiet.

4th.  Lay long talking pleasantly with my wife in bed, it having rained,
and do still, very much all night long.  Up and to the office, where we
sat till noon.  This morning we had news by letters that Sir Richard
Stayner is dead at sea in the Mary, which is now come into Portsmouth from
Lisbon; which we are sorry for, he being a very stout seaman.  But there
will be no great miss of him for all that.  Dined at home with my wife,
and all the afternoon among my workmen, and at night to my office to do
business there, and then to see Sir W. Pen, who is still sick, but his
pain less than it was.  He took occasion to talk with me about Sir J.
Minnes's intention to divide the entry and the yard, and so to keep him
out of the yard, and forcing him to go through the garden to his house.
Which he is vexed at, and I am glad to see that Sir J. Minnes do use him
just as he do me, and so I perceive it is not anything extraordinary his
carriage to me in the matter of our houses, for this is worse than
anything he has done to me, that he should give order for the stopping up
of his way to his house without so much as advising with him or letting of
him know it, and I confess that it is very highly and basely done of him.
So to my office again, and after doing business there, then home to supper
and to bed.

5th.  Up and with my painters painting my dining room all day long till
night, not stirring out at all.  Only in the morning my.  Lady Batten did
send to speak with me, and told me very civilly that she did not desire,
nor hoped I did, that anything should pass between us but what was civill,
though there was not the neighbourliness between her and my wife that was
fit to be, and so complained of my maid's mocking of her; when she called
"Nan" to her maid within her own house, my maid Jane in the garden
overheard her, and mocked her, and some other such like things she told
me, and of my wife's speaking unhandsomely of her; to all which I did give
her a very respectfull answer, such as did please her, and am sorry indeed
that this should be, though I do not desire there should be any
acquaintance between my wife and her.  But I promised to avoid such words
and passages for the future.  So home, and by and by Sir W. Pen did send
for me to his bedside; and tell me how really Sir J. Minnes did resolve to
have one of my rooms, and that he was very angry and hot, and said he
would speak to the Duke.  To which, knowing that all this was but to scare
me, and to get him to put off his resolution of making up the entry, I did
tell him plainly how I did not value his anger more, than he did mine, and
that I should be willing to do what the Duke commanded, and I was sure to
have justice of him, and that was all I did say to him about it, though I
was much vexed, and after a little stay went home; and there telling my
wife she did put me into heart, and resolve to offer him to change
lodgings, and believe that that will one way or other bring us to some end
in this dispute.  At night I called up my maids, and schooled Jane, who
did answer me so humbly and drolly about it, that though I seemed angry, I
was much pleased with her and [my] wife also.  So at night to bed.

6th.  At the office forenoon and afternoon till late at night, very busy
answering my Lord Treasurer's letter, and my mind troubled till we come to
some end with Sir J. Minnes about our lodgings, and so home.  And after
some pleasant discourse and supper to bed, and in my dream much troubled
by being with Will. Swan, a great fanatic, my old acquaintance, and,
methought, taken and led up with him for a plotter, all our discourse
being at present about the late plots.

7th.  Up and being by appointment called upon by Mr. Lee, he and I to the
Tower, to make our third attempt upon the cellar.  And now privately the
woman, Barkestead's great confident, is brought, who do positively say
that this is the place which he did say the money was hid in, and where he
and she did put up the L50,000

     [Thus in the MS., although the amount was first stated as L7,000
     (see October 30th, 1662)]

in butter firkins; and the very day that he went out of England did say
that neither he nor his would be the better for that money, and therefore
wishing that she and hers might.  And so left us, and we full of hope did
resolve to dig all over the cellar, which by seven o'clock at night we
performed.  At noon we sent for a dinner, and upon the head of a barrel
dined very merrily, and to work again.  Between times, Mr. Lee, who had
been much in Spain, did tell me pretty stories of the customs and other
things, as I asked him, of the country, to my great content.  But at last
we saw we were mistaken; and after digging the cellar quite through, and
removing the barrels from one side to the other, we were forced to pay our
porters, and give over our expectations, though I do believe there must be
money hid somewhere by him, or else he did delude this woman in hopes to
oblige her to further serving him, which I am apt to believe. Thence by
coach to White Hall, and at my Lord's lodgings did write a letter, he not
being within, to tell him how things went, and so away again, only hearing
that Mrs. Sarah is married, I did go up stairs again and joy her and kiss
her, she owning of it; and it seems it is to a cook. I am glad she is
disposed of, for she grows old, and is very painfull,--[painstaking]--and
one I have reason to wish well for her old service to me.  Then to my
brother's, where my wife, by my order, is tonight to stay a night or two
while my house is made clean, and thence home, where I am angry to see,
instead of the house made in part clean, all the pewter goods and other
things are brought up to scouring, which makes the house ten times worse,
at which I was very much displeased, but cannot help it. So to my office
to set down my journal, and so home and to bed.

8th.  All the morning sitting at the office, and after that dined alone at
home, and so to the office again till 9 o'clock, being loth to go home,
the house is so dirty, and my wife at my brother's.  So home and to bed.

9th (Lord's day).  Lay alone a good while, my mind busy about pleading
to-morrow to the Duke if there shall be occasion for this chamber that I
lie in against Sir J., Minnes.  Then up, and after being ready walked to
my brother's, where my wife is, calling at many churches, and then to the
Temple, hearing a bit there too, and observing that in the streets and
churches the Sunday is kept in appearance as well as I have known it at
any time.  Then to dinner to my brother's, only he and my wife, and after
dinner to see Mr. Moore, who is pretty well, and he and I to St.
Gregory's, where I escaped a great fall down the staires of the gallery:
so into a pew there and heard Dr. Ball make a very good sermon, though
short of what I expected, as for the most part it do fall out.  So home
with Mr. Moore to his chamber, and after a little talk I walked home to my
house and staid at Sir W. Batten's.  Till late at night with him and Sir
J. Minnes, with whom we did abundance of most excellent discourse of
former passages of sea commanders and officers of the navy, and so home
and to bed, with my mind well at ease but only as to my chamber, which I
fear to lose.

10th.  Up betimes and to set my workmen to work, and then a little to the
office, and so with Sir J. Minnes, Sir W. Batten, and myself by coach to
White Hall, to the Duke, who, after he was ready, did take us into his
closett.  Thither come my Lord General Monk, and did privately talk with
the Duke about having the life-guards pass through the City today only for
show and to fright people, for I perceive there are great fears abroad;
for all which I am troubled and full of doubt that things will not go
well.  He being gone, we fell to business of the Navy.  Among other
things, how to pay off this fleet that is now come from Portugall; the
King of Portugall sending them home, he having no more use for them, which
we wonder at, that his condition should be so soon altered.  And our
landmen also are coming back, being almost starved in that poor country.
Having done here I went by my Lord Sandwich's, who was not at home, and so
to Westminster Hall, where full of term, and here met with many about
business, among others my cozen Roger Pepys, who is all for a composition
with my uncle Thomas, which upon any fair terms I am for also and desire
it.  Thence by water, and so by land to my Lord Crew's, and dined with him
and his brother, I know not his name; where very good discourse; among
others, of France's intention to make a patriarch of his own, independent
from the Pope, by which he will be able to cope with the Spaniard in all
councils, which hitherto he has never done.  My Lord Crew told us how he
heard my Lord of Holland say that, being Embassador about the match with
the Queene-Mother that now is, the King of France--[Louis XIII., in
1624.]--insisted upon a dispensation from the Pope, which my Lord Holland
making a question of, and that he was commanded to yield to nothing to the
prejudice of our religion, says the King of France, "You need not fear
that, for if the Pope will not dispense with the match, my Bishopp of
Paris shall."  By and by come in great Mr. Swinfen, the Parliament-man,
who, among other discourse of the rise and fall of familys, told us of
Bishopp Bridgeman (brother of Sir Orlando) who lately hath bought a seat
anciently of the Levers, and then the Ashtons; and so he hath in his great
hall window (having repaired and beautified the house) caused four great
places to be left for coates of armes.  In one, he hath put the Levers,
with this motto, "Olim."  In another the Ashtons, with this, "Heri."  In
the next his own, with this, "Hodie."  In the fourth nothing but this
motto, "Cras nescio cujus."  Thence towards my brother's; met with Jack
Cole in Fleet Street, and he and I went into his cozen Mary Cole's (whom I
never saw since she was married), and drank a pint of wine and much good
discourse.  I found him a little conceited, but he had good things in him,
and a man may know the temper of the City by him, he being of a general
conversation, and can tell how matters go; and upon that score I will
encourage his acquaintance.  Thence to my brother's, and taking my wife
up, carried her to Charing Cross, and there showed her the Italian motion,
much after the nature of what I showed her a while since in Covent Garden.
Their puppets here are somewhat better, but their motions not at all.
Thence by coach to my Lady's, and, hiding my wife with Sarah below, I went
up and heard some musique with my Lord, and afterwards discoursed with him
alone, and so good night to him and below, having sent for Mr. Creed, had
thought to have shown my wife a play before the King, but it is so late
that we could not, and so we took coach, and taking up Sarah at my
brother's with their night geare we went home, and I to my office to
settle matters, and so home and to bed.  This morning in the Duke's
chamber Sir J. Minnes did break to me his desire about my chamber, which I
did put off to another time to discourse of, he speaking to me very kindly
to make me the less trouble myself, hoping to save myself and to contrive
something or other to pleasure him as well, though I know not well what.
The town, I hear, is full of discontents, and all know of the King's new
bastard by Mrs. Haslerigge, and as far as I can hear will never be
contented with Episcopacy, they are so cruelly set for Presbytery, and the
Bishopps carry themselves so high, that they are never likely to gain
anything upon them.

11th.  All the morning sitting at the office, and then to dinner with my
wife, and so to the office again (where a good while Mr. Bland was with
me, telling me very fine things in merchandize, which, but that the
trouble of my office do so cruelly hinder me, I would take some pains in)
till late at night.  Towards the evening I, as I have done for three or
four nights, studying something of Arithmetique, which do please me well
to see myself come forward.  So home, to supper, and to bed.

12th.  At my office most of the morning, after I had done among my
painters, and sent away Mr. Shaw and Hawly, who came to give me a visit
this morning.  Shaw it seems is newly re-married to a rich widow.  At noon
dined at home with my wife, and by and by, by my wife's appointment came
two young ladies, sisters, acquaintances of my wife's brother's, who are
desirous to wait upon some ladies, and proffer their service to my wife.
The youngest, indeed, hath a good voice, and sings very well, besides
other good qualitys; but I fear hath been bred up with too great liberty
for my family, and I fear greater inconveniences of expenses, and my
wife's liberty will follow, which I must study to avoid till I have a
better purse; though, I confess, the gentlewoman, being pretty handsome,
and singing, makes me have a good mind to her.  Anon I took them by coach
and carried them to a friend's of theirs, in Lincoln's Inn Fields, and
there I left them and I to the Temple by appointment to my cousin Roger's
chamber, where my uncle Thomas and his son Thomas met us, I having hoped
that they would have agreed with me to have had [it] ended by my cozen
Roger, but they will have two strangers to be for them against two others
of mine, and so we parted without doing any thing till the two send me the
names of their arbiters.  Thence I walked home, calling a little in Paul's
Churchyard, and, I thank God, can read and never buy a book, though I have
a great mind to it.  So to the Dolphin Tavern near home, by appointment,
and there met with Wade and Evett, and have resolved to make a new attempt
upon another discovery, in which God give us better fortune than in the
other, but I have great confidence that there is no cheat in these people,
but that they go upon good grounds, though they have been mistaken in the
place of the first.  From thence, without drinking a drop of wine, home to
my office and there made an end, though late, of my collection of the
prices of masts for these twelve years to this day, in order to the buying
of some of Wood, and I bound it up in painted paper to lie by as a book
for future use.  So home and to supper and to bed, and a little before and
after we were in bed we had much talk and difference between us about my
wife's having a woman, which I seemed much angry at, that she should go so
far in it without consideration and my being consulted with.  So to bed.

13th.  Up and began our discontent again and sorely angered my wife, who
indeed do live very lonely, but I do perceive that it is want of work that
do make her and all other people think of ways of spending their time
worse, and this I owe to my building, that do not admit of her undertaking
any thing of work, because the house has been and is still so dirty.  I to
my office, and there sat all the morning and dined with discontent with my
wife at noon, and so to my office, and there this afternoon we had our
first meeting upon our commission of inspecting the Chest, and there met
Sir J. Minnes, Sir Francis Clerke, Mr. Heath, Atturney of the Dutchy, Mr.
Prinn, Sir W. Rider, Captn. Cocke, and myself.  Our first work to read
over the Institution, which is a decree in Chancery in the year 1617, upon
an inquisition made at Rochester about that time into the revenues of the
Chest, which had then, from the year 1588 or 1590, by the advice of the
Lord High Admiral and principal officers then being, by consent of the
seamen, been settled, paying sixpence per month, according to their wages
then, which was then but 10s.  which is now 24s.  We adjourned to a
fortnight hence.  So broke up, and I to see Sir W. Pen, who is now pretty
well, but lies in bed still; he cannot rise to stand.  Then to my office
late, and this afternoon my wife in her discontent sent me a letter, which
I am in a quandary what to do, whether to read it or not, but I purpose
not, but to burn it before her face, that I may put a stop to more of this
nature.  But I must think of some way, either to find her some body to
keep her company, or to set her to work, and by employment to take up her
thoughts and time.  After doing what I had to do I went home to supper,
and there was very sullen to my wife, and so went to bed and to sleep
(though with much ado, my mind being troubled) without speaking one word
to her.

14th.  She begun to talk in the morning and to be friends, believing all
this while that.  I had read her letter, which I perceive by her discourse
was full of good counsel, and relating the reason of her desiring a woman,
and how little charge she did intend it to be to me, so I begun and argued
it as full and plain to her, and she to reason it highly to me, to put her
away, and take one of the Bowyers if I did dislike her, that I did resolve
when the house is ready she shall try her for a while; the truth is, I
having a mind to have her come for her musique and dancing.  So up and
about my papers all the morning, and her brother coming I did tell him my
mind plain, who did assure me that they were both of the sisters very
humble and very poor, and that she that we are to have would carry herself
so.  So I was well contented and spent part of the morning at my office,
and so home and to dinner, and after dinner, finding Sarah to be
discontented at the news of this woman, I did begin in my wife's chamber
to talk to her and tell her that it was not out of unkindness to her, but
my wife came up, and I perceive she is not too reconciled to her whatever
the matter is, that I perceive I shall not be able to keep her, though she
is as good a servant (only a little pettish) that ever I desire to have,
and a creditable servant.  So she desired leave to go out to look [for] a
service, and did, for which I am troubled, and fell out highly afterwards
with my wife about it.  So to my office, where we met this afternoon about
answering a great letter of my Lord Treasurer's, and that done to my
office drawing up a letter to him, and so home to supper.

15th.  All the morning at the office sitting, dined with my wife
pleasantly at home, then among my painters, and by and by went to my Civil
Lawyers about my uncle's suit, and so home again and saw my painters make
an end of my house this night, which is my great joy, and so to my office
and did business till ten at night, and so home and to supper, and after
reading part of Bussy d'Ambois, a good play I bought to-day, to bed.

16th (Lord's day).  About 3 o'clock in the morning waked with a rude noise
among Sir J. Minnes his servants (he not being yet come to his lodgings),
who are the rudest people but they that lived before, one Mrs. Davis, that
ever I knew in my life.  To sleep again, and after long talking pleasantly
with my wife, up and to church, where Mrs. Goodyer, now Mrs. Buckworth,
was churched.  I love the woman for her gravity above any in the parish.
So home and to dinner with my wife with great content, and after dinner
walked up and down my house, which is now almost finished, there being
nothing to do but the glazier and furniture to put up.  By and by comes
Tom, and after a little talk I with him towards his end, but seeing many
strangers and coaches coming to our church, and finding that it was a
sermon to be preached by a probationer for the Turkey Company,--[The
Turkey or Levant Company was established in 1581.]--to be sent to Smyrna,
I returned thither.  And several Turkey merchants filled all the best pews
(and some in ours) in the Church, but a most pitiful sermon it was upon a
text in Zachariah, and a great time he spent to show whose son Zachary
was, and to prove Malachi to be the last prophet before John the Baptist.
Home and to see Sir W. Pen, who gets strength, but still keeps his bed.
Then home and to my office to do some business there, and so home to
supper and to bed.

17th.  To the Duke's to-day, but he is gone a-hunting, and therefore I to
my Lord Sandwich's, and having spoke a little with him about his
businesses, I to Westminster Hall and there staid long doing many
businesses, and so home by the Temple and other places doing the like, and
at home I found my wife dressing by appointment by her woman--[Mrs.
Gosnell.]--that I think is to be, and her other sister being here to-day
with her and my wife's brother, I took Mr. Creed, that came to dine, to an
ordinary behind the Change, and there dined together, and after dinner
home and there spent an hour or two till almost dark, talking with my
wife, and making Mrs. Gosnell sing; and then, there being no coach to be
got, by water to White Hall; but Gosnell not being willing to go through
bridge, we were forced to land and take water, again, and put her and her
sister ashore at the Temple.  I am mightily pleased with her humour and
singing.  At White Hall by appointment, Mr. Creed carried my wife and I to
the Cockpitt, and we had excellent places, and saw the King, Queen, Duke
of Monmouth, his son, and my Lady Castlemaine, and all the fine ladies;
and "The Scornfull Lady," well performed.  They had done by eleven
o'clock, and it being fine moonshine, we took coach and home, but could
wake nobody at my house, and so were fain to have my boy get through one
of the windows, and so opened the door and called up the maids, and went
to supper and to bed, my mind being troubled at what my wife tells me,
that her woman will not come till she hears from her mother, for I am so
fond of her that I am loth now not to have her, though I know it will be a
great charge to me which I ought to avoid, and so will make it up in other
things.  So to bed.

18th.  Up and to the office, where Mr. Phillip the lawyer came to me, but
I put him off to the afternoon.  At noon I dined at Sir W. Batten's, Sir
John Minnes being here, and he and I very kind, but I every day expect to
pull a crow with him about our lodgings.  My mind troubled about Gosnell
and my law businesses.  So after dinner to Mr. Phillips his chamber, where
he demands an abatement for Piggott's money, which vexes me also, but I
will not give it him without my father's consent, which I will write to
him to-night about, and have done it.  Here meeting my uncle Thomas, he
and I to my cozen Roger's chamber, and there I did give my uncle him and
Mr. Philips to be my two arbiters against Mr. Cole and Punt, but I expect
no great good of the matter.  Thence walked home, and my wife came home,
having been abroad to-day, laying out above L12 in linen, and a copper,
and a pot, and bedstead, and other household stuff, which troubles me
also, so that my mind to-night is very heavy and divided.  Late at my
office, drawing up a letter to my Lord Treasurer, which we have been long
about, and so home, and, my mind troubled, to bed.

20th.  All the morning sitting at the office, at noon with Mr. Coventry to
the Temple to advise about Field's, but our lawyers not being in the way
we went to St. James's, and there at his chamber dined, and I am still in
love more and more with him for his real worth.  I broke to him my desire
for my wife's brother to send him to sea as a midshipman, which he is
willing to agree to, and will do it when I desire it.  After dinner to the
Temple, to Mr. Thurland; and thence to my Lord Chief Baron, Sir Edward
Hale's, and back with Mr. Thurland to his chamber, where he told us that
Field will have the better of us; and that we must study to make up the
business as well as we can, which do much vex and trouble us: but I am
glad the Duke is concerned in it.  Thence by coach homewards, calling at a
tavern in the way (being guided by the messenger in whose custody Field
lies), and spoke with Mr. Smith our messenger about the business, and so
home, where I found that my wife had finished very neatly my study with
the former hangings of the diningroom, which will upon occasion serve for
a fine withdrawing room.  So a little to my office and so home, and spent
the evening upon my house, and so to supper and to bed.

21St. Within all day long, helping to put up my hangings in my house in my
wife's chamber, to my great content.  In the afternoon I went to speak to
Sir J. Minnes at his lodgings, where I found many great ladies, and his
lodgings made very fine indeed.  At night to supper and to bed: this night
having first put up a spitting sheet, which I find very convenient.  This
day come the King's pleasure-boats from Calais, with the Dunkirk money,
being 400,000 pistolles.

22nd.  This morning, from some difference between my wife and Sarah, her
maid, my wife and I fell out cruelly, to my great discontent.  But I do
see her set so against the wench, whom I take to be a most extraordinary
good servant, that I was forced for the wench's sake to bid her get her
another place, which shall cost some trouble to my wife, however, before I
suffer to be.  Thence to the office, where I sat all the morning, then
dined; Mr. Moore with me, at home, my wife busy putting her furniture in
order.  Then he and I out, and he home and I to my cozen Roger Pepys to
advise about treating with my uncle Thomas, and thence called at the
Wardrobe on Mr. Moore again, and so home, and after doing much business at
my office I went home and caused a new fashion knocker to be put on my
door, and did other things to the putting my house in order, and getting
my outward door painted, and the arch.  This day I bought the book of
country dances against my wife's woman Gosnell comes, who dances finely;
and there meeting Mr. Playford he did give me his Latin songs of Mr.
Deering's, which he lately printed.  This day Mr. Moore told me that for
certain the Queen-Mother is married to my Lord St. Albans, and he is like
to be made Lord Treasurer.  Newes that Sir J. Lawson hath made up a peace
now with Tunis and Tripoli, as well as Argiers, by which he will come home
very highly honoured.

23rd (Lord's day).  Up, after some talk with my wife, soberly, upon
yesterday's difference, and made good friends, and to church to hear Mr.
Mills, and so home, and Mr. Moore and my brother Tom dined with me.  My
wife not being well to-day did not rise.  In the afternoon to church
again, and heard drowsy Mr. Graves, and so to see Sir W. Pen, who
continues ill in bed, but grows better and better every day.  Thence to
Sir W. Batten's, and there staid awhile and heard how Sir R. Ford's
daughter is married to a fellow without friends' consent, and the match
carried on and made up at Will Griffin's, our doorkeeper's.  So to my
office and did a little business, and so home and to bed.  I talked to my
brother to-day, who desires me to give him leave to look after his
mistress still; and he will not have me put to any trouble or obligation
in it, which I did give him leave to do.  I hear to-day how old rich
Audley is lately dead, and left a very great estate, and made a great many
poor familys rich, not all to one.  Among others, one Davis, my old
schoolfellow at Paul's, and since a bookseller in Paul's Church Yard: and
it seems do forgive one man L60,000 which he had wronged him of, but names
not his name; but it is well known to be the scrivener in Fleet Street, at
whose house he lodged.  There is also this week dead a poulterer, in
Gracious Street, which was thought rich, but not so rich, that hath left
L800 per annum, taken in other men's names, and 40,000 Jacobs in gold.

     [A jacobus was a gold coin of the value of twenty-five shillings,
     called after James I, in whose reign it was first coined.]

24th.  Sir J. Minnes, Sir W. Batten, and I, going forth toward White Hall,
we hear that the King and Duke are come this morning to the Tower to see
the Dunkirk money!  So we by coach to them, and there went up and down all
the magazines with them; but methought it was but poor discourse and
frothy that the King's companions (young Killigrew among the rest) about
the codpieces of some of the men in armour there to be seen, had with him.
We saw none of the money, but Mr. Slingsby did show the King, and I did
see, the stamps of the new money that is now to be made by Blondeau's
fashion,

     [Peter Blondeau was employed by the Commonwealth to coin their
     money.  After the Restoration, November 3rd, 1662, he received
     letters of denization, and a grant for being engineer of the Mint in
     the Tower of London, and for using his new invention for coining
     gold and silver with the mill and press, with the fee of L100 per
     annum (Walpole's "Anecdotes of Painting").]

which are very neat, and like the King.  Thence the King to Woolwich,
though a very cold day; and the Duke to White Hall, commanding us to come
after him, which we did by coach; and in his closett, my Lord Sandwich
being there, did discourse with us about getting some of this money to pay
off the Fleets, and other matters; and then away hence, and, it being
almost dinner time, I to my Lord Crew's, and dined with him, and had very
good discourse, and he seemed to be much pleased with my visits.  Thence
to Mr. Phillips, and so to the Temple, where met my cozen Roger Pepys and
his brother, Dr. John, as my arbitrators against Mr. Cole and Mr. John
Bernard for my uncle Thomas, and we two with them by appointment.  They
began very high in their demands, and my friends, partly being not so well
acquainted with the will, and partly, I doubt, not being so good wits as
they, for which I blame my choosing of relations (who besides that are
equally engaged to stand for them as me), I was much troubled thereat, and
taking occasion to deny without my father's consent to bind myself in a
bond of L2000 to stand to their award, I broke off the business for the
present till I hear and consider further, and so thence by coach (my
cozen, Thomas Pepys, being in another chamber busy all the while, going
along with me) homeward, and I set him down by the way; but, Lord! how he
did endeavour to find out a ninepence to clubb with me for the coach, and
for want was forced to give me a shilling, and how he still cries "Gad!"
and talks of Popery coming in, as all the Fanatiques do, of which I was
ashamed.  So home, finding my poor wife very busy putting things in order,
and so to bed, my mind being very much troubled, and could hardly sleep
all night, thinking how things are like to go with us about Brampton, and
blaming myself for living so high as I do when for ought I know my father
and mother may come to live upon my hands when all is done.

25th.  Up and to the office all the morning, and at noon with the rest, by
Mr. Holy, the ironmonger's invitation, to the Dolphin, to a venison pasty,
very good, and rare at this time of the year, and thence by coach with Mr.
Coventry as far as the Temple, and thence to Greatorex's, where I staid
and talked with him, and got him to mend my pocket ruler for me, and so by
coach to my Lord's lodging, where I sat with Mr. Moore by appointment,
making up accounts for my Lord Sandwich, which done he and I and Capt.
Ferrers and W. Howe very merry a good while in the great dining room, and
so it being late and my Lord not coming in, I by coach to the Temple, and
thence walked home, and so to my study to do some business, and then home
and to bed.  Great talk among people how some of the Fanatiques do say
that the end of the world is at hand, and that next Tuesday is to be the
day.  Against which, whenever it shall be, good God fit us all.

26th.  In the morning to the Temple to my cozen Roger, who now desires
that I would excuse him from arbitrating, he not being able to stand for
me as he would do, without appearing too high against my uncle Thomas,
which will raise his clamour.  With this I am very well pleased, for I did
desire it, and so I shall choose other counsel.  Thence home, he being
busy that I could not speak more with him.  All day long till twelve
o'clock at night getting my house in order, my wife putting up the red
hangings and bed in her woman's chamber, and I my books and all other
matters in my chamber and study, which is now very pretty.  So to bed.

27th.  At my waking, I found the tops of the houses covered with snow,
which is a rare sight, that I have not seen these three years.  Up, and
put my people to perfect the cleaning of my house, and so to the office,
where we sat till noon; and then we all went to the next house upon Tower
Hill, to see the coming by of the Russia Embassador; for whose reception
all the City trained-bands do attend in the streets, and the King's
life-guards, and most of the wealthy citizens in their black velvet coats,
and gold chains (which remain of their gallantry at the King's coming in),
but they staid so long that we went down again home to dinner.  And after
I had dined, I heard they were coming, and so I walked to the Conduit in
the Quarrefowr,

     [In two ordinances of the reign of Edward III., printed in Riley's
     "Memorials of London" (pp. 300, 389), this is called the "Carfukes,"
     which nearly approaches the name of the "Carfax," at Oxford, where
     four ways also met.  Pepys's form of the word is nearer quatre
     voies, the French equivalent of quadrivium.]

at the end of Gracious-street and Cornhill; and there (the spouts thereof
running very near me upon all the people that were under it) I saw them
pretty well go by.  I could not see the Embassador in his coach; but his
attendants in their habits and fur caps very handsome, comely men, and
most of them with hawkes upon their fists to present to the King.  But
Lord! to see the absurd nature of Englishmen, that cannot forbear laughing
and jeering at every thing that looks strange.  So back and to the office,
and there we met and sat till seven o'clock, making a bargain with Mr.
Wood for his masts of New England; and then in Mr. Coventry's coach to the
Temple, but my cozen Roger Pepys not being at leisure to speak to me about
my business, I presently walked home, and to my office till very late
doing business, and so home, where I found my house more and more clear
and in order, and hope in a day or two now to be in very good condition
there and to my full content.  Which God grant!  So to supper and to bed.

28th.  A very hard frost; which is news to us after having none almost
these three years.  Up and to Ironmongers' Hall by ten o'clock to the
funeral of Sir Richard Stayner.  Here we were, all the officers of the
Navy, and my Lord Sandwich, who did discourse with us about the fishery,
telling us of his Majesty's resolution to give L200 to every man that will
set out a Busse;

     [A small sea-vessel used in the Dutch herring-fishery.]

and advising about the effects of this encouragement, which will be a very
great matter certainly.  Here we had good rings, and by and by were to
take coach; and I being got in with Mr. Creed into a four-horse coach,
which they come and told us were only for the mourners, I went out, and so
took this occasion to go home.  Where I staid all day expecting Gosnell's
coming, but there came an excuse from her that she had not heard yet from
her mother, but that she will come next week, which I wish she may, since
I must keep one that I may have some pleasure therein. So to my office
till late writing out a copy of my uncle's will, and so home and to bed.

29th.  Before I went to the office my wife's brother did come to us, and
we did instruct him to go to Gosnell's and to see what the true matter is
of her not coming, and whether she do intend to come or no, and so I to
the office; and this morning come Sir G. Carteret to us (being the first
time we have seen him since his coming from France): he tells us, that the
silver which he received for Dunkirk did weigh 120,000 weight.  Here all
the morning upon business, and at noon (not going home to dinner, though
word was brought me that Will. Joyce was there, whom I had not seen at my
house nor any where else these three or four months) with Mr. Coventry by
his coach as far as Fleet Street, and there stepped into Madam Turner's,
where was told I should find my cozen Roger Pepys, and with him to the
Temple, but not having time to do anything I went towards my Lord
Sandwich's.  (In my way went into Captn. Cuttance's coach, and with him to
my Lord's.)  But the company not being ready I did slip down to
Wilkinson's, and having not eat any thing to-day did eat a mutton pie and
drank, and so to my Lord's, where my Lord and Mr. Coventry, Sir Wm. Darcy,
one Mr. Parham (a very knowing and well-spoken man in this business), with
several others, did meet about stating the business of the fishery, and
the manner of the King's giving of this L200 to every man that shall set
out a new-made English Busse by the middle of June next.  In which
business we had many fine pretty discourses; and I did here see the great
pleasure to be had in discoursing of publique matters with men that are
particularly acquainted with this or that business. Having come to some
issue, wherein a motion of mine was well received, about sending these
invitations from the King to all the fishing-ports in general, with
limiting so many Busses to this, and that port, before we know the
readiness of subscribers, we parted, and I walked home all the way, and
having wrote a letter full of business to my father, in my way calling
upon my cozen Turner and Mr. Calthrop at the Temple, for their consent to
be my arbitrators, which they are willing to.  My wife and I to bed pretty
pleasant, for that her brother brings word that Gosnell, which my wife and
I in discourse do pleasantly call our Marmotte, will certainly come next
week without fail, which God grant may be for the best.

30th (Lord's day).  To church in the morning, and Mr. Mills made a pretty
good sermon.  It is a bitter cold frost to-day.  Dined alone with my wife
to-day with great content, my house being quite clean from top to bottom.
In the afternoon I to the French church here

     [The French Protestant Church was founded by Edward VI. in the
     church of St. Anthony's Hospital in Threadneedle Street.  This was
     destroyed in the Great Fire, and rebuilt, but demolished for the
     approaches of the new Royal Exchange.  The church was then removed
     to St. Martin's-le-Grand, but this was also removed in 1888 to make
     room for the new Post Office buildings.]

in the city, and stood in the aisle all the sermon, with great delight
hearing a very admirable sermon, from a very young man, upon the article
in our creed, in order of catechism, upon the Resurrection.  Thence home,
and to visit Sir W. Pen, who continues still bed-rid.  Here was Sir W.
Batten and his Lady, and Mrs. Turner, and I very merry, talking of the
confidence of Sir R. Ford's new-married daughter, though she married so
strangely lately, yet appears at church as brisk as can be, and takes
place of her elder sister, a maid.  Thence home and to supper, and then,
cold as it is, to my office, to make up my monthly accounts, and I do find
that, through the fitting of my house this month, I have spent in that and
kitchen L50 this month; so that now I am worth but L660, or thereabouts.
This being done and fitted myself for the Duke to-morrow, I went home, and
to prayers and to bed.  This day I first did wear a muffe, being my wife's
last year's muffe,

     [The fashion of men wearing muffs appears to have been introduced
     from France in this reign.]

and now I have bought her a new one, this serves me very well.  Thus ends
this month; in great frost; myself and family all well, but my mind much
disordered about my uncle's law business, being now in an order of being
arbitrated between us, which I wish to God it were done.  I am also
somewhat uncertain what to think of my going about to take a woman-servant
into my house, in the quality of a woman for my wife.  My wife promises it
shall cost me nothing but her meat and wages, and that it shall not be
attended with any other expenses, upon which termes I admit of it; for
that it will, I hope, save me money in having my wife go abroad on visits
and other delights; so that I hope the best, but am resolved to alter it,
if matters prove otherwise than I would have them. Publique matters in an
ill condition of discontent against the height and vanity of the Court,
and their bad payments: but that which troubles most, is the Clergy, which
will never content the City, which is not to be reconciled to Bishopps:
the more the pity that differences must still be.  Dunkirk newly sold, and
the money brought over; of which we hope to get some to pay the Navy:
which by Sir J. Lawson's having dispatched the business in the Straights,
by making peace with Argier,--[The ancient name for Algiers.]--Tunis, and
Tripoli (and so his fleet will also shortly come home), will now every day
grow less, and so the King's charge be abated; which God send!

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                 DECEMBER
                                   1662

December 1st.  Up and by coach with Sir John Minnes and Sir W. Batten to
White Hall to the Duke's chamber, where, as is usual, my Lord Sandwich and
all of us, after his being ready, to his closett, and there discoursed of
matters of the Navy, and here Mr. Coventry did do me the great kindness to
take notice to the Duke of my pains in making a collection of all
contracts about masts, which have been of great use to us.  Thence I to my
Lord Sandwich's, to Mr. Moore, to talk a little about business; and then
over the Parke (where I first in my life, it being a great frost, did see
people sliding with their skeates,

     [Iron skates appear to have been introduced by the Dutch, as the
     name certainly was; but we learn from Fitzstephen that bone skates
     (although not so called) were used in London in the twelfth
     century.]

which is a very pretty art), to Mr. Coventry's chamber to St. James's,
where we all met to a venison pasty, and were very merry, Major Norwood
being with us, whom they did play upon for his surrendering of Dunkirk.
Here we staid till three or four o'clock; and so to the Council Chamber,
where there met the Duke of York, Prince Rupert, Duke of Albemarle, my
Lord Sandwich, Sir Win. Compton, Mr. Coventry, Sir J. Minnes, Sir R. Ford,
Sir W. Rider, myself, and Captain Cuttance, as Commissioners for Tangier.
And after our Commission was read by Mr. Creed, who I perceive is to be
our Secretary, we did fall to discourse of matters: as, first, the
supplying them forthwith with victualls; then the reducing it to make way
for the money, which upon their reduction is to go to the building of the
Mole; and so to other matters, ordered as against next meeting.  This done
we broke up, and I to the Cockpitt, with much crowding and waiting, where
I saw "The Valiant Cidd"--[Translated from the "Cid" of Corneille]--acted,
a play I have read with great delight, but is a most dull thing acted,
which I never understood before, there being no pleasure in it, though
done by Betterton and by Ianthe, And another fine wench that is come in
the room of Roxalana nor did the King or queen once smile all the whole
play, nor any of the company seem to take any pleasure but what was in the
greatness and gallantry of the company.  Thence to my Lord's, and Mr.
Moore being in bed I staid not, but with a link walked home and got
thither by 12 o'clock, knocked up my boy, and put myself to bed.

2nd.  Before I went to the office my wife and I had another falling out
about Sarah, against whom she has a deadly hate, I know not for what, nor
can I see but she is a very good servant.  Then to my office, and there
sat all the morning, and then to dinner with my wife at home, and after
dinner did give Jane a very serious lesson, against we take her to be our
chamber-maid, which I spoke so to her that the poor girl cried and did
promise to be very dutifull and carefull.  So to the office, where we sat
as Commissioners for the Chest, and so examined most of the old
accountants to the Chest about it, and so we broke up, and I to my office
till late preparing business, and so home, being cold, and this night
first put on a wastecoate.  So to bed.

3rd.  Called up by Commissioner Pett, and with him by water, much against
my will, to Deptford, and after drinking a warm morning draft, with Mr.
Wood and our officers measuring all the morning his New England masts,
with which sight I was much pleased for my information, though I perceive
great neglect and indifference in all the King's officers in what they do
for the King.  That done, to the Globe, and there dined with Mr. Wood, and
so by water with Mr. Pett home again, all the way reading his Chest
accounts, in which I did see things did not please me; as his allowing
himself 1300 for one year's looking to the business of the Chest, and L150
per annum for the rest of the years.  But I found no fault to him himself,
but shall when they come to be read at the Board.  We did also call at
Limehouse to view two Busses that are building, that being a thing we are
now very hot upon.  Our call was to see what dimensions they are of, being
50 feet by the keel and about 60 tons.  Home and did a little business,
and so taking Mr. Pett by the way, we walked to the Temple, in our way
seeing one of the Russia Embassador's coaches go along, with his footmen
not in liverys, but their country habits; one of one colour and another of
another, which was very strange.  At the Temple spoke with Mr. Turner and
Calthrop, and so walked home again, being in some pain through the cold
which I have got to-day by water, which troubles me.  At the office doing
business a good while, and so home and had a posset, and so to bed.

4th.  At the office all the morning setting about business, and after
dinner to it again, and so till night, and then home looking over my
Brampton papers against to-morrow that we are to meet with our counsel on
both sides toward an arbitration, upon which I was very late, and so to
bed.

5th.  Up, it being a snow and hard frost, and being up I did call up
Sarah, who do go away to-day or to-morrow.  I paid her her wages, and gave
her 10s. myself, and my wife 5s. to give her.  For my part I think never
servant and mistress parted upon such foolish terms in the world as they
do, only for an opinion in my wife that she is ill-natured, in all other
things being a good servant.  The wench cried, and I was ready to cry too,
but to keep peace I am content she should go, and the rather, though I say
nothing of that, that Jane may come into her place.  This being done, I
walked towards Guildhall, thither being summoned by the Commissioners for
the Lieutenancy; but they sat not this morning.  So meeting in my way W.
Swan, I took him to a house thereabouts, and gave him a morning draft of
buttered ale;

     [Buttered ale must have been a horrible concoction, as it is
     described as ale boiled with lump sugar and spice.]

he telling me still much of his Fanatique stories, as if he were a great
zealot, when I know him to be a very rogue.  But I do it for discourse,
and to see how things stand with him and his party; who I perceive have
great expectation that God will not bless the Court nor Church, as it is
now settled, but they must be purified.  The worst news he tells me, is
that Mr. Chetwind is dead, my old and most ingenious acquaintance.  He is
dead, worth L3,000, which I did not expect, he living so high as he did
always and neatly.  He hath given W. Symons his wife L300, and made Will
one of his executors.  Thence to the Temple to my counsel, and thence to
Gray's Inn to meet with Mr. Cole but could not, and so took a turn or two
in the garden, being very pleasant with the snow and frost.  Thence to my
brother's, and there I eat something at dinner and transcribed a copy or
two of the state of my uncle's estate, which I prepared last night, and so
to the Temple Church, and there walked alone till 4 or 5 o'clock, and then
to my cozen Turner's chamber and staid there, up and down from his to
Calthrop's and Bernard's chambers, till so late, that Mr. Cole not coming,
we broke up for meeting this night, and so taking my uncle Thomas
homewards with me by coach, talking of our desire to have a peace, and set
him down at Gracious-street end, and so home, and there I find Gosnell
come, who, my wife tells me, is like to prove a pretty companion, of which
I am glad.  So to my office for a little business and then home, my mind
having been all this day in most extraordinary trouble and care for my
father, there being so great an appearance of my uncle's going away with
the greatest part of the estate, but in the evening by Gosnell's coming I
do put off these thoughts to entertain myself with my wife and her, who
sings exceeding well, and I shall take great delight in her, and so
merrily to bed.

6th.  Up and to the office, and there sat all the morning, Mr. Coventry
and I alone, the rest being paying off of ships.  Dined at home with my
wife and Gosnell, my mind much pleased with her, and after dinner sat with
them a good while, till my wife seemed to take notice of my being at home
now more than at other times.  I went to the office, and there I sat till
late, doing of business, and at 9 o'clock walked to Mr. Rawlinson's,
thinking to meet my uncle Wight there, where he was, but a great deal of
his wife's kindred-women and I knew not whom (which Mr. Rawlinson did seem
to me to take much notice of his being led by the nose by his wife), I
went away to my office again, and doing my business there, I went home,
and after a song by Gosnell we to bed.

7th (Lord's day).  A great snow, and so to church this morning with my
wife, which is the first time she hath been at church since her going to
Brampton, and Gosnell attending her, which was very gracefull.  So home,
and we dined above in our dining room, the first time since it was new
done, and in the afternoon I thought to go to the French church; but
finding the Dutch congregation there, and then finding the French
congregation's sermon begun in the Dutch, I returned home, and up to our
gallery, where I found my wife and Gosnell, and after a drowsy sermon, we
all three to my aunt Wight's, where great store of her usuall company, and
here we staid a pretty while talking, I differing from my aunt, as I
commonly do, in our opinion of the handsomeness of the Queen, which I
oppose mightily, saying that if my nose be handsome, then is her's, and
such like.  After much discourse, seeing the room full, and being
unwilling to stay all three, I took leave, and so with my wife only to see
Sir W. Pen, who is now got out of his bed, and sits by the fireside. And
after some talk, home and to supper, and after prayers to bed.  This night
came in my wife's brother and talked to my wife and Gosnell about his
wife, which they told me afterwards of, and I do smell that he I doubt is
overreached in thinking that he has got a rich wife,' and I fear she will
prove otherwise.  So to bed.

8th.  Up, and carrying Gosnell by coach, set her down at Temple Barr, she
going about business of hers today.  By the way she was telling me how
Balty did tell her that my wife did go every day in the week to Court and
plays, and that she should have liberty of going abroad as often as she
pleased, and many other lies, which I am vexed at, and I doubt the wench
did come in some expectation of, which troubles me.  So to the Duke and
Mr. Coventry, and alone, the rest being at a Pay and elsewhere, and alone
with Mr. Coventry I did read over our letter to my Lord Treasurer, which I
think now is done as well as it can be.  Then to my Lord Sandwich's, and
there spent the rest of the morning in making up my Lord's accounts with
Mr. Moore, and then dined with Mr. Moore and Battersby his friend, very
well and merry, and good discourse.  Then into the Park, to see them slide
with their skeates, which is very pretty.  And so to the Duke's, where the
Committee for Tangier met: and here we sat down all with him at a table,
and had much good discourse about the business, and is to my great
content.  That done, I hearing what play it was that is to be acted before
the King to-night, I would not stay, but home by coach, where I find my
wife troubled about Gosnell, who brings word that her uncle, justice
Jiggins, requires her to come three times a week to him, to follow some
business that her mother intrusts her withall, and that, unless she may
have that leisure given her, he will not have her take any place; for
which we are both troubled, but there is no help for it, and believing it
to be a good providence of God to prevent my running behindhand in the
world, I am somewhat contented therewith, and shall make my wife so, who,
poor wretch, I know will consider of things, though in good earnest the
privacy of her life must needs be irksome to her.  So I made Gosnell and
we sit up looking over the book of Dances till 12 at night, not observing
how the time went, and so to prayers and to bed.

9th.  Lay long with my wife, contenting her about the business of
Gosnell's going, and I perceive she will be contented as well as myself,
and so to the office, and after sitting all the morning in hopes to have
Mr. Coventry dine with me, he was forced to go to White Hall, and so I
dined with my own company only, taking Mr. Hater home with me, but he,
poor man, was not very well, and so could not eat any thing.  After dinner
staid within all the afternoon, being vexed in my mind about the going
away of Sarah this afternoon, who cried mightily, and so was I ready to
do, and Jane did also, and then anon went Gosnell away, which did trouble
me too; though upon many considerations, it is better that I am rid of the
charge.  All together makes my house appear to me very lonely, which
troubles me much, and in a melancholy humour I went to the office, and
there about business sat till I was called to Sir G. Carteret at the
Treasury office about my Lord Treasurer's letter, wherein he puts me to a
new trouble to write it over again.  So home and late with Sir John Minnes
at the office looking over Mr. Creed's accounts, and then home and to
supper, and my wife and I melancholy to bed.

10th.  This morning rose, receiving a messenger from Sir G. Carteret and a
letter from Mr. Coventry, one contrary to another, about our letter to my
Lord Treasurer, at which I am troubled, but I went to Sir George, and
being desirous to please both, I think I have found out a way to do it. So
back to the office with Sir J. Minnes, in his coach, but so great a snow
that we could hardly pass the streets.  So we and Sir W. Batten to the
office, and there did discourse of Mr. Creed's accounts, and I fear it
will be a good while before we shall go through them, and many things we
meet with, all of difficulty.  Then to the Dolphin, where Sir J. Minnes,
Sir W. Batten, and I, did treat the Auditors of the Exchequer, Auditors
Wood and Beale, and hither come Sir G. Carteret to us.  We had a good
dinner, cost us L5 and 6s., whereof my share 26s., and after dinner did
discourse of our salarys and other matters, which I think now they will
allow.  Thence home, and there I found our new cook-mayde Susan come, who
is recommended to us by my wife's brother, for which I like her never the
better, but being a good well-looked lass, I am willing to try, and Jane
begins to take upon her as a chamber-mayde.  So to the office, where late
putting papers and my books and businesses in order, it being very cold,
and so home to supper.

11th.  Up, it being a great frost upon the snow, and we sat all the
morning upon Mr. Creed's accounts, wherein I did him some service and some
disservice.  At noon he dined with me, and we sat all the afternoon
together, discoursing of ways to get money, which I am now giving myself
wholly up to, and in the evening he went away and I to my office,
concluding all matters concerning our great letter so long in doing to my
Lord Treasurer, till almost one in the morning, and then home with my mind
much eased, and so to bed.

12th.  From a very hard frost, when I wake, I find a very great thaw, and
my house overflown with it, which vexed me.  At the office and home, doing
business all the morning.  Then dined with my wife and sat talking with
her all the afternoon, and then to the office, and there examining my copy
of Mr. Holland's book till 10 at night, and so home to supper and bed.

13th.  Slept long to-day till Sir J. Minnes and Sir W. Batten were set out
towards Portsmouth before I rose, and Sir G. Carteret came to the office
to speak with me before I was up.  So I started up and down to him.  By
and by we sat, Mr. Coventry and I (Sir G. Carteret being gone), and among
other things, Field and Stint did come, and received the L41 given him by
the judgement against me and Harry Kem;

     [Fine for the imprisonment of Field (see February 4th, 1661-62, and
     October 21st, 1662).]

and we did also sign bonds in L500 to stand to the award of Mr. Porter and
Smith for the rest: which, however, I did not sign to till I got Mr.
Coventry to go up with me to Sir W. Pen; and he did promise me before him
to bear his share in what should be awarded, and both concluded that Sir
W. Batten would do no less.  At noon broke up and dined with my wife, and
then to the office again, and there made an end of last night's
examination, and got my study there made very clean and put in order, and
then to write by the post, among other letters one to Sir W. Batten about
this day's work with Field, desiring his promise also.  The letter I have
caused to be entered in our public book of letters.  So home to supper and
to bed.

14th (Lord's day).  Lay with great content talking with my wife in bed,
and so up and to church and then home, and had a neat dinner by ourselves,
and after dinner walked to White Hall and my Lord's, and up and down till
chappell time, and then to the King's chappell, where I heard the service,
and so to my Lord's, and there Mr. Howe and Pagett, the counsellor, an old
lover of musique.  We sang some Psalms of Mr. Lawes, and played some
symphonys between till night, that I was sent for to Mr. Creed's lodging,
and there was Captain Ferrers and his lady and W. Howe and I; we supped
very well and good sport in discourse.  After supper I was sent for to my
Lord, with whom I staid talking about his, and my owne, and the publique
affairs, with great content, he advising me as to my owne choosing of Sir
R. Bernard for umpire in the businesses between my uncle and us, that I
would not trust to him upon his direction, for he did not think him a man
to be trusted at all; and so bid him good night, and to Mr. Creed's again;
Mr. Moore, with whom I intended to have lain, lying physically without
sheets; and there, after some discourse, to bed, and lay ill, though the
bed good, my stomach being sicke all night with my too heavy supper.

15th.  Up and to my Lord's and thence to the Duke, and followed him into
the Park, where, though the ice was broken and dangerous, yet he would go
slide upon his scates, which I did not like, but he slides very well. So
back and to his closett, whither my Lord Sandwich comes, and there Mr.
Coventry and we three had long discourse together about the matters of the
Navy; and, indeed, I find myself more and more obliged to Mr. Coventry,
who studies to do me all the right he can in every thing to the Duke.
Thence walked a good while up and down the gallerys; and among others, met
with Dr. Clerke, who in discourse tells me, that Sir Charles Barkeley's
greatness is only his being pimp to the King, and to my Lady Castlemaine.
And yet for all this, that the King is very kind to the Queen; who, he
says, is one of the best women in the world.  Strange how the King is
bewitched to this pretty Castlemaine.  Thence to my Lord's, and there with
Mr. Creed, Moore, and Howe to the Crown and dined, and thence to
Whitehall, where I walked up and down the gallerys, spending my time upon
the pictures, till the Duke and the Committee for Tangier met (the Duke
not staying with us), where the only matter was to discourse with my Lord
Rutherford, who is this day made Governor of Tangier, for I know not what
reasons; and my Lord of Peterborough to be called home; which, though it
is said it is done with kindness, yet all the world may see it is done
otherwise, and I am sorry to see a Catholick Governor sent to command
there, where all the rest of the officers almost are such already.  But
God knows what the reason is! and all may see how slippery places all
courtiers stand in.  Thence by coach home, in my way calling upon Sir John
Berkenheade, to speak about my assessment of L42 to the Loyal Sufferers;
which, I perceive, I cannot help; but he tells me I have been abused by
Sir R. Ford, which I shall hereafter make use of when it shall be fit.
Thence called at the Major-General's, Sir R. Browne, about my being
assessed armes to the militia; but he was abroad; and so driving through
the backside of the Shambles in Newgate Market, my coach plucked down two
pieces of beef into the dirt, upon which the butchers stopped the horses,
and a great rout of people in the street, crying that he had done him 40s
and L5 worth of hurt; but going down, I saw that he had done little or
none; and so I give them a shilling for it and they were well contented,
and so home, and there to my Lady Batten's to see her, who tells me she
hath just now a letter from Sir William, how that he and Sir J. Minnes did
very narrowly escape drowning on the road, the waters are so high; but is
well.  But, Lord! what a hypocrite-like face she made to tell it me.
Thence to Sir W. Pen and sat long with him in discourse, I making myself
appear one of greater action and resolution as to publique business than I
have hitherto done, at which he listens, but I know is a rogue in his
heart and likes not, but I perceive I may hold up my head, and the more
the better, I minding of my business as I have done, in which God do and
will bless me.  So home and with great content to bed, and talk and chat
with my wife while I was at supper, to our great pleasure.

16th.  Up and to the office, and thither came Mr. Coventry and Sir G.
Carteret, and among other business was Strutt's the purser, against Captn.
Browne, Sir W. Batten's brother-in-law, but, Lord!  though I believe the
Captain has played the knave, though I seem to have a good opinion of him
and to mean him well, what a most troublesome fellow that Strutt is, such
as I never did meet with his fellow in my life.  His talking and ours to
make him hold his peace set my head off akeing all the afternoon with
great pain.  So to dinner, thinking to have had Mr. Coventry, but he could
not go with me; and so I took Captn. Murford. Of whom I do hear what the
world says of me; that all do conclude Mr. Coventry, and Pett, and me, to
be of a knot; and that we do now carry all things before us; and much more
in particular of me, and my studiousnesse, &c., to my great content.
After dinner came Mrs. Browne, the Captain's wife, to see me and my wife,
and I showed her a good countenance, and indeed her husband has been civil
to us, but though I speak them fair, yet I doubt I shall not be able to do
her husband much favour in this business of Strutt's, whom without doubt
he has abused. So to the office, and hence, having done some business, by
coach to White Hall to Secretary Bennet's, and agreed with Mr. Lee to set
upon our new adventure at the Tower to-morrow.  Hence to Col. Lovelace in
Cannon Row about seeing how Sir R. Ford did report all the officers of the
navy to be rated for the Loyal Sufferers, but finding him at the Rhenish
wine-house I could not have any answer, but must take another time.
Thence to my Lord's, and having sat talking with Mr. Moore bewailing the
vanity and disorders of the age, I went by coach to my brother's, where I
met Sarah, my late mayde, who had a desire to speak with me, and I with
her to know what it was, who told me out of good will to me, for she loves
me dearly, that I would beware of my wife's brother, for he is begging or
borrowing of her and often, and told me of her Scallop whisk, and her
borrowing of 50s. for Will, which she believes was for him and her father.
I do observe so much goodness and seriousness in the mayde, that I am
again and again sorry that I have parted with her, though it was full
against my will then, and if she had anything in the world I would commend
her for a wife for my brother Tom.  After much discourse and her
professions of love to me and all my relations, I bade her good night and
did kiss her, and indeed she seemed very well-favoured to me to-night, as
she is always.  So by coach home and to my office, did some business, and
so home to supper and to bed.

17th.  This morning come Mr. Lee, Wade, and Evett, intending to have gone
upon our new design to the Tower today; but it raining, and the work being
to be done in the open garden, we put it off to Friday next.  And so I to
the office doing business, and then dined at home with my poor wife with
great content, and so to the office again and made an end of examining the
other of Mr. Holland's books about the Navy, with which I am much
contented, and so to other businesses till night at my office, and so home
to supper, and after much dear company and talk with my wife, to bed.

18th.  Up and to the office, Mr. Coventry and I alone sat till two
o'clock, and then he inviting himself to my house to dinner, of which I
was proud; but my dinner being a legg of mutton and two capons, they were
not done enough, which did vex me; but we made shift to please him, I
think; but I was, when he was gone, very angry with my wife and people.
This afternoon came my wife's brother and his wife, and Mrs. Lodum his
landlady (my old friend Mr. Ashwell's sister), Balty's wife is a most
little and yet, I believe, pretty old girl, not handsome, nor has anything
in the world pleasing, but, they say, she plays mighty well on the Base
Violl.  They dined at her father's today, but for ought I hear he is a
wise man, and will not give any thing to his daughter till he sees what
her husband do put himself to, so that I doubt he has made but a bad
matter of it, but I am resolved not to meddle with it.  They gone I to the
office, and to see Sir W. Pen, with my wife, and thence I to Mr. Cade the
stationer, to direct him what to do with my two copies of Mr. Holland's
books which he is to bind, and after supplying myself with several things
of him, I returned to my office, and so home to supper and to bed.

19th.  Up and by appointment with Mr. Lee, Wade, Evett, and workmen to the
Tower, and with the Lieutenant's leave set them to work in the garden, in
the corner against the mayne-guard, a most unlikely place. It being cold,
Mr. Lee and I did sit all the day till three o'clock by the fire in the
Governor's house; I reading a play of Fletcher's, being "A Wife for a
Month," wherein no great wit or language.  Having done we went to them at
work, and having wrought below the bottom of the foundation of the wall, I
bid them give over, and so all our hopes ended; and so went home, taking
Mr. Leigh with me, and after drunk a cup of wine he went away, and I to my
office, there reading in Sir W. Petty's book, and so home and to bed, a
little displeased with my wife, who, poor wretch, is troubled with her
lonely life, which I know not how without great charge to help as yet, but
I will study how to do it.

20th.  Up and had L100 brought me by Prior of Brampton in full of his
purchase money for Barton's house and some land.  So to the office, and
thence with Mr. Coventry in his coach to St. James's, with great content
and pride to see him treat me so friendly; and dined with him, and so to
White Hall together; where we met upon the Tangier Commission, and
discoursed many things thereon; but little will be done before my Lord
Rutherford comes there, as to the fortification or Mole.  That done, my
Lord Sandwich and I walked together a good while in the Matted Gallery, he
acquainting me with his late enquiries into the Wardrobe business to his
content; and tells me how things stand.  And that the first year was worth
about L3000 to him, and the next about as much; so that at this day, if he
were paid, it will be worth about L7000 to him.  But it contents me above
all things to see him trust me as his confidant: so I bid him good night,
he being to go into the country, to keep his Christmas, on Monday next.
So by coach home and to my office, being post night, and then home and to
bed.

21st (Lord's day).  Lay long in bed, so up to Church, and so home to
dinner alone with my wife very pleasant.  After dinner I walked to my
brother's, where he told me some hopes he had of bringing his business to
pass still of his mistress, but I do find they do stand upon terms that
will not be either fit or in his power to grant, and therefore I did
dislike his talk and advised him to give it quite over.  Thence walked to
White Hall, and there to chappell, and from thence up stairs, and up and
down the house and gallerys on the King's and Queen's side, and so through
the garden to my Lord's lodgings, where there was Mr. Gibbons, Madge, and
Mallard, and Pagett; and by and by comes in my Lord Sandwich, and so we
had great store of good musique.  By and by comes in my simple Lord
Chandois, who (my Lord Sandwich being gone out to Court) began to sing
psalms, but so dully that I was weary of it.  At last we broke up; and by
and by comes in my Lord Sandwich again, and he and I to talk together
about his businesses, and so he to bed and I and Mr. Creed and Captain
Ferrers fell to a cold goose pye of Mrs. Sarah's, heartily, and so spent
our time till past twelve o'clock, and then with Creed to his lodgings,
and so with him to bed, and slept till

22nd.  Six or seven o'clock and so up, and by the fireside read a good
part of "The Advice to a Daughter," which a simple coxcomb has wrote
against Osborne, but in all my life I never did nor can expect to see so
much nonsense in print Thence to my Lord's, who is getting himself ready
for his journey to Hinchingbroke.  And by and by, after eating something,
and talking with me about many things, and telling me his mind, upon my
asking about Sarah (who, it seems, only married of late, but is also said
to be turned a great drunkard, which I am ashamed of), that he likes her
service well, and do not love a strange face, but will not endure the
fault, but hath bade me speak to her and advise her if she hath a mind to
stay with him, which I will do.  My Lord and his people being gone, I
walked to Mr. Coventry's chamber, where I found him gone out into the Park
with the Duke, so the boy being there ready with my things, I shifted
myself into a riding-habitt, and followed him through White Hall, and in
the Park Mr. Coventry's people having a horse ready for me (so fine a one
that I was almost afeard to get upon him, but I did, and found myself more
feared than hurt) and I got up and followed the Duke, who, with some of
his people (among others Mr. Coventry) was riding out.  And with them to
Hide Park.  Where Mr. Coventry asking leave of the Duke, he bid us go to
Woolwich.  So he and I to the waterside, and our horses coming by the
ferry, we by oars over to Lambeth, and from thence, with brave discourse
by the way, rode to Woolwich, where we eat and drank at Mr. Peat's, and
discoursed of many businesses, and put in practice my new way of the
Call-book, which will be of great use.  Here, having staid a good while,
we got up again and brought night home with us and foul weather.  So over
to Whitehall to his chamber, whither my boy came, who had staid in St.
James's Park by my mistake all day, looking for me. Thence took my things
that I put off to-day, and by coach, being very wet and cold, on my feet
home, and presently shifted myself, and so had the barber come; and my
wife and I to read "Ovid's Metamorphoses," which I brought her home from
Paul's Churchyard to-night, having called for it by the way, and so to
bed,

23rd.  And slept hard till 8 o'clock this morning, and so up and to the
office, where I found Sir J. Minnes and Sir W. Batten come unexpectedly
home last night from Portsmouth, having done the Pay there before we could
have, thought it.  Sat all the morning, and at noon home to dinner with my
wife alone, and after dinner sat by the fire, and then up to make up my
accounts with her, and find that my ordinary housekeeping comes to L7 a
month, which is a great deal.  By and by comes Dr. Pierce, who among other
things tells me that my Lady Castlemaine's interest at Court increases,
and is more and greater than the Queen's; that she hath brought in Sir H.
Bennet, and Sir Charles Barkeley; but that the queen is a most good lady,
and takes all with the greatest meekness that may be. He tells me too that
Mr. Edward Montagu is quite broke at Court with his repute and purse; and
that he lately was engaged in a quarrell against my Lord Chesterfield: but
that the King did cause it to be taken up.  He tells me, too, that the
King is much concerned in the Chancellor's sickness, and that the
Chancellor is as great, he thinks, as ever he was with the King.  He also
tells me what the world says of me, "that Mr. Coventry and I do all the
business of the office almost:" at which I am highly proud.  He being gone
I fell to business, which was very great, but got it well over by nine at
night, and so home, and after supper to bed.

24th.  Lay pleasantly, talking to my wife, till 8 o'clock, then up and to
Sir W. Batten's to see him and Sir G. Carteret and Sir J. Minnes take
coach towards the Pay at Chatham, which they did and I home, and took
money in my pocket to pay many reckonings to-day in the town, as my
bookseller's, and paid at another shop L4 10s. for "Stephens's Thesaurus
Graecae Linguae," given to Paul's School: So to my brother's and
shoemaker, and so to my Lord Crew's, and dined alone with him, and after
dinner much discourse about matters.  Upon the whole, I understand there
are great factions at Court, and something he said that did imply a
difference like to be between the King and the Duke, in case the Queen
should not be with child.  I understand, about this bastard.

     [James Crofts, son of Charles II. by Lucy Walter, created Duke of
     Monmouth in 1663, Duke of Buccleuch in 1673, when he took the name
     of Scott.]

He says, also, that some great man will be aimed at when Parliament comes
to sit again; I understand, the Chancellor: and that there is a bill will
be brought in, that none that have been in arms for the Parliament shall
be capable of office.  And that the Court are weary of my Lord Albemarle
and Chamberlin.  He wishes that my Lord Sandwich had some good occasion to
be abroad this summer which is coming on, and that my Lord Hinchingbroke
were well married, and Sydney had some place at Court. He pities the poor
ministers that are put out, to whom, he says, the King is beholden for his
coming in, and that if any such thing had been foreseen he had never come
in.  After this, and much other discourse of the sea, and breeding young
gentlemen to the sea, I went away, and homeward, met Mr. Creed at my
bookseller's in Paul's Church-yard, who takes it ill my letter last night
to Mr. Povy, wherein I accuse him of the neglect of the Tangier boats, in
which I must confess I did not do altogether like a friend; but however it
was truth, and I must own it to be so, though I fall wholly out with him
for it.  Thence home and to my office alone to do business, and read over
half of Mr. Bland's discourse concerning Trade, which (he being no
scholler and so knows not the rules of writing orderly) is very good.  So
home to supper and to bed, my wife not being well .  .  .  .  This evening
Mr. Gauden sent me, against Christmas, a great chine of beef and three
dozen of tongues.  I did give 5s. to the man that brought it, and
half-a-crown to the porters.  This day also the parish-clerk brought the
general bill of mortality, which cost me half-a-crown more.

     [The Bills of Mortality for London were first compiled by order of
     Thomas Cromwell about 1538, and the keeping of them was commenced by
     the Company of Parish Clerks in the great plague year of 1593.  The
     bills were issued weekly from 1603.  The charter of the Parish
     Clerks' Company (1611) directs that "each parish clerk shall bring
     to the Clerks' Hall weekly a note of all christenings and burials."
     Charles I. in 1636 granted permission to the Parish Clerks to have a
     printing press and employ a printer in their hall for the purpose of
     printing their weekly bills.]

25th (Christmas Day).  Up pretty early, leaving my wife not well in bed,
and with my boy walked, it being a most brave cold and dry frosty morning,
and had a pleasant walk to White Hall, where I intended to have received
the Communion with the family, but I came a little too late. So I walked
up into the house and spent my time looking over pictures, particularly
the ships in King Henry the VIIIth's Voyage to Bullen;

     [Boulogne.  These pictures were given by George III. to the Society
     of Antiquaries, who in return presented to the king a set of Thomas
     Hearne's works, on large paper.  The pictures were reclaimed by
     George IV., and are now at Hampton Court.  They were exhibited in
     the Tudor Exhibition, 1890.]

marking the great difference between their build then and now.  By and by
down to the chappell again where Bishopp Morley preached upon the song of
the Angels, "Glory to God on high, on earth peace, and good will towards
men."  Methought he made but a poor sermon, but long, and reprehending the
mistaken jollity of the Court for the true joy that shall and ought to be
on these days, he particularized concerning their excess in plays and
gaming, saying that he whose office it is to keep the gamesters in order
and within bounds, serves but for a second rather in a duell, meaning the
groom-porter.  Upon which it was worth observing how far they are come
from taking the reprehensions of a bishopp seriously, that they all laugh
in the chappell when he reflected on their ill actions and courses.  He
did much press us to joy in these publique days of joy, and to
hospitality.  But one that stood by whispered in my ear that the Bishopp
himself do not spend one groat to the poor himself.  The sermon done, a
good anthem followed, with vialls, and then the King came down to receive
the Sacrament.  But I staid not, but calling my boy from my Lord's
lodgings, and giving Sarah some good advice, by my Lord's order, to be
sober and look after the house, I walked home again with great pleasure,
and there dined by my wife's bed-side with great content, having a mess of
brave plum-porridge

     [The national Christmas dish of plum pudding is a modern evolution
     from plum porridge, which was probably similar to the dish still
     produced at Windsor Castle.]

and a roasted pullet for dinner, and I sent for a mince-pie abroad, my
wife not being well to make any herself yet.  After dinner sat talking a
good while with her, her [pain] being become less, and then to see Sir W.
Pen a little, and so to my office, practising arithmetique alone and
making an end of last night's book with great content till eleven at
night, and so home to supper and to bed.

26th.  Up, my wife to the making of Christmas pies all day, being now
pretty well again, and I abroad to several places about some businesses,
among others bought a bake-pan in Newgate Market, and sent it home, it
cost me 16s.  So to Dr. Williams, but he is out of town, then to the
Wardrobe.  Hither come Mr. Battersby; and we falling into a discourse of a
new book of drollery in verse called Hudebras,

     [The first edition of Butler's "Hudibras" is dated 1663, and it
     probably had only been published a few days when Pepys bought it and
     sold it at a loss.  He subsequently endeavoured to appreciate the
     work, but was not successful.  The edition in the Pepysian Library
     is dated 1689.]

I would needs go find it out, and met with it at the Temple: cost me 2s.
6d.  But when I came to read it, it is so silly an abuse of the Presbyter
Knight going to the warrs, that I am ashamed of it; and by and by meeting
at Mr. Townsend's at dinner, I sold it to him for 18d.  Here we dined with
many tradesmen that belong to the Wardrobe, but I was weary soon of their
company, and broke up dinner as soon as I could, and away, with the
greatest reluctancy and dispute (two or three times my reason stopping my
sense and I would go back again) within myself, to the Duke's house and
saw "The Villaine," which I ought not to do without my wife, but that my
time is now out that I did undertake it for.  But, Lord! to consider how
my natural desire is to pleasure, which God be praised that he has given
me the power by my late oaths to curb so well as I have done, and will do
again after two or three plays more.  Here I was better pleased with the
play than I was at first, understanding the design better than I did. Here
I saw Gosnell and her sister at a distance, and could have found it in my
heart to have accosted them, but thought not prudent.  But I watched their
going out and found that they came, she, her sister and another woman,
alone, without any man, and did go over the fields a foot. I find that I
have an inclination to have her come again, though it is most against my
interest either of profit or content of mind, other than for their
singing.  Home on foot, in my way calling at Mr. Rawlinson's and drinking
only a cup of ale there.  He tells me my uncle has ended his purchase,
which cost him L4,500, and how my uncle do express his trouble that he has
with his wife's relations, but I understand his great intentions are for
the Wights that hang upon him and by whose advice this estate is bought.
Thence home, and found my wife busy among her pies, but angry for some
saucy words that her mayde Jane has given her, which I will not allow of,
and therefore will give her warning to be gone.  As also we are both
displeased for some slight words that Sarah, now at Sir W. Pen's, hath
spoke of us, but it is no matter.  We shall endeavour to joyne the lion's
skin to the fox's tail.  So to my office alone a while, and then home to
my study and supper and bed.  Being also vexed at my boy for his staying
playing abroad when he is sent of errands, so that I have sent him
to-night to see whether their country carrier be in town or no, for I am
resolved to keep him no more.

27th.  Up, and while I am dressing I sent for my boy's brother, William,
that lives in town here as a groom, to whom and their sister Jane I told
my resolution to keep the boy no longer.  So upon the whole they desire to
have him stay a week longer, and then he shall go.  So to the office, and
there Mr. Coventry and I sat till noon, and then I stept to the Exchange,
and so home to dinner, and after dinner with my wife to the Duke's
Theatre, and saw the second part of "Rhodes,"  done with the new Roxalana;
which do it rather better in all respects for person, voice, and judgment,
then the first Roxalana.  Home with great content with my wife, not so
well pleased with the company at the house to-day, which was full of
citizens, there hardly being a gentleman or woman in the house; a couple
of pretty ladies by us that made sport in it, being jostled and crowded by
prentices.  So home, and I to my study making up my monthly accounts,
which is now fallen again to L630 or thereabouts, which not long since was
L680, at which I am sorry, but I trust in God I shall get it up again, and
in the meantime will live sparingly.  So home to supper and to bed.

28th (Lord's day).  Up and, with my wife to church, and coming out, went
out both before my Lady Batten, he not being there, which I believe will
vex her.  After dinner my wife to church again, and I to the French
church, where I heard an old man make a tedious, long sermon, till they
were fain to light candles to baptize the children by.  So homewards,
meeting my brother Tom, but spoke but little with him, and calling also at
my uncle Wight's, but met him and her going forth, and so I went directly
home, and there fell to the renewing my last year's oaths, whereby it has
pleased God so much to better myself and practise, and so down to supper,
and then prayers and bed.

29th.  Up and walked to Whitehall, where the Duke and Mr. Coventry being
gone forth I went to Westminster Hall, where I staid reading at Mrs.
Mitchell's shop, and sent for half a pint of sack for her.  Here she told
me what I heard not of before, the strange burning of Mr. De Laun, a
merchant's house in Loathbury, and his lady (Sir Thomas Allen's daughter)
and her whole family; not one thing, dog nor cat, escaping; nor any of the
neighbours almost hearing of it till the house was quite down and burnt.
How this should come to pass, God knows, but a most strange thing it is!
Hither came Jack Spicer to me, and I took him to the Swan, where Mr.
Herbert did give me my breakfast of cold chine of pork; and here Spicer
and I talked of Exchequer matters, and how the Lord Treasurer' hath now
ordered all monies to be brought into the Exchequer, and hath settled the
King's revenue, and given to every general expence proper assignments; to
the Navy L200,000 and odd.  He also told me of the great vast trade of the
goldsmiths in supplying the King with money at dear rates.  Thence to
White Hall, and got up to the top gallerys in the Banquetting House, to
see the audience of the Russia Embassadors; which [took place] after long
waiting and fear of the falling of the gallery (it being so full, and part
of it being parted from the rest, for nobody to come up merely from the
weakness thereof): and very handsome it was. After they were come in, I
went down and got through the croude almost as high as the King and the
Embassadors, where I saw all the presents, being rich furs, hawks,
carpets, cloths of tissue, and sea-horse teeth.  The King took two or
three hawks upon his fist, having a glove on, wrought with gold, given him
for the purpose.  The son of one of the Embassadors was in the richest
suit for pearl and tissue, that ever I did see, or shall, I believe.
After they and all the company had kissed the King's hand, then the three
Embassadors and the son, and no more, did kiss the Queen's.  One thing
more I did observe, that the chief Embassador did carry up his master's
letters in state before him on high; and as soon as he had delivered them,
he did fall down to the ground and lay there a great while.  After all was
done, the company broke up; and I spent a little while walking up and down
the gallery seeing the ladies, the two Queens, and the Duke of Monmouth
with his little mistress, which is very little, and like my
brother-in-law's wife.  So with Mr. Creed to the Harp and Ball, and there
meeting with Mr. How, Goodgroom, and young Coleman, did drink and talk
with them, and I have almost found out a young gentlewoman for my turn, to
wait on my wife, of good family and that can sing.  Thence I went away,
and getting a coach went home and sat late talking with my wife about our
entertaining Dr. Clerke's lady and Mrs. Pierce shortly, being in great
pain that my wife hath never a winter gown, being almost ashamed of it,
that she should be seen in a taffeta one; when all the world wears
moyre;--[By moyre is meant mohair.-B.]--so to prayers and to bed, but we
could not come to any resolution what to do therein, other than to appear
as she is.

30th.  Up and to the office, whither Sir W. Pen came, the first time that
he has come downstairs since his late great sickness of the gout.  We with
Mr. Coventry sat till noon, then I to the Change ward, to see what play
was there, but I liked none of them, and so homeward, and calling in at
Mr, Rawlinson's, where he stopped me to dine with him and two East India
officers of ships and Howell our turner.  With the officers I had good
discourse, particularly of the people at the Cape of Good Hope, of whom
they of their own knowledge do tell me these one or two things: viz
.  .  .  .  that they never sleep lying, but always sitting upon the
ground, that their speech is not so articulate as ours, but yet [they]
understand one another well, that they paint themselves all over with the
grease the Dutch sell them (who have a fort there) and soot. After dinner
drinking five or six glasses of wine, which liberty I now take till I
begin my oath again, I went home and took my wife into coach, and carried
her to Westminster; there visited Mrs. Ferrer, and staid talking with her
a good while, there being a little, proud, ugly, talking lady there, that
was much crying up the Queen-Mother's Court at Somerset House above our
own Queen's; there being before no allowance of laughing and the mirth
that is at the other's; and indeed it is observed that the greatest Court
now-a-days is there. Thence to White Hall, where I carried my wife to see
the Queen in her presence-chamber; and the maydes of honour and the young
Duke of Monmouth playing at cards. Some of them, and but a few, were very
pretty; though all well dressed in velvet gowns.  Thence to my Lord's
lodgings, where Mrs. Sarah did make us my Lord's bed, and Mr. Creed I
being sent for, sat playing at cards till it was late, and so good night,
and with great pleasure to bed.

31st.  Lay pretty long in bed, and then I up and to Westminster Hall, and
so to the Swan, sending for Mr. W. Bowyer, and there drank my morning
draft, and had some of his simple discourse.  Among other things he tells
me how the difference comes between his fair cozen Butler and Collonell
Dillon, upon his opening letters of her brother's from Ireland,
complaining of his knavery, and forging others to the contrary; and so
they are long ago quite broke off.  Thence to a barber's and so to my
wife, and at noon took her to Mrs. Pierces by invitacion to dinner, where
there came Dr. Clerke and his wife and sister and Mr. Knight, chief
chyrurgeon to the King and his wife.  We were pretty merry, the two men
being excellent company, but I confess I am wedded from the opinion either
of Mrs. Pierces beauty upon discovery of her naked neck to-day, being
undrest when we came in, or of Mrs. Clerke's genius, which I so much
admired, I finding her to be so conceited and fantastique in her dress
this day and carriage, though the truth is, witty enough.  After dinner
with much ado the doctor and I got away to follow our business for a
while, he to his patients and I to the Tangier Committee, where the Duke
of York was, and we staid at it a good while, and thence in order to the
despatch of the boats and provisions for Tangier away, Mr. Povy, in his
coach, carried Mr. Gauden and I into London to Mr. Bland's, the merchant,
where we staid discoursing upon the reason of the delay of the going away
of these things a great while.  Then to eat a dish of anchovies, and drink
wine and syder, and very merry, but above all things pleased to hear Mrs.
Bland talk like a merchant in her husband's business very well, and it
seems she do understand it and perform a great deal. Thence merry back,
Mr. Povy and, I to White Hall; he carrying me thither on purpose to carry
me into the ball this night before the King.  All the way he talking very
ingenuously, and I find him a fine gentleman, and one that loves to live
nobly and neatly, as I perceive by his discourse of his house, pictures,
and horses.  He brought me first to the Duke's chamber, where I saw him
and the Duchess at supper; and thence into the room where the ball was to
be, crammed with fine ladies, the greatest of the Court.  By and by comes
the King and Queen, the Duke and Duchess, and all the great ones: and
after seating themselves, the King takes out the Duchess of York; and the
Duke, the Duchess of Buckingham; the Duke of Monmouth, my Lady
Castlemaine; and so other lords other ladies: and they danced the Bransle.

     "Branle.  Espece de danse de plusieurs personnes, qui se tiennent
     par la main, et qui se menent tour-a-tour. "Dictionnaire de
     l'Academie.  A country dance mentioned by Shakespeare and other
     dramatists under the form of brawl, which word continued to be used
     in the eighteenth century.

                    "My grave Lord Keeper led the brawls;
                    The seals and maces danced before him."
                                             Gray, 'A Long Story.'

After that, the King led a lady a single Coranto--[swift and lively]--and
then the rest of the lords, one after another, other ladies very noble it
was, and great pleasure to see.  Then to country dances; the King leading
the first, which he called for; which was, says he, "Cuckolds all awry,"
the old dance of England.  Of the ladies that danced, the Duke of
Monmouth's mistress, and my Lady Castlemaine, and a daughter of Sir Harry
de Vicke's, were the best.  The manner was, when the King dances, all the
ladies in the room, and the Queen herself, stand up: and indeed he dances
rarely, and much better that the Duke of York. Having staid here as long
as I thought fit, to my infinite content, it being the greatest pleasure I
could wish now to see at Court, I went out, leaving them dancing, and to
Mrs. Pierces, where I found the company had staid very long for my coming,
but all gone but my wife, and so I took her home by coach and so to my
Lord's again, where after some supper to bed, very weary and in a little
pain from my riding a little uneasily to-night in the coach.

Thus ends this year with great mirth to me and my wife: Our condition
being thus:--we are at present spending a night or two at my Lord's
lodgings at White Hall.  Our home at the Navy-office, which is and hath a
pretty while been in good condition, finished and made very convenient. My
purse is worth about L650, besides my goods of all sorts, which yet might
have been more but for my late layings out upon my house and public
assessment, and yet would not have been so much if I had not lived a very
orderly life all this year by virtue of the oaths that God put into my
heart to take against wine, plays, and other expenses, and to observe for
these last twelve months, and which I am now going to renew, I under God
owing my present content thereunto.  My family is myself and wife,
William, my clerk; Jane, my wife's upper mayde, but, I think, growing
proud and negligent upon it: we must part, which troubles me; Susan, our
cook-mayde, a pretty willing wench, but no good cook; and Wayneman, my
boy, who I am now turning away for his naughty tricks.  We have had from
the beginning our healths to this day very well, blessed be God!  Our late
mayde Sarah going from us (though put away by us) to live with Sir W. Pen
do trouble me, though I love the wench, so that we do make ourselves a
little strange to him and his family for it, and resolve to do so.  The
same we are for other reasons to my Lady Batten and hers. We have lately
had it in our thoughts, and I can hardly bring myself off of it, since
Mrs. Gosnell cannot be with us, to find out another to be in the quality
of a woman to my wife that can sing or dance, and yet finding it hard to
save anything at the year's end as I now live, I think I shall not be such
a fool till I am more warm in my purse, besides my oath of entering into
no such expenses till I am worth L1000.  By my last year's diligence in my
office, blessed be God!  I am come to a good degree of knowledge therein;
and am acknowledged so by all--the world, even the Duke himself, to whom I
have a good access and by that, and my being Commissioner with him for
Tangier, he takes much notice of me; and I doubt not but, by the
continuance of the same endeavours, I shall in a little time come to be a
man much taken notice of in the world, specially being come to so great an
esteem with Mr. Coventry.  The only weight that lies heavy upon my mind is
the ending the business with my uncle Thomas about my-dead uncle's estate,
which is very ill on our side, and I fear when all is done I must be
forced to maintain my father myself, or spare a good deal towards it out
of my own purse, which will be a very great pull back to me in my fortune.
But I must be contented and bring it to an issue one way or other.
Publique matters stand thus: The King is bringing, as is said, his family,
and Navy, and all other his charges, to a less expence.  In the mean time,
himself following his pleasures more than with good advice he would do; at
least, to be seen to all the world to do so.  His dalliance with my Lady
Castlemaine being publique, every day, to his great reproach; and his
favouring of none at Court so much as those that are the confidants of his
pleasure, as Sir H. Bennet and Sir Charles Barkeley; which, good God! put
it into his heart to mend, before he makes himself too much contemned by
his people for it!  The Duke of Monmouth is in so great splendour at
Court, and so dandled by the King, that some doubt, if the King should
have no child by the Queen (which there is yet no appearance of), whether
he would not be acknowledged for a lawful son; and that there will be a
difference follow upon it between the Duke of York and him; which God
prevent!  My Lord Chancellor is threatened by people to be questioned, the
next sitting of the Parliament, by some spirits that do not love to see
him so great: but certainly he is a good servant to the King.  The
Queen-Mother is said to keep too great a Court now; and her being married
to my Lord St. Albans is commonly talked of; and that they had a daughter
between them in France, how true, God knows.  The Bishopps are high, and
go on without any diffidence in pressing uniformity; and the Presbyters
seem silent in it, and either conform or lay down, though without doubt
they expect a turn, and would be glad these endeavours of the other
Fanatiques would take effect; there having been a plot lately found, for
which four have been publickly tried at the Old Bayley and hanged.  My
Lord Sandwich is still in good esteem, and now keeping his Christmas in
the country; and I in good esteem, I think, as any man can be, with him.
Mr. Moore is very sickly, and I doubt will hardly get over his late fit of
sickness, that still hangs on him.  In fine, for the good condition of
myself, wife, family, and estate, in the great degree that it is, and for
the public state of the nation, so quiett as it is, the Lord God be
praised!





     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     All may see how slippery places all courtiers stand in
     Bewailing the vanity and disorders of the age
     Charles Barkeley's greatness is only his being pimp to the King
     Fanatiques do say that the end of the world is at hand
     Goldsmiths in supplying the King with money at dear rates
     He made but a poor sermon, but long
     Joyne the lion's skin to the fox's tail
     Lady Castlemaine's interest at Court increases
     Laughing and jeering at every thing that looks strange
     Lord! to see the absurd nature of Englishmen
     Short of what I expected, as for the most part it do fall out
     Will upon occasion serve for a fine withdrawing room





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Diary of Samuel Pepys,
November/December 1662, by Samuel Pepys

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***

***** This file should be named 4137.txt or 4137.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/4/1/3/4137/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
