The Project Gutenberg EBook of Diary of Samuel Pepys, January/February
1662/63, by Samuel Pepys

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Diary of Samuel Pepys, January/February 1662/63

Author: Samuel Pepys

Release Date: November 30, 2004 [EBook #4139]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***




Produced by David Widger





                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A.  F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS

                            1663 N.S. COMPLETE

                            JANUARY & FEBRUARY
                                1662-1663

January 1st, 1662-63.

Lay with my wife at my Lord's lodgings, where I have been these two
nights, till 10 o'clock with great pleasure talking, then I rose and to
White Hall, where I spent a little time walking among the courtiers, which
I perceive I shall be able to do with great confidence, being now
beginning to be pretty well known among them.  Then to my wife again, and
found Mrs. Sarah with us in the chamber we lay in.  Among other discourse,
Mrs. Sarah tells us how the King sups at least four or [five] times every
week with my Lady Castlemaine; and most often stays till the morning with
her, and goes home through the garden all alone privately, and that so as
the very centrys take notice of it and speak of it.  She tells me, that
about a month ago she [Lady Castlemaine] quickened at my Lord Gerard's at
dinner, and cried out that she was undone; and all the lords and men were
fain to quit the room, and women called to help her. In fine, I find that
there is nothing almost but bawdry at Court from top to bottom, as, if it
were fit, I could instance, but it is not necessary; only they say my Lord
Chesterfield, groom of the stole to the Queen, is either gone or put away
from the Court upon the score of his lady's having smitten the Duke of
York, so as that he is watched by the Duchess of York, and his lady is
retired into the country upon it.  How much of this is true, God knows,
but it is common talk.  After dinner I did reckon with Mrs. Sarah for what
we have eat and drank here, and gave her a crown, and so took coach, and
to the Duke's House, where we saw "The Villaine" again; and the more I see
it, the more I am offended at my first undervaluing the play, it being
very good and pleasant, and yet a true and allowable tragedy.  The house
was full of citizens, and so the less pleasant, but that I was willing to
make an end of my gaddings, and to set to my business for all the year
again tomorrow.  Here we saw the old Roxalana in the chief box, in a
velvet gown, as the fashion is, and very handsome, at which I was glad.
Hence by coach home, where I find all well, only Sir W. Pen they say ill
again.  So to my office to set down these two or three days' journall, and
to close the last year therein, and so that being done, home to supper,
and to bed, with great pleasure talking and discoursing with my wife of
our late observations abroad.

2nd.  Lay long in bed, and so up and to the office, where all the morning
alone doing something or another.  So dined at home with my wife, and in
the afternoon to the Treasury office, where Sir W. Batten was paying off
tickets, but so simply and arbitrarily, upon a dull pretence of doing
right to the King, though to the wrong of poor people (when I know there
is no man that means the King less right than he, or would trouble himself
less about it, but only that he sees me stir, and so he would appear doing
something, though to little purpose), that I was weary of it.  At last we
broke up, and walk home together, and I to see Sir W. Pen, who is fallen
sick again.  I staid a while talking with him, and so to my office,
practising some arithmetique, and so home to supper and bed, having sat up
late talking to my poor wife with great content.

3rd.  Up and to the office all the morning, and dined alone with my wife
at noon, and then to my office all the afternoon till night, putting
business in order with great content in my mind.  Having nothing now in my
mind of trouble in the world, but quite the contrary, much joy, except
only the ending of our difference with my uncle Thomas, and the getting of
the bills well over for my building of my house here, which however are as
small and less than any of the others.  Sir W. Pen it seems is fallen very
ill again.  So to my arithmetique again to-night, and so home to supper
and to bed.

4th (Lord's day).  Up and to church, where a lazy sermon, and so home to
dinner to a good piece of powdered beef, but a little too salt.  At dinner
my wife did propound my having of my sister Pall at my house again to be
her woman, since one we must have, hoping that in that quality possibly
she may prove better than she did before, which I take very well of her,
and will consider of it, it being a very great trouble to me that I should
have a sister of so ill a nature, that I must be forced to spend money
upon a stranger when it might better be upon her, if she were good for
anything.  After dinner I and she walked, though it was dirty, to White
Hall (in the way calling at the Wardrobe to see how Mr. Moore do, who is
pretty well, but not cured yet), being much afeard of being seen by
anybody, and was, I think, of Mr. Coventry, which so troubled me that I
made her go before, and I ever after loitered behind.  She to Mr. Hunt's,
and I to White Hall Chappell, and then up to walk up and down the house,
which now I am well known there, I shall forbear to do, because I would
not be thought a lazy body by Mr. Coventry and others by being seen, as I
have lately been, to walk up and down doing nothing.  So to Mr. Hunt's,
and there was most prettily and kindly entertained by him and her, who are
two as good people as I hardly know any, and so neat and kind one to
another.  Here we staid late, and so to my Lord's to bed.

5th.  Up and to the Duke, who himself told me that Sir J. Lawson was come
home to Portsmouth from the Streights, who is now come with great renown
among all men, and, I perceive, mightily esteemed at Court by all.  The
Duke did not stay long in his chamber; but to the King's chamber, whither
by and by the Russia Embassadors come; who, it seems, have a custom that
they will not come to have any treaty with our or any King's
Commissioners, but they will themselves see at the time the face of the
King himself, be it forty days one after another; and so they did to-day
only go in and see the King; and so out again to the Council-chamber. The
Duke returned to his chamber, and so to his closett, where Sir G.
Carteret, Sir J. Minnes, Sir W. Batten, Mr. Coventry, and myself attended
him about the business of the Navy; and after much discourse and pleasant
talk he went away.  And I took Sir W. Batten and Captain Allen into the
wine cellar to my tenant (as I call him, Serjeant Dalton), and there drank
a great deal of variety of wines, more than I have drunk at one time, or
shall again a great while, when I come to return to my oaths, which I
intend in a day or two.  Thence to my Lord's lodging, where Mr. Hunt and
Mr. Creed dined with us, and were very merry.  And after dinner he and I
to White Hall, where the Duke and the Commissioners for Tangier met, but
did not do much: my Lord Sandwich not being in town, nobody making it
their business.  So up, and Creed and I to my wife again, and after a game
or two at cards, to the Cockpitt, where we saw "Claracilla," a poor play,
done by the King's house (but neither the King nor Queen were there, but
only the Duke and Duchess, who did show some impertinent and, methought,
unnatural dalliances there, before the whole world, such as kissing, and
leaning upon one another); but to my very little content, they not acting
in any degree like the Duke's people.  So home (there being here this
night Mrs. Turner and Mrs. Martha Batten of our office) to my Lord's
lodgings again, and to a game at cards, we three and Sarah, and so to
supper and some apples and ale, and to bed with great pleasure, blessed be
God!

6th (Twelfth Day).  Up and Mr. Creed brought a pot of chocolate ready made
for our morning draft, and then he and I to the Duke's, but I was not very
willing to be seen at this end of the town, and so returned to our
lodgings, and took my wife by coach to my brother's, where I set her down,
and Creed and I to St. Paul's Church-yard, to my bookseller's, and looked
over several books with good discourse, and then into St. Paul's Church,
and there finding Elborough, my old schoolfellow at Paul's, now a parson,
whom I know to be a silly fellow, I took him out and walked with him,
making Creed and myself sport with talking with him, and so sent him away,
and we to my office and house to see all well, and thence to the Exchange,
where we met with Major Thomson, formerly of our office, who do talk very
highly of liberty of conscience, which now he hopes for by the King's
declaration, and that he doubts not that if he will give him, he will find
more and better friends than the Bishopps can be to him, and that if he do
not, there will many thousands in a little time go out of England, where
they may have it.  But he says that they are well contented that if the
King thinks it good, the Papists may have the same liberty with them.  He
tells me, and so do others, that Dr. Calamy is this day sent to Newgate
for preaching, Sunday was se'nnight, without leave, though he did it only
to supply the place; when otherwise the people must have gone away without
ever a sermon, they being disappointed of a minister but the Bishop of
London will not take that as an excuse. Thence into Wood Street, and there
bought a fine table for my dining-room, cost me 50s.; and while we were
buying it, there was a scare-fire

     [Scar-fire or scarefire.  An alarm of fire.  One of the little
     pieces in Herrick's "Hesperides" is entitled "The Scar-fire," but
     the word sometimes was used, as in the text, for the fire itself.
     Fuller, in his "Worthies," speaks of quenching scare-fires.]

in an ally over against us, but they quenched it.  So to my brother's,
where Creed and I and my wife dined with Tom, and after dinner to the
Duke's house, and there saw "Twelfth Night"

     [Pepys saw "Twelfth Night" for the first time on September 11th,
     1661, when he supposed it was a new play, and "took no pleasure at
     all in it."]

acted well, though it be but a silly play, and not related at all to the
name or day.  Thence Mr. Battersby the apothecary, his wife, and I and
mine by coach together, and setting him down at his house, he paying his
share, my wife and I home, and found all well, only myself somewhat vexed
at my wife's neglect in leaving of her scarf, waistcoat, and
night-dressings in the coach today that brought us from Westminster,
though, I confess, she did give them to me to look after, yet it was her
fault not to see that I did take them out of the coach.  I believe it
might be as good as 25s. loss or thereabouts.  So to my office, however,
to set down my last three days' journall, and writing to my Lord Sandwich
to give him an account of Sir J. Lawson's being come home, and to my
father about my sending him some wine and things this week, for his making
an entertainment of some friends in the country, and so home.  This night
making an end wholly of Christmas, with a mind fully satisfied with the
great pleasures we have had by being abroad from home, and I do find my
mind so apt to run to its old want of pleasures, that it is high time to
betake myself to my late vows, which I will to-morrow, God willing,
perfect and bind myself to, that so I may, for a great while, do my duty,
as I have well begun, and increase my good name and esteem in the world,
and get money, which sweetens all things, and whereof I have much need. So
home to supper and to bed, blessing God for his mercy to bring me home,
after much pleasure, to my house and business with health and resolution
to fall hard to work again.

7th.  Up pretty early, that is by seven o'clock, it being not yet light
before or then.  So to my office all the morning, signing the Treasurer's
ledger, part of it where I have not put my hand, and then eat a mouthful
of pye at home to stay my stomach, and so with Mr. Waith by water to
Deptford, and there among other things viewed old pay-books, and found
that the Commanders did never heretofore receive any pay for the rigging
time, but only for seatime, contrary to what Sir J. Minnes and Sir W.
Batten told the Duke the other day.  I also searched all the ships in the
Wett Dock for fire, and found all in good order, it being very dangerous
for the King that so many of his ships lie together there.  I was among
the canvass in stores also, with Mr. Harris, the saylemaker, and learnt
the difference between one sort and another, to my great content, and so
by water home again, where my wife tells me stories how she hears that by
Sarah's going to live at Sir W. Pen's, all our affairs of my family are
made known and discoursed of there and theirs by my people, which do
trouble me much, and I shall take a time to let Sir W. Pen know how he has
dealt in taking her without our full consent.  So to my office, and by and
by home to supper, and so to prayers and bed.

8th.  Up pretty early, and sent my boy to the carrier's with some wine for
my father, for to make his feast among his Brampton friends this
Christmas, and my muff to my mother, sent as from my wife.  But before I
sent my boy out with them, I beat him for a lie he told me, at which his
sister, with whom we have of late been highly displeased, and warned her
to be gone, was angry, which vexed me, to see the girl I loved so well,
and my wife, should at last turn so much a fool and unthankful to us. So
to the office, and there all the morning, and though without and a little
against the advice of the officers did, to gratify him, send Thomas Hater
to-day towards Portsmouth a day or two before the rest of the clerks,
against the Pay next week.  Dined at home; and there being the famous new
play acted the first time to-day, which is called "The Adventures of Five
Hours," at the Duke's house, being, they say, made or translated by
Colonel Tuke, I did long to see it; and so made my wife to get her ready,
though we were forced to send for a smith, to break open her trunk, her
mayde Jane being gone forth with the keys, and so we went; and though
early, were forced to sit almost out of sight, at the end of one of the
lower forms, so full was the house.  And the play, in one word, is the
best, for the variety and the most excellent continuance of the plot to
the very end, that ever I saw, or think ever shall, and all possible, not
only to be done in the time, but in most other respects very admittable,
and without one word of ribaldry; and the house, by its frequent plaudits,
did show their sufficient approbation.  So home; with much ado in an hour
getting a coach home, and, after writing letters at my office, I went home
to supper and to bed, now resolving to set up my rest as to plays till
Easter, if not Whitsuntide next, excepting plays at Court.

9th.  Waking in the morning, my wife I found also awake, and begun to
speak to me with great trouble and tears, and by degrees from one
discourse to another at last it appears that Sarah has told somebody that
has told my wife of my meeting her at my brother's and making her sit down
by me while she told me stories of my wife, about her giving her scallop
to her brother, and other things, which I am much vexed at, for I am sure
I never spoke any thing of it, nor could any body tell her but by Sarah's
own words.  I endeavoured to excuse my silence herein hitherto by not
believing any thing she told me, only that of the scallop which she
herself told me of.  At last we pretty good friends, and my wife begun to
speak again of the necessity of her keeping somebody to bear her company;
for her familiarity with her other servants is it that spoils them all,
and other company she hath none, which is too true, and called for Jane to
reach her out of her trunk, giving her the keys to that purpose, a bundle
of papers, and pulls out a paper, a copy of what, a pretty while since,
she had wrote in a discontent to me, which I would not read, but burnt.
She now read it, and it was so piquant, and wrote in English, and most of
it true, of the retiredness of her life, and how unpleasant it was; that
being wrote in English, and so in danger of being met with and read by
others, I was vexed at it, and desired her and then commanded her to tear
it.  When she desired to be excused it, I forced it from her, and tore it,
and withal took her other bundle of papers from her, and leapt out of the
bed and in my shirt clapped them into the pocket of my breeches, that she
might not get them from me, and having got on my stockings and breeches
and gown, I pulled them out one by one and tore them all before her face,
though it went against my heart to do it, she crying and desiring me not
to do it, but such was my passion and trouble to see the letters of my
love to her, and my Will wherein I had given her all I have in the world,
when I went to sea with my Lord Sandwich, to be joyned with a paper of so
much disgrace to me and dishonour, if it should have been found by any
body.  Having torn them all, saving a bond of my uncle Robert's, which she
hath long had in her hands, and our marriage license, and the first letter
that ever I sent her when I was her servant,

     [The usual word at this time for a lover.  We have continued the
     correlative term "mistress," but rejected that of "servant."]

I took up the pieces and carried them into my chamber, and there, after
many disputes with myself whether I should burn them or no, and having
picked up, the pieces of the paper she read to-day, and of my Will which I
tore, I burnt all the rest, and so went out to my office troubled in mind.
Hither comes Major Tolhurst, one of my old acquaintance in Cromwell's
time, and sometimes of our clubb, to see me, and I could do no less than
carry him to the Mitre, and having sent for Mr. Beane, a merchant, a
neighbour of mine, we sat and talked, Tolhurst telling me the manner of
their collierys in the north.  We broke up, and I home to dinner.  And to
see my folly, as discontented as I am, when my wife came I could not
forbear smiling all dinner till she began to speak bad words again, and
then I began to be angry again, and so to my office.  Mr. Bland came in
the evening to me hither, and sat talking to me about many things of
merchandise, and I should be very happy in his discourse, durst I confess
my ignorance to him, which is not so fit for me to do.  There coming a
letter to me from Mr. Pierce, the surgeon, by my desire appointing his and
Dr. Clerke's coming to dine with me next Monday, I went to my wife and
agreed upon matters, and at last for my honour am forced to make her
presently a new Moyre gown to be seen by Mrs. Clerke, which troubles me to
part with so much money, but, however, it sets my wife and I to friends
again, though I and she never were so heartily angry in our lives as
to-day almost, and I doubt the heartburning will not [be] soon over, and
the truth is I am sorry for the tearing of so many poor loving letters of
mine from sea and elsewhere to her.  So to my office again, and there the
Scrivener brought me the end of the manuscript which I am going to get
together of things of the Navy, which pleases me much.  So home, and
mighty friends with my wife again, and so to bed.

10th.  Up and to the office.  From thence, before we sat, Sir W. Pen sent
for me to his bedside to talk (indeed to reproach me with my not owning to
Sir J. Minnes that he had my advice in the blocking up of the garden door
the other day, which is now by him out of fear to Sir J. Minnes opened
again), to which I answered him so indifferently that I think he and I
shall be at a distance, at least to one another, better than ever we did
and love one another less, which for my part I think I need not care for.
So to the office, and sat till noon, then rose and to dinner, and then to
the office again, where Mr. Creed sat with me till late talking very good
discourse, as he is full of it, though a cunning knave in his heart, at
least not to be too much trusted, till Sir J. Minnes came in, which at
last he did, and so beyond my expectation he was willing to sign his
accounts, notwithstanding all his objections, which really were very
material, and yet how like a doting coxcomb he signs the accounts without
the least satisfaction, for which we both sufficiently laughed at him and
Sir W. Batten after they had signed them and were gone, and so sat talking
together till 11 o'clock at night, and so home and to bed.

11th (Lord's day).  Lay long talking pleasant with my wife, then up and to
church, the pew being quite full with strangers come along with Sir W.
Batten and Sir J. Minnes, so after a pitifull sermon of the young Scott,
home to dinner.  After dinner comes a footman of my Lord Sandwich's (my
Lord being come to town last night) with a letter from my father, in which
he presses me to carry on the business for Tom with his late mistress,
which I am sorry to see my father do, it being so much out of our power or
for his advantage, as it is clear to me it is, which I shall think of and
answer in my next.  So to my office all the afternoon writing orders
myself to have ready against to-morrow, that I might not appear negligent
to Mr. Coventry.  In the evening to Sir W. Pen's, where Sir J. Minnes and
Sir W. Batten, and afterwards came Sir G. Carteret. There talked about
business, and afterwards to Sir W. Batten's, where we staid talking and
drinking Syder, and so I went away to my office a little, and so home and
to bed.

12th.  Up, and to Sir W. Batten's to bid him and Sir J. Minnes adieu, they
going this day towards Portsmouth, and then to Sir W. Pen's to see Sir J.
Lawson, who I heard was there, where I found him the same plain man that
he was, after all his success in the Straights, with which he is come
loaded home.  Thence to Sir G. Carteret, and with him in his coach to
White Hall, and first I to see my Lord Sandwich (being come now from
Hinchingbrooke), and after talking a little with him, he and I to the
Duke's chamber, where Mr. Coventry and he and I into the Duke's closett
and Sir J. Lawson discoursing upon business of the Navy, and particularly
got his consent to the ending some difficulties in Mr. Creed's accounts.
Thence to my Lord's lodgings, and with Mr. Creed to the King's Head
ordinary, but people being set down, we went to two or three places; at
last found some meat at a Welch cook's at Charing Cross, and here dined
and our boys.  After dinner to the 'Change to buy some linen for my wife,
and going back met our two boys.  Mine had struck down Creed's boy in the
dirt, with his new suit on, and the boy taken by a gentlewoman into a
house to make clean, but the poor boy was in a pitifull taking and pickle;
but I basted my rogue soundly.  Thence to my Lord's lodging, and Creed to
his, for his papers against the Committee.  I found my Lord within, and he
and I went out through the garden towards the Duke's chamber, to sit upon
the Tangier matters; but a lady called to my Lord out of my Lady
Castlemaine's lodging, telling him that the King was there and would speak
with him.  My Lord could not tell what to bid me say at the Committee to
excuse his absence, but that he was with the King; nor would suffer me to
go into the Privy Garden (which is now a through-passage, and common), but
bid me to go through some other way, which I did; so that I see he is a
servant of the King's pleasures too, as well as business.  So I went to
the Committee, where we spent all this night attending to Sir J. Lawson's
description of Tangier and the place for the Mole,

     [The construction of this Mole or breakwater turned out a very
     costly undertaking.  In April, 1663, it was found that the charge
     for one year's work was L13,000.  In March, 1665, L36,000 had been
     spent upon it.  The wind and sea exerted a very destructive
     influence over this structure, although it was very strongly built,
     and Colonel Norwood reported in 1668 that a breach had been made in
     the Mole, which cost a considerable sum to repair.]

of which he brought a very pretty draught.  Concerning the making of the
Mole, Mr. Cholmely did also discourse very well, having had some
experience in it.  Being broke up, I home by coach to Mr. Bland's, and
there discoursed about sending away of the merchant ship which hangs so
long on hand for Tangier.  So to my Lady Batten's, and sat with her
awhile, Sir W. Batten being gone out of town; but I did it out of design
to get some oranges for my feast to-morrow of her, which I did.  So home,
and found my wife's new gown come home, and she mightily pleased with it.
But I appeared very angry that there were no more things got ready against
to-morrow's feast, and in that passion sat up long, and went discontented
to bed.

13th.  So my poor wife rose by five o'clock in the morning, before day,
and went to market and bought fowls and many other things for dinner, with
which I was highly pleased, and the chine of beef was down also before six
o'clock, and my own jack, of which I was doubtfull, do carry it very well.
Things being put in order, and the cook come, I went to the office, where
we sat till noon and then broke up, and I home, whither by and by comes
Dr. Clerke and his lady, his sister, and a she-cozen, and Mr. Pierce and
his wife, which was all my guests.  I had for them, after oysters, at
first course, a hash of rabbits, a lamb, and a rare chine of beef.  Next a
great dish of roasted fowl, cost me about 30s., and a tart, and then fruit
and cheese.  My dinner was noble and enough.  I had my house mighty clean
and neat; my room below with a good fire in it; my dining-room above, and
my chamber being made a withdrawing-chamber; and my wife's a good fire
also.  I find my new table very proper, and will hold nine or ten people
well, but eight with great room.  After dinner the women to cards in my
wife's chamber, and the Dr. and Mr. Pierce in mine, because the
dining-room smokes unless I keep a good charcoal fire, which I was not
then provided with.  At night to supper, had a good sack posset and cold
meat, and sent my guests away about ten o'clock at night, both them and
myself highly pleased with our management of this day; and indeed their
company was very fine, and Mrs. Clerke a very witty, fine lady, though a
little conceited and proud.  So weary, so to bed.  I believe this day's
feast will cost me near L5.

14th.  Lay very long in bed, till with shame forced to rise, being called
up by Mr. Bland about business.  He being gone I went and staid upon
business at the office and then home to dinner, and after dinner staid a
little talking pleasant with my wife, who tells me of another woman
offered by her brother that is pretty and can sing, to which I do listen
but will not appear over forward, but I see I must keep somebody for
company sake to my wife, for I am ashamed she should live as she do. So to
the office till 10 at night upon business, and numbering and examining
part of my sea-manuscript with great pleasure, my wife sitting working by
me.  So home to supper and to bed.

15th.  Up and to my office preparing things, by and by we met and sat Mr.
Coventry and I till noon, and then I took him to dine with me, I having a
wild goose roasted, and a cold chine of beef and a barrel of oysters.  We
dined alone in my chamber, and then he and I to fit ourselves for
horseback, he having brought me a horse; and so to Deptford, the ways
being very dirty.  There we walked up and down the Yard and Wett Dock, and
did our main business, which was to examine the proof of our new way of
the call-books, which we think will be of great use.  And so to horse
again, and I home with his horse, leaving him to go over the fields to
Lambeth, his boy at my house taking home his horse. I vexed, having left
my keys in my other pocket in my chamber, and my door is shut, so that I
was forced to set my boy in at the window, which done I shifted myself,
and so to my office till late, and then home to supper, my mind being
troubled about Field's business and my uncle's, which the term coming on I
must think to follow again.  So to prayers and to bed, and much troubled
in mind this night in my dreams about my uncle Thomas and his son going to
law with us.

16th.  Lay long talking in bed with my wife.  Up, and Mr. Battersby, the
apothecary, coming to see me, I called for the cold chine of beef and made
him eat, and drink wine, and talked, there being with us Captain Brewer,
the paynter, who tells me how highly the Presbyters do talk in the
coffeehouses still, which I wonder at.  They being gone I walked two or
three hours with my brother Tom, telling him my mind how it is troubled
about my father's concernments, and how things would be with them all if
it should please God that I should die, and therefore desire him to be a
good husband and follow his business, which I hope he do. At noon to
dinner, and after dinner my wife began to talk of a woman again, which I
have a mind to have, and would be glad Pall might please us, but she is
quite against having her, nor have I any great mind to it, but only for
her good and to save money flung away upon a stranger. So to my office
till 9 o'clock about my navy manuscripts, and there troubled in my mind
more and more about my uncle's business from a letter come this day from
my father that tells me that all his tenants are sued by my uncle, which
will cost me some new trouble, I went home to supper and so to bed.

17th.  Waked early with my mind troubled about our law matters, but it
came into my mind that [sayings] of Epictetus, which did put me to a great
deal of ease, it being a saying of great reason.  Up to the office, and
there sat Mr. Coventry, Mr. Pett, new come to town, and I.  I was sorry
for signing a bill and guiding Mr. Coventry to sign a bill to Mr. Creed
for his pay as Deputy Treasurer to this day, though the service ended 5 or
6 months ago, which he perceiving did blot out his name afterwards, but I
will clear myself to him from design in it.  Sat till two o'clock and then
home to dinner, and Creed with me, and after dinner, to put off my mind's
trouble, I took Creed by coach and to the Duke's playhouse, where we did
see "The Five Hours" entertainment again, which indeed is a very fine
play, though, through my being out of order, it did not seem so good as at
first; but I could discern it was not any fault in the play.  Thence with
him to the China alehouse, and there drank a bottle or two, and so home,
where I found my wife and her brother discoursing about Mr. Ashwell's
daughter, whom we are like to have for my wife's woman, and I hope it may
do very well, seeing there is a necessity of having one.  So to the office
to write letters, and then home to supper and to bed.

18th (Lord's day).  Up, and after the barber had done, and I had spoke
with Mr. Smith (whom I sent for on purpose to speak of Field's business,
who stands upon L250 before he will release us, which do trouble me
highly), and also Major Allen of the Victualling Office about his ship to
be hired for Tangier, I went to church, and thence home to dinner alone
with my wife, very pleasant, and after dinner to church again, and heard a
dull, drowsy sermon, and so home and to my office, perfecting my vows
again for the next year, which I have now done, and sworn to in the
presence of Almighty God to observe upon the respective penalties thereto
annexed, and then to Sir W. Pen's (though much against my will, for I
cannot bear him, but only to keep him from complaint to others that I do
not see him) to see how he do, and find him pretty well, and ready to go
abroad again.

19th.  Up and to White Hall, and while the Duke is dressing himself I went
to wait on my Lord Sandwich, whom I found not very well, and Dr. Clerke
with him.  He is feverish, and hath sent for Mr. Pierce to let him blood,
but not being in the way he puts it off till night, but he stirs not
abroad to-day.  Then to the Duke, and in his closett discoursed as we use
to do, and then broke up.  That done, I singled out Mr. Coventry into the
Matted Gallery, and there I told him the complaints I meet every day about
our Treasurer's or his people's paying no money, but at the goldsmith's
shops, where they are forced to pay fifteen or twenty sometimes per cent.
for their money, which is a most horrid shame, and that which must not be
suffered.  Nor is it likely that the Treasurer (at least his people) will
suffer Maynell the Goldsmith to go away with L10,000 per annum, as he do
now get, by making people pay after this manner for their money.  We were
interrupted by the Duke, who called Mr. Coventry aside for half an hour,
walking with him in the gallery, and then in the garden, and then going
away I ended my discourse with Mr. Coventry.  But by the way Mr. Coventry
was saying that there remained nothing now in our office to be amended but
what would do of itself every day better and better, for as much as he
that was slowest, Sir W. Batten, do now begin to look about him and to
mind business.  At which, God forgive me! I was a little moved with envy,
but yet I am glad, and ought to be, though it do lessen a little my care
to see that the King's service is like to be better attended than it was
heretofore.  Thence by coach to Mr. Povy's, being invited thither by [him]
came a messenger this morning from him, where really he made a most
excellent and large dinner, of their variety, even to admiration, he
bidding us, in a frolique, to call for what we had a mind, and he would
undertake to give it us: and we did for prawns, swan, venison, after I had
thought the dinner was quite done, and he did immediately produce it,
which I thought great plenty, and he seems to set off his rest in this
plenty and the neatness of his house, which he after dinner showed me,
from room to room, so beset with delicate pictures, and above all, a piece
of perspective in his closett in the low parler; his stable, where was
some most delicate horses, and the very-racks painted, and mangers, with a
neat leaden painted cistern, and the walls done with Dutch tiles, like my
chimnies.  But still, above all things, he bid me go down into his
wine-cellar, where upon several shelves there stood bottles of all sorts
of wine, new and old, with labells pasted upon each bottle, and in the
order and plenty as I never saw books in a bookseller's shop; and herein,
I observe, he puts his highest content, and will accordingly commend all
that he hath, but still they deserve to be so.  Here dined with me Dr.
Whore and Mr. Scawen. Therewith him and Mr. Bland, whom we met by the way,
to my Lord Chancellor's, where the King was to meet my Lord Treasurer,
&c., many great men, to settle the revenue of Tangier.  I staid talking
awhile there, but the King not coming I walked to my brother's, where I
met my cozen Scotts (Tom not being at home) and sent for a glass of wine
for them, and having drunk we parted, and I to the Wardrobe talking with
Mr. Moore about my law businesses, which I doubt will go ill for want of
time for me to attend them.  So home, where I found Mrs. Lodum speaking
with my wife about her kinswoman which is offered my wife to come as a
woman to her.  So to the office and put things in order, and then home and
to bed, it being my great comfort that every day I understand more and
more the pleasure of following of business and the credit that a man gets
by it, which I hope at last too will end in profit.  This day, by Dr.
Clerke, I was told the occasion of my Lord Chesterfield's going and taking
his lady (my Lord Ormond's daughter) from Court.  It seems he not only
hath been long jealous of the Duke of York, but did find them two talking
together, though there were others in the room, and the lady by all
opinions a most good, virtuous woman.  He, the next day (of which the Duke
was warned by somebody that saw the passion my Lord Chesterfield was in
the night before), went and told the Duke how much he did apprehend
himself wronged, in his picking out his lady of the whole Court to be the
subject of his dishonour; which the Duke did answer with great calmness,
not seeming to understand the reason of complaint, and that was all that
passed but my Lord did presently pack his lady into the country in
Derbyshire, near the Peake; which is become a proverb at Court, to send a
man's wife to the Devil's arse a' Peake, when she vexes him.  This noon I
did find out Mr. Dixon at Whitehall, and discoursed with him about Mrs.
Wheatly's daughter for a wife for my brother Tom, and have committed it to
him to enquire the pleasure of her father and mother concerning it.  I
demanded L300.

20th.  Up betimes and to the office, where all the morning.  Dined at
home, and Mr. Deane of Woolwich with me, talking about the abuses of the
yard.  Then to the office about business all the afternoon with great
pleasure, seeing myself observed by every body to be the only man of
business of us all, but Mr. Coventry.  So till late at night, and then
home to supper and bed.

21st.  Up early leaving my wife very ill in bed .  .  .  and to my office
till eight o'clock, there coming Ch. Pepys

     [Charles Pepys was second son of Thomas Pepys, elder brother of
     Samuel's father.  Samuel paid part of the legacy to Charles and his
     elder brother Thomas on May 25th, 1664.]

to demand his legacy of me, which I denied him upon good reason of his
father and brother's suing us, and so he went away.  Then came
Commissioner Pett, and he and I by agreement went to Deptford, and after a
turn or two in the yard, to Greenwich, and thence walked to Woolwich. Here
we did business, and I on board the Tangier-merchant, a ship freighted by
us, that has long lain on hand in her despatch to Tangier, but is now
ready for sailing.  Back, and dined at Mr. Ackworth's, where a pretty
dinner, and she a pretty, modest woman; but above all things we saw her
Rocke, which is one of the finest things done by a woman that ever I saw.
I must have my wife to see it.  After dinner on board the Elias, and found
the timber brought by her from the forest of Deane to be exceeding good.
The Captain gave each of us two barrels of pickled oysters put up for the
Queen mother.  So to the Dock again, and took in Mrs. Ackworth and another
gentlewoman, and carried them to London, and at the Globe tavern, in
Eastcheap, did give them a glass of wine, and so parted.  I home, where I
found my wife ill in bed all day, and her face swelled with pain.  My Will
has received my last two quarters salary, of which I am glad.  So to my
office till late and then home, and after the barber had done, to bed.

22nd.  To the office, where Sir W. Batten and Sir J. Minnes are come from
Portsmouth.  We sat till dinner time.  Then home, and Mr. Dixon by
agreement came to dine, to give me an account of his success with Mr.
Wheatly for his daughter for my brother; and in short it is, that his
daughter cannot fancy my brother because of his imperfection in his
speech, which I am sorry for, but there the business must die, and we must
look out for another.  There came in also Mrs. Lodum, with an answer from
her brother Ashwell's daughter, who is likely to come to me, and with her
my wife's brother, and I carried Commissioner Pett in with me, so I feared
want of victuals, but I had a good dinner, and mirth, and so rose and
broke up, and with the rest of the officers to Mr. Russell's buriall,
where we had wine and rings, and a great and good company of aldermen and
the livery of the Skinners' Company.  We went to St. Dunstan's in the East
church, where a sermon, but I staid not, but went home, and, after writing
letters, I took coach to Mr. Povy's, but he not within I left a letter
there of Tangier business, and so to my Lord's, and there find him not
sick, but expecting his fit to-night of an ague. Here was Sir W. Compton,
Mr. Povy, Mr. Bland, Mr. Gawden and myself; we were very busy about
getting provisions sent forthwith to Tangier, fearing that by Mr. Gawden's
neglect they might want bread.  So among other ways thought of to supply
them I was empowered by the Commissioners of Tangier that were present to
write to Plymouth and direct Mr. Lanyon to take up vessels great or small
to the quantity of 150 tons, and fill them with bread of Mr. Gawden's
lying ready there for Tangier, which they undertake to bear me out in, and
to see the freight paid.  This I did. About 10 o'clock we broke up, and my
Lord's fit was coming upon him, and so we parted, and I with Mr. Creed,
Mr. Pierce, Win. Howe and Captn. Ferrers, who was got almost drunk this
afternoon, and was mighty capricious and ready to fall out with any body,
supped together in the little chamber that was mine heretofore upon some
fowls sent by Mr. Shepley, so we were very merry till 12 at night, and so
away, and I lay with Mr. Creed at his lodgings, and slept well.

23rd.  Up and hastened him in despatching some business relating to
Tangier, and I away homewards, hearing that my Lord had a bad fit
to-night, called at my brother's, and found him sick in bed, of a pain in
the sole of one of his feet, without swelling, knowing not how it came,
but it will not suffer him to stand these two days.  So to Mr. Moore, and
Mr. Lovell, our proctor, being there, discoursed of my law business.
Thence to Mr. Grant, to bid him come for money for Mr. Barlow, and he and
I to a coffee-house, where Sir J. Cutler was;

     [Citizen and grocer of London; most severely handled by Pope.  Two
     statues were erected to his memory--one in the College of
     Physicians, and the other in the Grocers' Hall.  They were erected
     and one removed (that in the College of Physicians) before Pope
     stigmatized "sage Cutler."  Pope says that Sir John Cutler had an
     only daughter; in fact, he had two: one married to Lord Radnor; the
     other, mentioned afterwards by Pepys, the wife of Sir William
     Portman.--B.]

and in discourse, among other things, he did fully make it out that the
trade of England is as great as ever it was, only in more hands; and that
of all trades there is a greater number than ever there was, by reason of
men taking more 'prentices, because of their having more money than
heretofore.  His discourse was well worth hearing.  Coming by Temple Bar I
bought "Audley's Way to be Rich," a serious pamphlett and some good things
worth my minding. Thence homewards, and meeting Sir W. Batten, turned back
again to a coffee-house, and there drunk more till I was almost sick, and
here much discourse, but little to be learned, but of a design in the
north of a rising, which is discovered, among some men of condition, and
they sent for up.  Thence to the 'Change, and so home with him by coach,
and I to see how my wife do, who is pretty well again, and so to dinner to
Sir W. Batten's to a cod's head, and so to my office, and after stopping
to see Sir W. Pen, where was Sir J. Lawson and his lady and daughter,
which is pretty enough, I came back to my office, and there set to
business pretty late, finishing the margenting my Navy-Manuscript.  So
home and to bed.

24th.  Lay pretty long, and by lying with my sheet upon my lip, as I have
of old observed it, my upper lip was blistered in the morning.  To the
office all the morning, sat till noon, then to the Exchange to look out
for a ship for Tangier, and delivered my manuscript to be bound at the
stationer's.  So to dinner at home, and then down to Redriffe, to see a
ship hired for Tangier, what readiness she was in, and found her ready to
sail.  Then home, and so by coach to Mr. Povy's, where Sir W. Compton, Mr.
Bland, Gawden, Sir J. Lawson and myself met to settle the victualling of
Tangier for the time past, which with much ado we did, and for a six
months' supply more.  So home in Mr. Gawden's coach, and to my office till
late about business, and find that it is business that must and do every
day bring me to something.--[In earlier days Pepys noted for us each few
pounds or shillings of graft which he annexed at each transaction in his
office.]--So home to supper and to bed.

25th (Lord's day).  Lay till 9 a-bed, then up, and being trimmed by the
barber, I walked towards White Hall, calling upon Mr. Moore, whom I found
still very ill of his ague.  I discoursed with him about my Lord's estate
against I speak with my Lord this day.  Thence to the King's Head ordinary
at Charing Cross, and sent for Mr. Creed, where we dined very finely and
good company, good discourse.  I understand the King of France is upon
consulting his divines upon the old question, what the power of the Pope
is? and do intend to make war against him, unless he do right him for the
wrong his Embassador received;

     [On the 20th of August, the Duc de Crequi, then French ambassador at
     Rome, was insulted by the Corsican armed police, a force whose
     ignoble duty it was to assist the Sbirri; and the pope, Alexander
     VII., at first refused reparation for the affront offered to the
     French.  Louis, as in the case of D'Estrades, took prompt measures.
     He ordered the papal nuncio forthwith to quit France; he seized upon
     Avignon, and his army prepared to enter Italy.  Alexander found it
     necessary to submit.  In fulfilment of a treaty signed at Pisa in
     1664, Cardinal Chigi, the pope's nephew, came to Paris, to tender
     the pope's apology to Louis.  The guilty individuals were punished;
     the Corsicans banished for ever from the Roman States; and in front
     of the guard-house which they had occupied a pyramid was erected,
     bearing an inscription which embodied the pope's apology.  This
     pyramid Louis permitted Clement IX. to destroy on his accession.-B.]

and banish the Cardinall Imperiall,

     [Lorenzo Imperiali, of Genoa.  He had been appointed Governor of
     Rome by Innocent X., and he had acted in that capacity at
     the time of the tumult.--B.]

which I understand this day is not meant the Cardinall belonging or chosen
by the Emperor, but the name of his family is Imperiali.  Thence to walk
in the Park, which we did two hours, it being a pleasant sunshine day
though cold.  Our discourse upon the rise of most men that we know, and
observing them to be the results of chance, not policy, in any of them,
particularly Sir J. Lawson's, from his declaring against Charles Stuart in
the river of Thames, and for the Rump.  Thence to my Lord, who had his
ague fit last night, but is now pretty well, and I staid talking with him
an hour alone in his chamber, about sundry publique and private matters.
Among others, he wonders what the project should be of the Duke's going
down to Portsmouth just now with his Lady, at this time of the year: it
being no way, we think, to increase his popularity, which is not great;
nor yet safe to do it, for that reason, if it would have any such effect.
By and by comes in my Lady Wright, and so I went away, end after talking
with Captn. Ferrers, who tells me of my Lady Castlemaine's and Sir Charles
Barkeley being the great favourites at Court, and growing every day more
and more; and that upon a late dispute between my Lord Chesterfield, that
is the Queen's Lord Chamberlain, and Mr. Edward Montagu, her Master of the
Horse, who should have the precedence in taking the Queen's upperhand
abroad out of the house, which Mr. Montagu challenges, it was given to my
Lord Chesterfield.  So that I perceive he goes down the wind in honour as
well as every thing else, every day.  So walk to my brother's and talked
with him, who tells me that this day a messenger is come, that tells us
how Collonel Honiwood, who was well yesterday at Canterbury, was flung by
his horse in getting up, and broke his scull, and so is dead.  So home and
to the office, despatching some business, and so home to supper, and then
to prayers and to bed.

26th.  Up and by water with Sir W. Batten to White Hall, drinking a glass
of wormewood wine at the Stillyard, and so up to the Duke, and with the
rest of the officers did our common service; thence to my Lord Sandwich's,
but he was in bed, and had a bad fit last night, and so I went to,
Westminster Hall, it being Term time, it troubling me to think that I
should have any business there to trouble myself and thoughts with.  Here
I met with Monsieur Raby, who is lately come from France. [He] tells me
that my Lord Hinchingbroke and his brother do little improve there, and
are much neglected in their habits and other things; but I do believe he
hath a mind to go over as their tutour, and so I am not apt to believe
what he says therein.  But I had a great deal of very good discourse with
him, concerning the difference between the French and the Pope, and the
occasion, which he told me very particularly, and to my great content; and
of most of the chief affairs of France, which I did enquire: and that the
King is a most excellent Prince, doing all business himself; and that it
is true he hath a mistress, Mademoiselle La Valiere, one of the Princess
Henriette's women, that he courts for his pleasure every other day, but
not so as to make him neglect his publique affairs. He tells me how the
King do carry himself nobly to the relations of the dead
Cardinall,--[Cardinal Mazarin died March 9th, 1661.]--and will not suffer
one pasquill to come forth against him; and that he acts by what
directions he received from him before his death.  Having discoursed long
with him, I took him by coach and set him down at my Lord Crew's, and
myself went and dined at Mr. Povy's, where Orlando Massam, Mr. Wilks, a
Wardrobe man, myself and Mr. Gawden, and had just such another dinner as I
had the other day there.  But above all things I do the most admire his
piece of perspective especially, he opening me the closett door, and there
I saw that there is nothing but only a plain picture hung upon the wall.
After dinner Mr. Gauden and I to settle the business of the Tangier
victualling, which I perceive none of them yet have hitherto understood
but myself.  Thence by coach to White Hall, and met upon the Tangier
Commission, our greatest business the discoursing of getting things ready
for my Lord Rutherford to go about the middle of March next, and a
proposal of Sir J. Lawson's and Mr. Cholmely's concerning undertaking the
Mole, which is referred to another time.  So by coach home, being
melancholy, overcharged with business, and methinks I fear that I have
some ill offices done to Mr. Coventry, or else he observes that of late I
have not despatched business so as I did use to do, which I confess I do
acknowledge.  But it may be it is but my fear only, he is not so fond as
he used to be of me.  But I do believe that Sir W. Batten has made him
believe that I do too much crow upon having his kindness, and so he may on
purpose to countenance him seem a little more strange to me, but I will
study hard to bring him back again to the same degree of kindness.  So
home, and after a little talk with my wife, to the office, and did a great
deal of business there till very late, and then home to supper and to bed.

27th.  Up and to the office, where sat till two o'clock, and then home to
dinner, whither by and by comes Mr. Creed, and he and I talked of our
Tangier business, and do find that there is nothing in the world done with
true integrity, but there is design along with it, as in my Lord
Rutherford, who designs to have the profit of victualling of the garrison
himself, and others to have the benefit of making the Mole, so that I am
almost discouraged from coming any more to the Committee, were it not that
it will possibly hereafter bring me to some acquaintance of great men.
Then to the office again, where very busy till past ten at night, and so
home to supper and to bed.  I have news this day from Cambridge that my
brother hath had his bachelor's cap put on; but that which troubles me is,
that he hath the pain of the stone, and makes bloody water with great
pain, it beginning just as mine did.  I pray God help him.

28th.  Up and all the morning at my office doing business, and at home
seeing my painters' work measured.  So to dinner and abroad with my wife,
carrying her to Unthank's, where she alights, and I to my Lord Sandwich's,
whom I find missing his ague fit to-day, and is pretty well, playing at
dice (and by this I see how time and example may alter a man; he being now
acquainted with all sorts of pleasures and vanities, which heretofore he
never thought of nor loved, nor, it may be, hath allowed) with Ned
Pickering and his page Laud.  Thence to the Temple to my cozen Roger
Pepys, and thence to Serjt. Bernard to advise with him and retain him
against my uncle, my heart and head being very heavy with the business.
Thence to Wotton's, the shoemaker, and there bought another pair of new
boots, for the other I bought my last would not fit me, and here I drank
with him and his wife, a pretty woman, they broaching a vessel of syder
a-purpose for me.  So home, and there found my wife come home, and seeming
to cry; for bringing home in a coach her new ferrandin

     [Ferrandin, which was sometimes spelt farendon, was a stuff made of
     silk mixed with some other material, like what is now called poplin.
     Both mohair and farendon are generally cheap materials; for in the
     case of Manby v. Scott, decided in the Exchequer Chamber in 1663,
     and reported in the first volume of "Modern Reports," the question
     being as to the liability of a husband to pay for goods supplied
     against his consent to his wife, who had separated from him, Mr.
     Justice Hyde (whose judgment is most amusing) observes, in putting
     various supposed cases, that "The wife will have a velvet gown and a
     satin petticoat, and the husband thinks a mohair or farendon for a
     gown, and watered tabby for a petticoat, is as fashionable, and
     fitter for her quality."--B.]

waistecoate, in Cheapside, a man asked her whether that was the way to the
Tower; and while she was answering him, another, on the other side,
snatched away her bundle out of her lap, and could not be recovered, but
ran away with it, which vexes me cruelly, but it cannot be helped.  So to
my office, and there till almost 12 at night with Mr. Lewes, learning to
understand the manner of a purser's account, which is very hard and little
understood by my fellow officers, and yet mighty necessary.  So at last
with great content broke up and home to supper and bed.

29th.  Lay chiding, and then pleased with my wife in bed, and did consent
to her having a new waistcoate made her for that which she lost yesterday.
So to the office, and sat all the morning.  At noon dined with Mr.
Coventry at Sir J. Minnes his lodgings, the first time that ever I did
yet, and am sorry for doing it now, because of obliging me to do the like
to him again.  Here dined old Captn. Marsh of the Tower with us. So to
visit Sir W. Pen, and then to the office, and there late upon business by
myself, my wife being sick to-day.  So home and to supper and to bed.

30th.  A solemn fast for the King's murther, and we were forced to keep it
more than we would have done, having forgot to take any victuals into the
house.  I to church in the forenoon, and Mr. Mills made a good sermon upon
David's heart smiting him for cutting off the garment of Saul.

     [Samuel, chap.  xxiv.  v. 5, "And it came to pass afterward, that
     David's heart smote him, because he bad cut off Saul's skirt."]

Home, and whiled away some of the afternoon at home talking with my wife.
So to my office, and all alone making up my month's accounts, which to my
great trouble I find that I am got no further than L640.  But I have had
great expenses this month.  I pray God the next may be a little better, as
I hope it will.  In the evening my manuscript is brought home handsomely
bound, to my full content; and now I think I have a better collection in
reference to the Navy, and shall have by the time I have filled it, than
any of my predecessors.  So home and eat something such as we have, bread
and butter and milk, and so to bed.

31st.  Up and to my office, and there we sat till noon.  I home to dinner,
and there found my plate of the Soverayne with the table to it come from
Mr. Christopher Pett, of which I am very glad.  So to dinner late, and not
very good, only a rabbit not half roasted, which made me angry with my
wife.  So to the office, and there till late, busy all the while.  In the
evening examining my wife's letter intended to my Lady, and another to
Mademoiselle; they were so false spelt that I was ashamed of them, and
took occasion to fall out about them with my wife, and so she wrote none,
at which, however, I was, sorry, because it was in answer to a letter of
Madam about business.  Late home to supper and to bed.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                FEBRUARY
                                1662-1663

February 1st (Lord's day).  Up and to church, where Mr. Mills, a good
sermon, and so home and had a good dinner with my wife, with which I was
pleased to see it neatly done, and this troubled me to think of parting
with Jane, that is come to be a very good cook.  After dinner walked to my
Lord Sandwich, and staid with him in the chamber talking almost all the
afternoon, he being not yet got abroad since his sickness.  Many
discourses we had; but, among others, how Sir R. Bernard is turned out of
his Recordership of Huntingdon by the Commissioners for Regulation, &c.,
at which I am troubled, because he, thinking it is done by my Lord
Sandwich, will act some of his revenge, it is likely, upon me in my
business, so that I must cast about me to get some other counsel to rely
upon.  In the evening came Mr. Povey and others to see my Lord, and they
gone, my Lord and I and Povey fell to the business of Tangier, as to the
victualling, and so broke up, and I, it being a fine frost, my boy
lighting me I walked home, and after supper up to prayers, and then alone
with my wife and Jane did fall to tell her what I did expect would become
of her since, after so long being my servant, she had carried herself so
as to make us be willing to put her away, and desired God to bless [her],
but bid her never to let me hear what became of her, for that I could
never pardon ingratitude.  So I to bed, my mind much troubled for the poor
girl that she leaves us, and yet she not submitting herself, for some
words she spoke boldly and yet I believe innocently and out of familiarity
to her mistress about us weeks ago, I could not recall my words that she
should stay with me.  This day Creed and I walking in White Hall garden
did see the King coming privately from my Lady Castlemaine's; which is a
poor thing for a Prince to do; and I expressed my sense of it to Creed in
terms which I should not have done, but that I believe he is trusty in
that point.

2nd.  Up, and after paying Jane her wages, I went away, because I could
hardly forbear weeping, and she cried, saying it was not her fault that
she went away, and indeed it is hard to say what it is, but only her not
desiring to stay that she do now go.  By coach with Sir J. Minnes and Sir
W. Batten to the Duke; and after discourse as usual with him in his
closett, I went to my Lord's: the King and Duke being gone to chappell, it
being collar-day, it being Candlemas-day; where I staid with him a while
until towards noon, there being Jonas Moore talking about some
mathematical businesses, and thence I walked at noon to Mr. Povey's, where
Mr. Gawden met me, and after a neat and plenteous dinner as is usual, we
fell to our victualling business, till Mr. Gawden and I did almost fall
out, he defending himself in the readiness of his provision, when I know
that the ships everywhere stay for them.  Thence Mr. Povey and I walked to
White Hall, it being a great frost still, and after a turn in the Park
seeing them slide, we met at the Committee for Tangier, a good full
Committee, and agreed how to proceed in the dispatching of my Lord
Rutherford, and treating about this business of Mr. Cholmely and Sir J.
Lawson's proposal for the Mole.  Thence with Mr. Coventry down to his
chamber, where among other discourse he did tell me how he did make it not
only his desire, but as his greatest pleasure, to make himself an interest
by doing business truly and justly, though he thwarts others greater than
himself, not striving to make himself friends by addresses; and by this he
thinks and observes he do live as contentedly (now he finds himself
secured from fear of want), and, take one time with another, as void of
fear or cares, or more, than they that (as his own termes were) have
quicker pleasures and sharper agonies than he.  Thence walking with Mr.
Creed homewards we turned into a house and drank a cup of Cock ale and so
parted, and I to the Temple, where at my cozen Roger's chamber I met Madam
Turner, and after a little stay led her home and there left her, she and
her daughter having been at the play to-day at the Temple, it being a
revelling time with them.

     [The revels were held in the Inner Temple Hall.  The last revel in
     any of the Inns of Court was held in the Inner Temple in 1733.]

Thence called at my brother's, who is at church, at the buriall of young
Cumberland, a lusty young man.  So home and there found Jane gone, for
which my wife and I are very much troubled, and myself could hardly
forbear shedding tears for fear the poor wench should come to any ill
condition after her being so long with me.  So to my office and setting
papers to rights, and then home to supper and to bed.  This day at my
Lord's I sent for Mr. Ashwell, and his wife came to me, and by discourse I
perceive their daughter is very fit for my turn if my family may be as
much for hers, but I doubt it will be to her loss to come to me for so
small wages, but that will be considered of.

3rd.  To the office all the morning, at noon to dinner, where Mr. Creed
dined with me, and Mr. Ashwell, with whom after dinner I discoursed
concerning his daughter coming to live with us.  I find that his daughter
will be very fit, I think, as any for our turn, but the conditions I know
not what they will be, he leaving it wholly to her, which will be agreed
on a while hence when my wife sees her.  After an hour's discourse after
dinner with them, I to my office again, and there about business of the
office till late, and then home to supper and to bed.




4th.  Up early and to Mr. Moore, and thence to Mr. Lovell about my law

business, and from him to Paul's School, it being Apposition-day there. I
heard some of their speeches, and they were just as schoolboys' used to
be, of the seven liberal sciences; but I think not so good as ours were in
our time.  Away thence and to Bow Church, to the Court of Arches, where a
judge sits, and his proctors about him in their habits, and their
pleadings all in Latin.  Here I was sworn to give a true answer to my
uncle's libells, and so paid my fee for swearing, and back again to Paul's
School, and went up to see the head forms posed in Latin, Greek, and
Hebrew, but I think they did not answer in any so well as we did, only in
geography they did pretty well: Dr. Wilkins and Outram were examiners.  So
down to the school, where Dr. Crumlum did me much honour by telling many
what a present I had made to the school, shewing my Stephanus, in four
volumes, cost me L4 10s.  He also shewed us, upon my desire, an old
edition of the grammar of Colett's, where his epistle to the children is
very pretty; and in rehearsing the creed it is said "borne of the cleane
Virgin Mary."  Thence with Mr. Elborough (he being all of my old
acquaintance that I could meet with here) to a cook's shop to dinner, but
I found him a fool, as he ever was, or worse.  Thence to my cozen Roger
Pepys and Mr. Phillips about my law businesses, which stand very bad, and
so home to the office, where after doing some business I went home, where
I found our new mayde Mary, that is come in Jane's place.

5th.  Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and then home to
dinner, and found it so well done, above what I did expect from my mayde
Susan, now Jane is gone, that I did call her in and give her sixpence.
Thence walked to the Temple, and there at my cozen Roger Pepys's chamber
met by appointment with my uncle Thomas and his son Thomas, and there I
shewing them a true state of my uncle's estate as he has left it with the
debts, &c., lying upon it, we did come to some quiett talk and fair offers
against an agreement on both sides, though I do offer quite to the losing
of the profit of the whole estate for 8 or 10 years together, yet if we
can gain peace, and set my mind at a little liberty, I shall be glad of
it.  I did give them a copy of this state, and we are to meet tomorrow
with their answer.  So walked home, it being a very great frost still, and
to my office, there late writing letters of office business, and so home
to supper and to bed.

6th.  Up and to my office about business, examining people what they could
swear against Field, and the whole is, that he has called us cheating
rogues and cheating knaves, for which we hope to be even with him.  Thence
to Lincoln's Inn Fields; and it being too soon to go to dinner, I walked
up and down, and looked upon the outside of the new theatre, now
a-building in Covent Garden, which will be very fine.  And so to a
bookseller's in the Strand, and there bought Hudibras again, it being
certainly some ill humour to be so against that which all the world cries
up to be the example of wit; for which I am resolved once again to read
him, and see whether I can find it or no.  So to Mr. Povy's, and there
found them at dinner, and dined there, there being, among others, Mr.
Williamson, Latin Secretary, who, I perceive, is a pretty knowing man and
a scholler, but, it may be, thinks himself to be too much so. Thence,
after dinner, to the Temple, to my cozen Roger Pepys, where met us my
uncle Thomas and his son; and, after many high demands, we at last came to
a kind of agreement upon very hard terms, which are to be prepared in
writing against Tuesday next.  But by the way promising them to pay my
cozen Mary's' legacys at the time of her marriage, they afterwards told me
that she was already married, and married very well, so that I must be
forced to pay it in some time.  My cozen Roger was so sensible of our
coming to agreement that he could not forbear weeping, and, indeed, though
it is very hard, yet I am glad to my heart that we are like to end our
trouble.  So we parted for to-night, and I to my Lord Sandwich and there
staid, there being a Committee to sit upon the contract for the Mole,
which I dare say none of us that were there understood, but yet they
agreed of things as Mr. Cholmely and Sir J. Lawson demanded, who are the
undertakers, and so I left them to go on to agree, for I understood it
not.  So home, and being called by a coachman who had a fare in him, he
carried me beyond the Old Exchange, and there set down his fare, who would
not pay him what was his due, because he carried a stranger with him, and
so after wrangling he was fain to be content with 6d., and being vexed the
coachman would not carry me home a great while, but set me down there for
the other 6d., but with fair words he was willing to it, and so I came
home and to my office, setting business in order, and so to supper and to
bed, my mind being in disorder as to the greatness of this day's business
that I have done, but yet glad that my trouble therein is like to be over.

7th.  Up and to my office, whither by agreement Mr. Coventry came before
the time of sitting to confer about preparing an account of the
extraordinary charge of the Navy since the King's coming, more than is
properly to be applied and called the Navy charge.  So by and by we sat,
and so till noon.  Then home to dinner, and in the afternoon some of us
met again upon something relating to the victualling, and thence to my
writing of letters late, and making my Alphabet to my new Navy book very
pretty.  And so after writing to my father by the post about the endeavour
to come to a composition with my uncle, though a very bad one, desiring
him to be contented therewith, I went home to supper and to bed.

8th (Lord's day).  Up, and it being a very great frost, I walked to White
Hall, and to my Lord Sandwich's by the fireside till chapel time, and so
to chappell, where there preached little Dr. Duport, of Cambridge, upon
Josiah's words,--"But I and my house, we will serve the Lord."  But though
a great scholler, he made the most flat dead sermon, both for matter and
manner of delivery, that ever I heard, and very long beyond his hour,
which made it worse.  Thence with Mr. Creed to the King's Head ordinary,
where we dined well, and after dinner Sir Thomas Willis and another
stranger, and Creed and I, fell a-talking; they of the errours and
corruption of the Navy, and great expence thereof, not knowing who I was,
which at last I did undertake to confute, and disabuse them: and they took
it very well, and I hope it was to good purpose, they being
Parliament-men.  By and by to my Lord's, and with him a good while talking
upon his want of money, and ways of his borrowing some, &c., and then by
other visitants, I withdrew and away, Creed and I and Captn. Ferrers to
the Park, and there walked finely, seeing people slide, we talking all the
while; and Captn. Ferrers telling me, among other Court passages, how
about a month ago, at a ball at Court, a child was dropped by one of the
ladies in dancing, but nobody knew who, it being taken up by somebody in
their handkercher.  The next morning all the Ladies of Honour appeared
early at Court for their vindication, so that nobody could tell whose this
mischance should be.  But it seems Mrs. Wells

     [Winifred Wells, maid of honour to the Queen, who figures in the
     "Grammont Memoirs."  The king is supposed to have been father of the
     child.  A similar adventure is told of Mary Kirke (afterwards
     married to Sir Thomas Vernon), who figures in the "Grammont Memoirs"
     as Miss Warmestre.]

fell sick that afternoon, and hath disappeared ever since, so that it is
concluded that it was her.  Another story was how my Lady Castlemaine, a
few days since, had Mrs. Stuart to an entertainment, and at night began a
frolique that they two must be married, and married they were, with ring
and all other ceremonies of church service, and ribbands and a sack posset
in bed, and flinging the stocking; but in the close, it is said that my
Lady Castlemaine, who was the bridegroom, rose, and the King came and took
her place with pretty Mrs. Stuart.  This is said to be very true.  Another
story was how Captain Ferrers and W. Howe both have often, through my Lady
Castlemaine's window, seen her go to bed and Sir Charles Barkeley in the
chamber all the while with her.  But the other day Captn. Ferrers going to
Sir Charles to excuse his not being so timely at his arms the other day,
Sir Charles swearing and cursing told him before a great many other
gentlemen that he would not suffer any man of the King's Guards to be
absent from his lodging a night without leave.  Not but that, says he,
once a week or so I know a gentleman must go .  .  ., and I am not for
denying it to any man, but however he shall be bound to ask leave to lie
abroad, and to give account of his absence, that we may know what guard
the King has to depend upon.  The little Duke of Monmouth, it seems, is
ordered to take place of all Dukes, and so to follow Prince Rupert now,
before the Duke of Buckingham, or any else.  Whether the wind and the cold
did cause it or no I know not, but having been this day or two mightily
troubled with an itching all over my body' which I took to be a louse or
two that might bite me, I found this afternoon that all my body is
inflamed, and my face in a sad redness and swelling and pimpled, so that I
was before we had done walking not only sick but ashamed of myself to see
myself so changed in my countenance, so that after we had thus talked we
parted and I walked home with much ado (Captn. Ferrers with me as far as
Ludgate Hill towards Mr. Moore at the Wardrobe), the ways being so full of
ice and water by peoples' trampling.  At last got home and to bed
presently, and had a very bad night of it, in great pain in my stomach,
and in great fever.

9th.  Could not rise and go to the Duke, as I should have done with the
rest, but keep my bed and by the Apothecary's advice, Mr. Battersby, I am
to sweat soundly, and that will carry all this matter away which nature
would of itself eject, but they will assist nature, it being some disorder
given the blood, but by what I know not, unless it be by my late quantitys
of Dantzic-girkins that I have eaten.  In the evening came Sir J. Minnes
and Sir W. Batten to see me, and Sir J. Minnes advises me to the same
thing, but would not have me take anything from the apothecary, but from
him, his Venice treacle being better than the others, which I did consent
to and did anon take and fell into a great sweat, and about 10 or 11
o'clock came out of it and shifted myself, and slept pretty well alone, my
wife lying in the red chamber above.

10th.  In the morning most of my disease, that is, itching and pimples,
were gone.  In the morning visited by Mr. Coventry and others, and very
glad I am to see that I am so much inquired after and my sickness taken
notice of as I did.  I keep my bed all day and sweat again at night, by
which I expect to be very well to-morrow.  This evening Sir W. Warren came
himself to the door and left a letter and box for me, and went his way.
His letter mentions his giving me and my wife a pair of gloves; but,
opening the box, we found a pair of plain white gloves for my hand, and a
fair state dish of silver, and cup, with my arms, ready cut upon them,
worth, I believe, about L18, which is a very noble present, and the best I
ever had yet.  So after some contentful talk with my wife, she to bed and
I to rest.

11th.  Took a clyster in the morning and rose in the afternoon.  My wife
and I dined on a pullet and I eat heartily, having eat nothing since
Sunday but water gruel and posset drink, but must needs say that our new
maid Mary has played her part very well in her readiness and discretion in
attending me, of which I am very glad.  In the afternoon several people
came to see me, my uncle Thomas, Mr. Creed, Sir J. Minnes (who has been,
God knows to what end, mighty kind to me and careful of me in my
sickness).  At night my wife read Sir H. Vane's tryall to me, which she
began last night, and I find it a very excellent thing, worth reading, and
him to have been a very wise man.  So to supper and to bed.

12th.  Up and find myself pretty well, and so to the office, and there all
the morning.  Rose at noon and home to dinner in my green chamber, having
a good fire.  Thither there came my wife's brother and brought Mary
Ashwell with him, whom we find a very likely person to please us, both for
person, discourse, and other qualitys.  She dined with us, and after
dinner went away again, being agreed to come to us about three weeks or a
month hence.  My wife and I well pleased with our choice, only I pray God
I may be able to maintain it.  Then came an old man from Mr. Povy, to give
me some advice about his experience in the stone, which I [am] beholden to
him for, and was well pleased with it, his chief remedy being Castle soap
in a posset.  Then in the evening to the office, late writing letters and
my Journall since Saturday, and so home to supper and to bed.

13th.  Lay very long with my wife in bed talking with great pleasure, and
then rose.  This morning Mr. Cole, our timber merchant, sent me five
couple of ducks.  Our maid Susan is very ill, and so the whole trouble of
the house lies upon our maid Mary, who do it very contentedly and mighty
well, but I am sorry she is forced to it.  Dined upon one couple of ducks
to-day, and after dinner my wife and I by coach to Tom's, and I to the
Temple to discourse with my cozen Roger Pepys about my law business, and
so back again, it being a monstrous thaw after the long great frost, so
that there is no passing but by coach in the streets, and hardly that.
Took my wife home, and I to my office.  Find myself pretty well but
fearful of cold, and so to my office, where late upon business; Mr. Bland
sitting with me, talking of my Lord Windsor's being come home from
Jamaica, unlooked-for; which makes us think that these young Lords are not
fit to do any service abroad, though it is said that he could not have his
health there, but hath razed a fort of the King of Spain upon Cuba, which
is considerable, or said to be so, for his honour.  So home to supper and
to bed.  This day I bought the second part of Dr. Bates's Elenchus, which
reaches to the fall of Richard, and no further, for which I am sorry.
This evening my wife had a great mind to choose Valentines against
to-morrow, I Mrs. Clerke, or Pierce, she Mr. Hunt or Captain Ferrers, but
I would not because of getting charge both to me for mine and to them for
her, which did not please her.

14th.  Up and to my office, where we met and sate all the morning, only
Mr. Coventry, which I think is the first or second time he has missed
since he came to the office, was forced to be absent.  So home to dinner,
my wife and I upon a couple of ducks, and then by coach to the Temple,
where my uncle Thomas, and his sons both, and I, did meet at my cozen
Roger's and there sign and seal to an agreement.  Wherein I was displeased
at nothing but my cozen Roger's insisting upon my being obliged to settle
upon them as the will do all my uncle's estate that he has left, without
power of selling any for the payment of debts, but I would not yield to it
without leave of selling, my Lord Sandwich himself and my cozen Thos.
Pepys being judges of the necessity thereof, which was done.  One thing
more that troubles me was my being forced to promise to give half of what
personal estate could be found more than L372, which I reported to them,
which though I do not know it to be less than what we really have found,
yet he would have been glad to have been at liberty for that, but at last
I did agree to it under my own handwriting on the backside of the report I
did make and did give them of the estate, and have taken a copy of it upon
the backside of one that I have.  All being done I took the father and his
son Thos. home by coach, and did pay them L30, the arrears of the father's
annuity, and with great seeming love parted, and I presently to bed, my
head akeing mightily with the hot dispute I did hold with my cozen Roger
and them in the business.

15th (Lord's day).  This morning my wife did wake me being frighted with
the noise I made in my sleep, being a dream that one of our sea maisters
did desire to see the St. John's Isle of my drawing, which methought I
showed him, but methought he did handle it so hard that it put me to very
horrid pain .  .  .  .  Which what a strange extravagant dream it was. So
to sleep again and lay long in bed, and then trimmed by the barber, and so
sending Will to church, myself staid at home, hanging up in my green
chamber my picture of the Soveraigne, and putting some things in order
there.  So to dinner, to three more ducks and two teals, my wife and I.
Then to Church, where a dull sermon, and so home, and after walking about
the house awhile discoursing with my wife, I to my office there to set
down something and to prepare businesses for tomorrow, having in the
morning read over my vows, which through sicknesse I could not do the last
Lord's day, and not through forgetfulness or negligence, so that I hope it
is no breach of my vow not to pay my forfeiture.  So home, and after
prayers to bed, talking long with my wife and teaching her things in
astronomy.

16th.  Up and by coach with Sir W. Batten and Sir J. Minnes to White Hall,
and, after we had done our usual business with the Duke, to my Lord
Sandwich and by his desire to Sir W. Wheeler, who was brought down in a
sedan chair from his chamber, being lame of the gout, to borrow L1000 of
him for my Lord's occasions, but he gave me a very kind denial that he
could not, but if any body else would, he would be bond with my Lord for
it.  So to Westminster Hall, and there find great expectation what the
Parliament will do, when they come two days hence to sit again, in matters
of religion.  The great question is, whether the Presbyters will be
contented to have the Papists have the same liberty of conscience with
them, or no, or rather be denied it themselves: and the Papists, I hear,
are very busy designing how to make the Presbyters consent to take their
liberty, and to let them have the same with them, which some are apt to
think they will.  It seems a priest was taken in his vests officiating
somewhere in Holborn the other day, and was committed by Secretary Morris,
according to law; and they say the Bishop of London did give him thanks
for it.  Thence to my Lord Crew's and dined there, there being much
company, and the above-said matter is now the present publique discourse.
Thence about several businesses to Mr. Phillips my attorney, to stop all
proceedings at law, and so to the Temple, where at the Solicitor General's
I found Mr. Cholmely and Creed reading to him the agreement for him to put
into form about the contract for the Mole at Tangier, which is done at
13s. the Cubical yard, though upon my conscience not one of the Committee,
besides the parties concerned, do understand what they do therein, whether
they give too much or too little.  Thence with Mr. Creed to see Mr. Moore,
who continues sick still, within doors, and here I staid a good while
after him talking of all the things either business or no that came into
my mind, and so home and to see Sir W. Pen, and sat and played at cards
with him, his daughter, and Mrs. Rooth, and so to my office a while, and
then home and to bed.

17th.  Up and to my office, and there we sat all the morning, and at noon
my wife being gone to Chelsey with her brother and sister and Mrs. Lodum,
to see the wassell at the school, where Mary Ashwell is, I took home Mr.
Pett and he dined with me all alone, and much discourse we had upon the
business of the office, and so after dinner broke up and with much ado, it
raining hard, which it has not done a great while now, but only frost a
great while, I got a coach and so to the Temple, where discoursed with Mr.
W. Montagu about borrowing some money for my Lord, and so by water (where
I have not been a good while through cold) to Westminster to Sir W.
Wheeler's, whom I found busy at his own house with the Commissioners of
Sewers, but I spoke to him about my Lord's business of borrowing money,
and so to my Lord of Sandwich, to give him an account of all, whom I found
at cards with Pickering; but he made an end soon: and so all alone, he and
I, after I had given him an account, he told me he had a great secret to
tell me, such as no flesh knew but himself, nor ought; which was this:
that yesterday morning Eschar, Mr. Edward Montagu's man, did come to him
from his master with some of the Clerks of the Exchequer, for my Lord to
sign to their books for the Embassy money; which my Lord very civilly
desired not to do till he had spoke with his master himself. In the
afternoon, my Lord and my Lady Wright being at cards in his chamber, in
comes Mr. Montagu; and desiring to speak with my Lord at the window in his
chamber, he begun to charge my Lord with the greatest ingratitude in the
world: that he that had received his earldom, garter, L4000 per annum, and
whatever he is in the world, from him, should now study him all the
dishonour that he could; and so fell to tell my Lord, that if he should
speak all that he knew of him, he could do so and so. In a word, he did
rip up all that could be said that was unworthy, and in the basest terms
they could be spoken in.  To which my Lord answered with great temper,
justifying himself, but endeavouring to lessen his heat, which was a
strange temper in him, knowing that he did owe all he hath in the world to
my Lord, and that he is now all that he is by his means and favour.  But
my Lord did forbear to increase the quarrel, knowing that it would be to
no good purpose for the world to see a difference in the family; but did
allay him so as that he fell to weeping.  And after much talk (among other
things Mr. Montagu telling him that there was a fellow in the town, naming
me, that had done ill offices, and that if he knew it to be so, he would
have him cudgelled) my Lord did promise him that, if upon account he saw
that there was not many tradesmen unpaid, he would sign the books; but if
there was, he could not bear with taking too great a debt upon him.  So
this day he sent him an account, and a letter assuring him there was not
above L200 unpaid; and so my Lord did sign to the Exchequer books.  Upon
the whole, I understand fully what a rogue he is, and how my Lord do think
and will think of him for the future; telling me that thus he has served
his father my Lord Manchester, and his whole family, and now himself: and
which is worst, that he hath abused, and in speeches every day do abuse,
my Lord Chancellor, whose favour he hath lost; and hath no friend but Sir
H. Bennet, and that (I knowing the rise of the friendship) only from the
likeness of their pleasures, and acquaintance, and concernments, they have
in the same matters of lust and baseness; for which, God forgive them!
But he do flatter himself, from promises of Sir H. Bennet, that he shall
have a pension of L2000 per annum, and be made an Earl.  My Lord told me
he expected a challenge from him, but told me there was no great fear of
him, for there was no man lies under such an imputation as he do in the
business of Mr. Cholmely, who, though a simple sorry fellow, do brave him
and struts before him with the Queen, to the sport and observation of the
whole Court.  He did keep my Lord at the window, thus reviling and braving
him above an hour, my Lady Wright being by; but my Lord tells me she could
not hear every word, but did well know what their discourse was; she could
hear enough to know that.  So that he commands me to keep it as the
greatest secret in the world, and bids me beware of speaking words against
Mr. Montagu, for fear I should suffer by his passion thereby.  After he
had told me this I took coach and home, where I found my wife come home
and in bed with her sister in law in the chamber with her, she not being
able to stay to see the wassel, being so ill .  .  ., which I was sorry
for. Hither we sent for her sister's viall, upon which she plays pretty
well for a girl, but my expectation is much deceived in her, not only for
that, but in her spirit, she being I perceive a very subtle witty jade,
and one that will give her husband trouble enough as little as she is,
whereas I took her heretofore for a very child and a simple fool.  I
played also, which I have not done this long time before upon any
instrument, and at last broke up and I to my office a little while, being
fearful of being too much taken with musique, for fear of returning to my
old dotage thereon, and so neglect my business as I used to do.  Then home
and to bed.  Coming home I brought Mr. Pickering as far as the Temple, who
tells me the story is very true of a child being dropped at the ball at
Court; and that the King had it in his closett a week after, and did
dissect it; and making great sport of it, said that in his opinion it must
have been a month and three hours old; and that, whatever others think, he
hath the greatest loss (it being a boy, as he says), that hath lost a
subject by the business.  He tells me, too, that the other story, of my
Lady Castlemaine's and Stuart's marriage, is certain, and that it was in
order to the King's coming to Stuart, as is believed generally.  He tells
me that Sir H. Bennet is a Catholique, and how all the Court almost is
changed to the worse since his coming in, they being afeard of him.  And
that the Queen-Mother's Court is now the greatest of all; and that our own
Queen hath little or no company come to her, which I know also to be very
true, and am sorry to see it.

18th.  Up, leaving my wife sick as last night in bed.  I to my office all
the morning, casting up with Captain Cocke their accounts of 500 tons of
hemp brought from Riga, and bought by him and partners upon account,
wherein are many things worth my knowledge.  So at noon to dinner, taking
Mr. Hater with me because of losing them, and in the afternoon he and I
alone at the office, finishing our account of the extra charge of the
Navy, not properly belonging to the Navy, since the King's coming in to
Christmas last; and all extra things being abated, I find that the true
charge of the Navy to that time hath been after the rate of L374,743
a-year.  I made an end by eleven o'clock at night, and so home to bed
almost weary.  This day the Parliament met again, after their long
prorogation; but I know not any thing what they have done, being within
doors all day.

19th.  Up and to my office, where abundance of business all the morning.
Dined by my wife's bedside, she not being yet well.  We fell out almost
upon my discourse of delaying the having of Ashwell, where my wife
believing that I have a mind to have Pall, which I have not, though I
could wish she did deserve to be had.  So to my office, where by and by we
sat, this afternoon being the first we have met upon a great while, our
times being changed because of the parliament sitting.  Being rose, I to
my office till twelve at night, drawing out copies of the overcharge of
the Navy, one to send to Mr. Coventry early to-morrow.  So home and to
bed, being weary, sleepy, and my eyes begin to fail me, looking so long by
candlelight upon white paper.  This day I read the King's speech to the
Parliament yesterday; which is very short, and not very obliging; but only
telling them his desire to have a power of indulging tender consciences,
not that he will yield to have any mixture in the uniformity of the
Church's discipline; and says the same for the Papists, but declares
against their ever being admitted to have any offices or places of trust
in the kingdom; but, God knows, too many have.

20th.  Up and by water with Commissioner Pett to Deptford, and there
looked over the yard, and had a call, wherein I am very highly pleased
with our new manner of call-books, being my invention.  Thence thinking to
have gone down to Woolwich in the Charles pleasure boat, but she run
aground, it being almost low water, and so by oars to the town, and there
dined, and then to the yard at Mr. Ackworth's, discoursing with the
officers of the yard about their stores of masts, which was our chief
business, and having done something therein, took boat and to the pleasure
boat, which was come down to fetch us back, and I could have been sick if
I would in going, the wind being very fresh, but very pleasant it was, and
the first time I have sailed in any one of them.  It carried us to
Cuckold's Point, and so by oars to the Temple, it raining hard, where
missed speaking with my cosen Roger, and so walked home and to my office;
there spent the night till bed time, and so home to supper and to bed.

21st.  Up and to the office, where Sir J. Minnes (most of the rest being
at the Parliament-house), all the morning answering petitions and other
business.  Towards noon there comes a man in as if upon ordinary business,
and shows me a writ from the Exchequer, called a Commission of Rebellion,
and tells me that I am his prisoner in Field's business; which methought
did strike me to the heart, to think that we could not sit in the middle
of the King's business.  I told him how and where we were employed, and
bid him have a care; and perceiving that we were busy, he said he would,
and did withdraw for an hour: in which time Sir J. Minnes took coach and
to Court, to see what he could do from thence; and our solicitor against
Field came by chance and told me that he would go and satisfy the fees of
the Court, and would end the business.  So he went away about that, and I
staid in my closett, till by and by the man and four more of his fellows
came to know what I would do; I told them stay till I heard from the King
or my Lord Chief Baron, to both whom I had now sent.  With that they
consulted, and told me that if I would promise to stay in the house they
would go and refresh themselves, and come again, and know what answer I
had: so they away, and I home to dinner, whither by chance comes Mr.
Hawley and dined with me.  Before I had dined, the bayleys come back again
with the constable, and at the office knock for me, but found me not
there; and I hearing in what manner they were come, did forbear letting
them know where I was; so they stood knocking and enquiring for me.  By
and by at my parler-window comes Sir W. Batten's Mungo, to tell me that
his master and lady would have me come to their house through Sir J.
Minnes's lodgings, which I could not do; but, however, by ladders, did get
over the pale between our yards, and so to their house, where I found them
(as they have reason) to be much concerned for me, my lady especially.
The fellows staid in the yard swearing with one or two constables, and
some time we locked them into the yard, and by and by let them out again,
and so kept them all the afternoon, not letting them see me, or know where
I was.  One time I went up to the top of Sir W. Batten's house, and out of
one of their windows spoke to my wife out of one of ours; which methought,
though I did it in mirth, yet I was sad to think what a sad thing it would
be for me to be really in that condition.  By and by comes Sir J. Minnes,
who (like himself and all that he do) tells us that he can do no good, but
that my Lord Chancellor wonders that we did not cause the seamen to fall
about their ears: which we wished we could have done without our being
seen in it; and Captain Grove being there, he did give them some affront,
and would have got some seamen to have drubbed them, but he had not time,
nor did we think it fit to have done it, they having executed their
commission; but there was occasion given that he did draw upon one of them
and he did complain that Grove had pricked him in the breast, but no hurt
done; but I see that Grove would have done our business to them if we had
bid him.  By and by comes Mr. Clerke, our solicitor, who brings us a
release from our adverse atturney, we paying the fees of the commission,
which comes to five marks, and pay the charges of these fellows, which are
called the commissioners, but are the most rake-shamed rogues that ever I
saw in my life; so he showed them this release, and they seemed satisfied,
and went away with him to their atturney to be paid by him.  But before
they went, Sir W. Batten and my lady did begin to taunt them, but the
rogues answered them as high as themselves, and swore they would come
again, and called me rogue and rebel, and they would bring the sheriff and
untile his house, before he should harbour a rebel in his house, and that
they would be here again shortly.  Well, at last they went away, and I by
advice took occasion to go abroad, and walked through the street to show
myself among the neighbours, that they might not think worse than the
business is.  Being met by Captn. Taylor and Bowry, whose ship we have
hired for Tangier, they walked along with me to Cornhill talking about
their business, and after some difference about their prices we agreed,
and so they would have me to a tavern, and there I drank one glass of wine
and discoursed of something about freight of a ship that may bring me a
little money, and so broke up, and I home to Sir W. Batten's again, where
Sir J. Lawson, Captain Allen, Spragg, and several others, and all our
discourse about the disgrace done to our office to be liable to this
trouble, which we must get removed.  Hither comes Mr. Clerke by and by,
and tells me that he hath paid the fees of the Court for the commission;
but the men are not contented with under; L5 for their charges, which he
will not give them, and therefore advises me not to stir abroad till
Monday that he comes or sends to me again, whereby I shall not be able to
go to White Hall to the Duke of York, as I ought.  Here I staid vexing,
and yet pleased to see every body, man and woman, my Lady and Mr. Turner
especially, for me, till 10 at night; and so home, where my people are
mightily surprized to see this business, but it troubles me not very much,
it being nothing touching my particular person or estate.  Being in talk
to-day with Sir W. Batten he tells me that little is done yet in the
Parliament-house, but only this day it was moved and ordered that all the
members of the House do subscribe to the renouncing of the Covenant, which
is thought will try some of them. There is also a bill brought in for the
wearing of nothing but cloth or stuffs of our own manufacture, and is
likely to be passed.  Among other talk this evening, my lady did speak
concerning Commissioner Pett's calling the present King bastard, and other
high words heretofore; and Sir W. Batten did tell us, that he did give the
Duke or Mr. Coventry an account of that and other like matters in writing
under oath, of which I was ashamed, and for which I was sorry, but I see
there is an absolute hatred never to be altered there, and Sir J. Minnes,
the old coxcomb, has got it by the end, which troubles me for the sake of
the King's service, though I do truly hate the expressions laid to him.
To my office and set down this day's journall, and so home with my mind
out of order, though not very sad with it, but ashamed for myself
something, and for the honour of the office much more.  So home and to
bed.

22d (Lord's day).  Lay long in bed and went not out all day; but after
dinner to Sir W. Batten's and Sir W. Pen's, where discoursing much of
yesterday's trouble and scandal; but that which troubled me most was Sir
J. Minnes coming from Court at night, and instead of bringing great
comfort from thence (but I expected no better from him), he tells me that
the Duke and Mr. Coventry make no great matter of it.  So at night
discontented to prayers, and to bed.

23d.  Up by times; and not daring to go by land, did (Griffin going along
with me for fear), slip to White Hall by water; where to Mr. Coventry,
and, as we used to do, to the Duke; the other of my fellows being come.
But we said nothing of our business, the Duke being sent for to the King,
that he could not stay to speak with us.  This morning came my Lord
Windsor to kiss the Duke's hand, being returned from Jamaica.  He tells
the Duke, that from such a degree of latitude going thither he begun to be
sick, and was never well till his coming so far back again, and then
presently begun to be well.  He told the Duke of their taking the fort of
St. Jago, upon Cuba, by his men; but, upon the whole, I believe that he
did matters like a young lord, and was weary of being upon service out of
his own country, where he might have pleasure.  For methought it was a
shame to see him this very afternoon, being the first day of his coming to
town, to be at a playhouse.  Thence to my Lord Sandwich, who though he has
been abroad again two or three days is falling ill again, and is let blood
this morning, though I hope it is only a great cold that he has got.  It
was a great trouble to me (and I had great apprehensions of it) that my
Lord desired me to go to Westminster Hall, to the Parliament-house door,
about business; and to Sir Wm. Wheeler, which I told him I would do, but
durst not go for fear of being taken by these rogues; but was forced to go
to White Hall and take boat, and so land below the Tower at the Iron-gate;
and so the back way over Little Tower Hill; and with my cloak over my
face, took one of the watermen along with me, and staid behind a wall in
the New-buildings behind our garden, while he went to see whether any body
stood within the Merchants' Gate, under which we pass to go into our
garden, and there standing but a little dirty boy before the gate, did
make me quake and sweat to think he might be a Trepan.  But there was
nobody, and so I got safe into the garden, and coming to open my office
door, something behind it fell in the opening, which made me start.  So
that God knows in what a sad condition I should be in if I were truly in
the condition that many a poor man is for debt: and therefore ought to
bless God that I have no such reall reason, and to endeavour to keep
myself, by my good deportment and good husbandry, out of any such
condition.  At home I found Mr. Creed with my wife, and so he dined with
us, I finding by a note that Mr. Clerke in my absence hath left here, that
I am free; and that he hath stopped all matters in Court; I was very glad
of it, and immediately had a light thought of taking pleasure to rejoice
my heart, and so resolved to take my wife to a play at Court to-night, and
the rather because it is my birthday, being this day thirty years old, for
which let me praise God.  While my wife dressed herself, Creed and I
walked out to see what play was acted to-day, and we find it "The Slighted
Mayde."  But, Lord!  to see that though I did know myself to be out of
danger, yet I durst not go through the street, but round by the garden
into Tower Street.  By and by took coach, and to the Duke's house, where
we saw it well acted, though the play hath little good in it, being most
pleased to see the little girl dance in boy's apparel, she having very
fine legs, only bends in the hams, as I perceive all women do.  The play
being done, we took coach and to Court, and there got good places, and saw
"The Wilde Gallant,"  performed by the King's house, but it was ill acted,
and the play so poor a thing as I never saw in my life almost, and so
little answering the name, that from beginning to end, I could not, nor
can at this time, tell certainly which was the Wild Gallant.  The King did
not seem pleased at all, all the whole play, nor any body else, though Mr.
Clerke whom we met here did commend it to us.  My Lady Castlemaine was all
worth seeing tonight, and little Steward.--[Mrs. Stuart]--Mrs. Wells do
appear at Court again, and looks well; so that, it may be, the late report
of laying the dropped child to her was not true.  It being done, we got a
coach and got well home about 12 at night.  Now as my mind was but very
ill satisfied with these two plays themselves, so was I in the midst of
them sad to think of the spending so much money and venturing upon the
breach of my vow, which I found myself sorry for, I bless God, though my
nature would well be contented to follow the pleasure still.  But I did
make payment of my forfeiture presently, though I hope to save it back
again by forbearing two plays at Court for this one at the Theatre, or
else to forbear that to the Theatre which I am to have at Easter.  But it
being my birthday and my day of liberty regained to me, and lastly, the
last play that is likely to be acted at Court before Easter, because of
the Lent coming in, I was the easier content to fling away so much money.
So to bed.  This day I was told that my Lady Castlemaine hath all the
King's Christmas presents, made him by the peers, given to her, which is a
most abominable thing; and that at the great ball she was much richer in
jewells than the Queen and Duchess put both together.

24th.  Slept hard till 8 o'clock, then waked by Mr. Clerke's being come to
consult me about Field's business, which we did by calling him up to my
bedside, and he says we shall trounce him.  Then up, and to the office,
and at 11 o'clock by water to Westminster, and to Sir W. Wheeler's about
my Lord's borrowing of money that I was lately upon with him, and then to
my Lord, who continues ill, but will do well I doubt not.  Among other
things, he tells me that he hears the Commons will not agree to the King's
late declaration, nor will yield that the Papists have any ground given
them to raise themselves up again in England, which I perceive by my Lord
was expected at Court.  Thence home again by water presently, and with a
bad dinner, being not looked for, to the office, and there we sat, and
then Captn. Cocke and I upon his hemp accounts till 9 at night, and then,
I not very well, home to supper and to bed.  My late distemper of heat and
itching being come upon me again, so that I must think of sweating again
as I did before.

25th.  Up and to my office, where with Captain Cocke making an end of his
last night's accounts till noon, and so home to dinner, my wife being come
in from laying out about L4 in provision of several things against Lent.
In the afternoon to the Temple, my brother's, the Wardrobe, to Mr. Moore,
and other places, called at about small businesses, and so at night home
to my office and then to supper and to bed.  The Commons in Parliament, I
hear, are very high to stand to the Act of Uniformity, and will not
indulge the Papists (which is endeavoured by the Court Party) nor the
Presbyters.

26th.  Up and drinking a draft of wormewood wine with Sir W. Batten at the
Steelyard, he and I by water to the Parliament-house: he went in, and I
walked up and down the Hall.  All the news is the great odds yesterday in
the votes between them that are for the Indulgence to the Papists and
Presbyters, and those that are against it, which did carry it by 200
against 30.  And pretty it is to consider how the King would appear to be
a stiff Protestant and son of the, Church; and yet would appear willing to
give a liberty to these people, because of his promise at Breda.  And yet
all the world do believe that the King would not have this liberty given
them at all.  Thence to my Lord's, who, I hear, has his ague again, for
which I am sorry, and Creed and I to the King's Head ordinary, where much
good company.  Among the rest a young gallant lately come from France, who
was full of his French, but methought not very good, but he had enough to
make him think himself a wise man a great while.  Thence by water from the
New Exchange home to the Tower, and so sat at the office, and then writing
letters till 11 at night.  Troubled this evening that my wife is not come
home from Chelsey, whither she is gone to see the play at the school where
Ashwell is, but she came at last, it seems, by water, and tells me she is
much pleased with Ashwell's acting and carriage, which I am glad of.  So
home and to supper and bed.

27th.  Up and to my office, whither several persons came to me about
office business.  About 11 o'clock, Commissioner Pett and I walked to
Chyrurgeon's Hall (we being all invited thither, and promised to dine
there); where we were led into the Theatre; and by and by comes the
reader, Dr. Tearne, with the Master and Company, in a very handsome
manner: and all being settled, he begun his lecture, this being the second
upon the kidneys, ureters, &c., which was very fine; and his discourse
being ended, we walked into the Hall, and there being great store of
company, we had a fine dinner and good learned company, many Doctors of
Phisique, and we used with extraordinary great respect.  Among other
observables we drank the King's health out of a gilt cup given by King
Henry VIII. to this Company, with bells hanging at it, which every man is
to ring by shaking after he hath drunk up the whole cup.  There is also a
very excellent piece of the King, done by Holbein, stands up in the Hall,
with the officers of the Company kneeling to him to receive their Charter.
After dinner Dr. Scarborough took some of his friends, and I went along
with them, to see the body alone, which we did, which was a lusty fellow,
a seaman, that was hanged for a robbery.  I did touch the dead body with
my bare hand: it felt cold, but methought it was a very unpleasant sight.
It seems one Dillon, of a great family, was, after much endeavours to have
saved him, hanged with a silken halter this Sessions (of his own
preparing), not for honour only, but it seems, it being soft and sleek, it
do slip close and kills, that is, strangles presently: whereas, a stiff
one do not come so close together, and so the party may live the longer
before killed.  But all the Doctors at table conclude, that there is no
pain at all in hanging, for that it do stop the circulation of the blood;
and so stops all sense and motion in an instant.  Thence we went into a
private room, where I perceive they prepare the bodies, and there were the
kidneys, ureters [&c.], upon which he read to-day, and Dr. Scarborough
upon my desire and the company's did show very clearly the manner of the
disease of the stone and the cutting and all other questions that I could
think of .  .  . how the water [comes] into the bladder through the
three skins or coats just as poor Dr. Jolly has heretofore told me.
Thence with great satisfaction to me back to the Company, where I heard
good discourse, and so to the afternoon Lecture upon the heart and lungs,
&c., and that being done we broke up, took leave, and back to the office,
we two, Sir W. Batten, who dined here also, being gone before.  Here late,
and to Sir W. Batten's to speak upon some business, where I found Sir J.
Minnes pretty well fuddled I thought: he took me aside to tell me how
being at my Lord Chancellor's to-day, my Lord told him that there was a
Great Seal passing for Sir W. Pen, through the impossibility of the
Comptroller's duty to be performed by one man; to be as it were
joynt-comptroller with him, at which he is stark mad; and swears he will
give up his place, and do rail at Sir W. Pen the cruellest; he I made
shift to encourage as much as I could, but it pleased me heartily to hear
him rail against him, so that I do see thoroughly that they are not like
to be great friends, for he cries out against him for his house and yard
and God knows what.  For my part, I do hope, when all is done, that my
following my business will keep me secure against all their envys.  But to
see how the old man do strut, and swear that he understands all his duty
as easily as crack a nut, and easier, he told my Lord Chancellor, for his
teeth are gone; and that he understands it as well as any man in England;
and that he will never leave to record that he should be said to be unable
to do his duty alone; though, God knows, he cannot do it more than a
child.  All this I am glad to see fall out between them and myself safe,
and yet I hope the King's service well done for all this, for I would not
that should be hindered by any of our private differences.  So to my
office, and then home to supper and to bed.

28th.  Waked with great pain in my right ear (which I find myself much
subject to) having taken cold.  Up and to my office, where we sat all the
morning, and I dined with Sir W. Batten by chance, being in business
together about a bargain of New England masts.  Then to the Temple to meet
my uncle Thomas, who I found there, but my cozen Roger not being come home
I took boat and to Westminster, where I found him in Parliament this
afternoon.  The House have this noon been with the King to give him their
reasons for refusing to grant any indulgence to Presbyters or Papists;
which he, with great content and seeming pleasure, took, saying, that he
doubted not but he and they should agree in all things, though there may
seem a difference in judgement, he having writ and declared for an
indulgence: and that he did believe never prince was happier in a House of
Commons, than he was in them.  Thence he and I to my Lord Sandwich, who
continues troubled with his cold.  Our discourse most upon the outing of
Sir R. Bernard, and my Lord's being made Recorder of Huntingdon in his
stead, which he seems well contented with, saying, that it may be for his
convenience to have the chief officer of the town dependent upon him,
which is very true.  Thence he and I to the Temple, but my uncle being
gone we parted, and I walked home, and to my office, and at nine o'clock
had a good supper of an oxe's cheek, of my wife's dressing and baking, and
so to my office again till past eleven at night, making up my month's
account, and find that I am at a stay with what I was last, that is L640.
So home and to bed.  Coming by, I put in at White Hall, and at the Privy
Seal I did see the docquet by which Sir W. Pen is made the Comptroller's
assistant, as Sir J. Minnes told me last night, which I must endeavour to
prevent.

     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     After oysters, at first course, a hash of rabbits, a lamb
     At last we pretty good friends
     Before I sent my boy out with them, I beat him for a lie
     Dr. Calamy is this day sent to Newgate for preaching
     Eat a mouthful of pye at home to stay my stomach
     Familiarity with her other servants is it that spoils them all
     Feverish, and hath sent for Mr. Pierce to let him blood
     Found him a fool, as he ever was, or worse
     Goes down the wind in honour as well as every thing else
     Had a good supper of an oxe's cheek
     Hanged with a silken halter
     How highly the Presbyters do talk in the coffeehouses still
     I and she never were so heartily angry in our lives as to-day
     Ill humour to be so against that which all the world cries up
     Lady Castlemaine hath all the King's Christmas presents
     Lay chiding, and then pleased with my wife in bed
     Lay very long with my wife in bed talking with great pleasure
     Liability of a husband to pay for goods supplied his wife
     Many thousands in a little time go out of England
     Money, which sweetens all things
     Most flat dead sermon, both for matter and manner of delivery
     Much discourse, but little to be learned
     Nor will yield that the Papists have any ground given them
     Nothing in the world done with true integrity
     Once a week or so I know a gentleman must go .  .  .  .
     Pain of the stone, and makes bloody water with great pain
     Rabbit not half roasted, which made me angry with my wife
     Scholler, but, it may be, thinks himself to be too much so
     See how time and example may alter a man
     Servant of the King's pleasures too, as well as business
     So home, and mighty friends with my wife again
     So neat and kind one to another
     Sorry for doing it now, because of obliging me to do the like
     Talk very highly of liberty of conscience
     The house was full of citizens, and so the less pleasant
     There is no passing but by coach in the streets, and hardly that
     These young Lords are not fit to do any service abroad
     They were so false spelt that I was ashamed of them
     Vexed at my wife's neglect in leaving of her scarf
     Wine, new and old, with labells pasted upon each bottle
     With much ado in an hour getting a coach home
     Yet it was her fault not to see that I did take them





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Diary of Samuel Pepys,
January/February 1662/63, by Samuel Pepys

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***

***** This file should be named 4139.txt or 4139.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/4/1/3/4139/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
