The Project Gutenberg EBook of Diary of Samuel Pepys, March/April 1662/63
by Samuel Pepys

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Diary of Samuel Pepys, March/April 1662/63

Author: Samuel Pepys

Release Date: November 30, 2004 [EBook #4140]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***




Produced by David Widger





                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A.  F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                              MARCH & APRIL
                                1662-1663

March 1st (Lord's day).  Up and walked to White Hall, to the Chappell,
where preached one Dr. Lewes, said heretofore to have been a great witt;
but he read his sermon every word, and that so brokenly and so low, that
nobody could hear at any distance, nor I anything worth hearing that sat
near.  But, which was strange, he forgot to make any prayer before sermon,
which all wonder at, but they impute it to his forgetfulness. After sermon
a very fine anthem; so I up into the house among the courtiers, seeing the
fine ladies, and, above all, my Lady Castlemaine, who is above all, that
only she I can observe for true beauty.  The King and Queen being set to
dinner I went to Mr. Fox's, and there dined with him.  Much genteel
company, and, among other things, I hear for certain that peace is
concluded between the King of France and the Pope; and also I heard the
reasons given by our Parliament yesterday to the King why they dissent
from him in matter of Indulgence, which are very good quite through, and
which I was glad to hear.  Thence to my Lord Sandwich, who continues with
a great cold, locked up; and, being alone, we fell into discourse of my
uncle the Captain's death and estate, and I took the opportunity of
telling my Lord how matters stand, and read his will, and told him all,
what a poor estate he hath left, at all which he wonders strangely, which
he may well do.  Thence after singing some new tunes with W. Howe I walked
home, whither came Will.  Joyce, whom I have not seen here a great while,
nor desire it a great while again, he is so impertinent a coxcomb, and yet
good natured, and mightily concerned for my brother's late folly in his
late wooing at the charge to no purpose, nor could in any probability a
it.  He gone, we all to bed, without prayers, it being washing day
to-morrow.

2nd.  Up early and by water with Commissioner Pett to Deptford, and there
took the Jemmy yacht (that the King and the Lords virtuosos built the
other day) down to Woolwich, where we discoursed of several matters both
there and at the Ropeyard, and so to the yacht again, and went down four
or five miles with extraordinary pleasure, it being a fine day, and a
brave gale of wind, and had some oysters brought us aboard newly taken,
which were excellent, and ate with great pleasure.  There also coming into
the river two Dutchmen, we sent a couple of men on board and bought three
Hollands cheeses, cost 4d. a piece, excellent cheeses, whereof I had two
and Commissioner Pett one.  So back again to Woolwich, and going aboard
the Hulke to see the manner of the iron bridles, which we are making of
for to save cordage to put to the chain, I did fall from the shipside into
the ship (Kent), and had like to have broke my left hand, but I only
sprained some of my fingers, which, when I came ashore I sent to Mrs.
Ackworth for some balsam, and put to my hand, and was pretty well within a
little while after.  We dined at the White Hart with several officers with
us, and after dinner went and saw the Royal James brought down to the
stern of the Docke (the main business we came for), and then to the
Ropeyard, and saw a trial between Riga hemp and a sort of Indian grass,
which is pretty strong, but no comparison between it and the other for
strength, and it is doubtful whether it will take tarre or no.  So to the
yacht again, and carried us almost to London, so by our oars home to the
office, and thence Mr. Pett and I to Mr. Grant's coffee-house, whither he
and Sir J. Cutler came to us and had much discourse, mixed discourse, and
so broke up, and so home where I found my poor wife all alone at work, and
the house foul, it being washing day, which troubled me, because that
tomorrow I must be forced to have friends at dinner.  So to my office, and
then home to supper and to bed.

3rd (Shrove Tuesday).  Up and walked to the Temple, and by promise calling
Commissioner Pett, he and I to White Hall to give Mr. Coventry an account
of what we did yesterday.  Thence I to the Privy Seal Office, and there
got a copy of Sir W. Pen's grant to be assistant to Sir J. Minnes,
Comptroller, which, though there be not much in it, yet I intend to stir
up Sir J. Minnes to oppose, only to vex Sir W. Pen.  Thence by water home,
and at noon, by promise, Mrs. Turner and her daughter, and Mrs. Morrice,
came along with Roger Pepys to dinner.  We were as merry as I could be,
having but a bad dinner for them; but so much the better, because of the
dinner which I must have at the end of this month.  And here Mrs. The.
shewed me my name upon her breast as her Valentine, which will cost me
20s.  After dinner I took them down into the wine-cellar, and broached my
tierce of claret for them.  Towards the evening we parted, and I to the
office awhile, and then home to supper and to bed, the sooner having taken
some cold yesterday upon the water, which brings me my usual pain.  This
afternoon Roger Pepys tells me, that for certain the King is for all this
very highly incensed at the Parliament's late opposing the Indulgence;
which I am sorry for, and fear it will breed great discontent.

4th.  Lay long talking with my wife about ordering things in our family,
and then rose and to my office, there collecting an alphabet for my Navy
Manuscript, which, after a short dinner, I returned to and by night
perfected to my great content.  So to other business till 9 at night, and
so home to supper and to bed.

5th.  Rose this morning early, only to try with intention to begin my last
summer's course in rising betimes.  So to my office a little, and then to
Westminster by coach with Sir J. Minnes and Sir W. Batten, in our way
talking of Sir W. Pen's business of his patent, which I think I have put a
stop to wholly, for Sir J. Minnes swears he will never consent to it.
Here to the Lobby, and spoke with my cozen Roger, who is going to
Cambridge to-morrow.  In the Hall I do hear that the Catholiques are in
great hopes for all this, and do set hard upon the King to get Indulgence.
Matters, I hear, are all naught in Ireland, and that the Parliament has
voted, and the people, that is, the Papists, do cry out against the
Commissioners sent by the King; so that they say the English interest will
be lost there.  Thence I went to see my Lord Sandwich, who I found very
ill, and by his cold being several nights hindered from sleep, he is
hardly able to open his eyes, and is very weak and sad upon it, which
troubled me much.  So after talking with Mr. Cooke, whom I found there,
about his folly for looking and troubling me and other friends in getting
him a place (that is, storekeeper of the Navy at Tangier) before there is
any such thing, I returned to the Hall, and thence back with the two
knights home again by coach, where I found Mr. Moore got abroad, and dined
with me, which I was glad to see, he having not been able to go abroad a
great while.  Then came in Mr. Hawley and dined with us, and after dinner
I left them, and to the office, where we sat late, and I do find that I
shall meet with nothing to oppose my growing great in the office but Sir
W. Pen, who is now well again, and comes into the office very brisk, and,
I think, to get up his time that he has been out of the way by being
mighty diligent at the office, which, I pray God, he may be, but I hope by
mine to weary him out, for I am resolved to fall to business as hard as I
can drive, God giving me health.  At my office late, and so home to supper
and to bed.

6th.  Up betimes, and about eight o'clock by coach with four horses, with
Sir J. Minnes and Sir W. Batten, to Woolwich, a pleasant day.  There at
the yard we consulted and ordered several matters, and thence to the rope
yard and did the like, and so into Mr. Falconer's, where we had some fish,
which we brought with us, dressed; and there dined with us his new wife,
which had been his mayde, but seems to be a genteel woman, well enough
bred and discreet.  Thence after dinner back to Deptford, where we did as
before, and so home, good discourse in our way, Sir J. Minnes being good
company, though a simple man enough as to the business of his office, but
we did discourse at large again about Sir W. Pen's patent to be his
assistant, and I perceive he is resolved never to let it pass. To my
office, and thence to Sir W. Batten's, where Major Holmes was lately come
from the Streights, but do tell me strange stories of the faults of Cooper
his master, put in by me, which I do not believe, but am sorry to hear and
must take some course to have him removed, though I believe that the
Captain is proud, and the fellow is not supple enough to him.  So to my
office again to set down my Journall, and so home and to bed.  This
evening my boy Waynman's brother was with me, and I did tell him again
that I must part with the boy, for I will not keep him.  He desires my
keeping him a little longer till he can provide for him, which I am
willing for a while to do.  This day it seems the House of Commons have
been very high against the Papists, being incensed by the stir which they
make for their having an Indulgence; which, without doubt, is a great
folly in them to be so hot upon at this time, when they see how averse
already the House have showed themselves from it.  This evening Mr. Povy
was with me at my office, and tells me that my Lord Sandwich is this day
so ill that he is much afeard of him, which puts me to great pain, not
more for my own sake than for his poor family's.

7th.  Up betimes, and to the office, where some of us sat all the morning.
At noon Sir W. Pen began to talk with me like a counterfeit rogue very
kindly about his house and getting bills signed for all our works, but he
is a cheating fellow, and so I let him talk and answered nothing.  So we
parted.  I to dinner, and there met The. Turner, who is come on foot in a
frolique to beg me to get a place at sea for John, their man, which is a
rogue; but, however, it may be, the sea may do him good in reclaiming him,
and therefore I will see what I can do.  She dined with me; and after
dinner I took coach, and carried her home; in our way, in Cheapside,
lighting and giving her a dozen pair of white gloves as my Valentine.
Thence to my Lord Sandwich, who is gone to Sir W. Wheeler's for his more
quiet being, where he slept well last night, and I took him very merry,
playing at cards, and much company with him. So I left him, and Creed and
I to Westminster Hall, and there walked a good while.  He told me how for
some words of my Lady Gerard's

     [Jane, wife of Lord Gerard (see ante, January 1st, 1662-63).  The
     king had previously put a slight upon Lady Gerard, probably at the
     instigation of Lady Castlemaine, as the two ladies were not friends.
     On the 4th of January of this same year Lady Gerard had given a
     supper to the king and queen, when the king withdrew from the party
     and proceeded to the house of Lady Castlemaine, and remained there
     throughout the evening (see Steinman's "Memoir of Barbara, Duchess
     of Cleveland," 1871, p. 47).]

against my Lady Castlemaine to the Queen, the King did the other day
affront her in going out to dance with her at a ball, when she desired it
as the ladies do, and is since forbid attending the Queen by the King;
which is much talked of, my Lord her husband being a great favourite.
Thence by water home and to my office, wrote by the post and so home to
bed.

8th (Lord's day).  Being sent to by Sir J. Minnes to know whether I would
go with him to White Hall to-day, I rose but could not get ready before he
was gone, but however I walked thither and heard Dr. King, Bishop of
Chichester, make a good and eloquent sermon upon these words, "They that
sow in tears, shall reap in joy."  Thence (the chappell in Lent being hung
with black, and no anthem sung after sermon, as at other times), to my
Lord Sandwich at Sir W. Wheeler's.  I found him out of order, thinking
himself to be in a fit of an ague, but in the afternoon he was very
cheery.  I dined with Sir William, where a good but short dinner, not
better than one of mine commonly of a Sunday.  After dinner up to my Lord,
there being Mr. Kumball.  My Lord, among other discourse, did tell us of
his great difficultys passed in the business of the Sound, and of his
receiving letters from the King there, but his sending them by Whetstone
was a great folly; and the story how my Lord being at dinner with Sydney,
one of his fellow plenipotentiarys and his mortal enemy, did see
Whetstone, and put off his hat three times to him, but the fellow would
not be known, which my Lord imputed to his coxcombly humour (of which he
was full), and bid Sydney take notice of him too, when at the very time he
had letters in his pocket from the King, as it proved afterwards.  And
Sydney afterwards did find it out at Copenhagen, the Dutch Commissioners
telling him how my Lord Sandwich had hired one of their ships to carry
back Whetstone to Lubeck, he being come from Flanders from the King.  But
I cannot but remember my Lord's aequanimity in all these affairs with
admiration.  Thence walked home, in my way meeting Mr. Moore, with whom I
took a turn or two in the street among the drapers in Paul's Churchyard,
talking of business, and so home to bed.

9th.  Up betimes, to my office, where all the morning.  About noon Sir J.
Robinson, Lord Mayor, desiring way through the garden from the Tower,
called in at the office and there invited me (and Sir W. Pen, who happened
to be in the way) to dinner, which we did; and there had a great Lent
dinner of fish, little flesh.  And thence he and I in his coach, against
my will (for I am resolved to shun too great fellowship with him) to White
Hall, but came too late, the Duke having been with our fellow officers
before we came, for which I was sorry.  Thence he and I to walk one turn
in the Park, and so home by coach, and I to my office, where late, and so
home to supper and bed.  There dined with us to-day Mr. Slingsby, of the
Mint, who showed us all the new pieces both gold and silver (examples of
them all), that are made for the King, by Blondeau's' way; and compared
them with those made for Oliver.  The pictures of the latter made by
Symons, and of the King by one Rotyr, a German, I think, that dined with
us also.  He extolls those of Rotyr's above the others; and, indeed, I
think they are the better, because the sweeter of the two; but, upon my
word, those of the Protector are more like in my mind, than the King's,
but both very well worth seeing.  The crowns of Cromwell are now sold, it
seems, for 25s. and 30s. apiece.

10th.  Up and to my office all the morning, and great pleasure it is to be
doing my business betimes.  About noon Sir J. Minnes came to me and staid
half an hour with me in my office talking about his business with Sir W.
Pen, and (though with me an old doter) yet he told me freely how sensible
he is of Sir W. Pen's treachery in this business, and what poor ways he
has taken all along to ingratiate himself by making Mr. Turner write out
things for him and then he gives them to the Duke, and how he directed him
to give Mr. Coventry L100 for his place, but that Mr. Coventry did give
him L20 back again.  All this I am pleased to hear that his knavery is
found out.  Dined upon a poor Lenten dinner at home, my wife being vexed
at a fray this morning with my Lady Batten about my boy's going thither to
turn the watercock with their maydes' leave, but my Lady was mighty high
upon it and she would teach his mistress better manners, which my wife
answered aloud that she might hear, that she could learn little manners of
her.  After dinner to my office, and there we sat all the afternoon till 8
at night, and so wrote my letters by the post and so before 9 home, which
is rare with me of late, I staying longer, but with multitude of business
my head akes, and so I can stay no longer, but home to supper and to bed.

11th.  Up betimes, and to my office, walked a little in the garden with
Sir W. Batten, talking about the difference between his Lady and my wife
yesterday, and I doubt my wife is to blame.  About noon had news by Mr.
Wood that Butler, our chief witness against Field, was sent by him to New
England contrary to our desire, which made me mad almost; and so Sir J.
Minnes, Sir W. Pen, and I dined together at Trinity House, and thither
sent for him to us and told him our minds, which he seemed not to value
much, but went away.  I wrote and sent an express to Walthamstow to Sir W.
Pen, who is gone thither this morning, to tell him of it.  However, in the
afternoon Wood sends us word that he has appointed another to go, who
shall overtake the ship in the Downes.  So I was late at the office, among
other things writing to the Downes, to the Commander-in-Chief, and putting
things into the surest course I could to help the business.  So home and
to bed.

12th.  Up betimes and to my office all the morning with Captain Cocke
ending their account of their Riga contract for hemp.  So home to dinner,
my head full of business against the office.  After dinner comes my uncle
Thomas with a letter to my father, wherein, as we desire, he and his son
do order their tenants to pay their rents to us, which pleases me well. In
discourse he tells me my uncle Wight thinks much that I do never see them,
and they have reason, but I do apprehend that they have been too far
concerned with my uncle Thomas against us, so that I have had no mind
hitherto, but now I shall go see them.  He being gone, I to the office,
where at the choice of maisters and chyrurgeons for the fleet now going
out, I did my business as I could wish, both for the persons I had a mind
to serve, and in getting the warrants signed drawn by my clerks, which I
was afeard of.  Sat late, and having done I went home, where I found Mary
Ashwell come to live with us, of whom I hope well, and pray God she may
please us, which, though it cost me something, yet will give me much
content.  So to supper and to bed, and find by her discourse and carriage
to-night that she is not proud, but will do what she is bid, but for want
of being abroad knows not how to give the respect to her mistress, as she
will do when she is told it, she having been used only to little children,
and there was a kind of a mistress over them.  Troubled all night with my
cold, I being quite hoarse with it that I could not speak to be heard at
all almost.

13th.  Up pretty early and to my office all the morning busy.  At noon
home to dinner expecting Ashwell's father, who was here in the morning and
promised to come but he did not, but there came in Captain Grove, and I
found him to be a very stout man, at least in his discourse he would be
thought so, and I do think that he is, and one that bears me great respect
and deserves to be encouraged for his care in all business. Abroad by
water with my wife and Ashwell, and left them at Mr. Pierce's, and I to
Whitehall and St. James's Park (there being no Commission for Tangier
sitting to-day as I looked for) where I walked an hour or two with great
pleasure, it being a most pleasant day.  So to Mrs. Hunt's, and there
found my wife, and so took them up by coach, and carried them to Hide
Park, where store of coaches and good faces.  Here till night, and so home
and to my office to write by the post, and so to supper and to bed.

14th.  Up betimes and to my office, where we sat all the morning, and a
great rant I did give to Mr. Davis, of Deptford, and others about their
usage of Michell, in his Bewpers,--[Bewpers is the old name for
bunting.]--which he serves in for flaggs, which did trouble me, but yet it
was in defence of what was truth.  So home to dinner, where Creed dined
with me, and walked a good while in the garden with me after dinner,
talking, among other things, of the poor service which Sir J. Lawson did
really do in the Streights, for which all this great fame and honour done
him is risen.  So to my office, where all the afternoon giving maisters
their warrants for this voyage, for which I hope hereafter to get
something at their coming home.  In the evening my wife and I and Ashwell
walked in the garden, and I find she is a pretty ingenuous

     [For ingenious.  The distinction of the two words ingenious and
     ingenuous by which the former indicates mental, and the second moral
     qualities, was not made in Pepys's day.]

girl at all sorts of fine work, which pleases me very well, and I hope
will be very good entertainment for my wife without much cost.  So to
write by the post, and so home to supper and to bed.

15th (Lord's day).  Up and with my wife and her woman Ashwell the first
time to church, where our pew was so full with Sir J. Minnes's sister and
her daughter, that I perceive, when we come all together, some of us must
be shut out, but I suppose we shall come to some order what to do therein.
Dined at home, and to church again in the afternoon, and so home, and I to
my office till the evening doing one thing or other and reading my vows as
I am bound every Lord's day, and so home to supper and talk, and Ashwell
is such good company that I think we shall be very lucky in her.  So to
prayers and to bed.  This day the weather, which of late has been very hot
and fair, turns very wet and cold, and all the church time this afternoon
it thundered mightily, which I have not heard a great while.

16th.  Up very betimes and to my office, where, with several Masters of
the King's ships, Sir J. Minnes and I advising upon the business of
Slopps, wherein the seaman is so much abused by the Pursers, and that
being done, then I home to dinner, and so carried my wife to her mother's,
set her down and Ashwell to my Lord's lodging, there left her, and I to
the Duke, where we met of course, and talked of our Navy matters.  Then to
the Commission of Tangier, and there, among other things, had my Lord
Peterborough's Commission read over; and Mr. Secretary Bennet did make his
querys upon it, in order to the drawing one for my Lord Rutherford more
regularly, that being a very extravagant thing.  Here long discoursing
upon my Lord Rutherford's despatch, and so broke up, and so going out of
the Court I met with Mr. Coventry, and so he and I walked half an hour in
the long Stone Gallery, where we discoursed of many things, among others
how the Treasurer doth intend to come to pay in course, which is the thing
of the world that will do the King the greatest service in the Navy, and
which joys my heart to hear of.  He tells me of the business of Sir J.
Minnes and Sir W. Pen, which I knew before, but took no notice or little
that I did know it.  But he told me it was chiefly to make Mr. Pett's
being joyned with Sir W. Batten to go down the better, and do tell me how
he well sees that neither one nor the other can do their duties without
help.  But however will let it fall at present without doing more in it to
see whether they will do their duties themselves, which he will see, and
saith they do not.  We discoursed of many other things to my great content
and so parted, and I to my wife at my Lord's lodgings, where I heard
Ashwell play first upon the harpsicon, and I find she do play pretty well,
which pleaseth me very well.  Thence home by coach, buying at the Temple
the printed virginal-book for her, and so home and to my office a while,
and so home and to supper and to bed.

17th.  Up betimes and to my office a while, and then home and to Sir W.
Batten, with whom by coach to St. Margaret's Hill in Southwark, where the
judge of the Admiralty came, and the rest of the Doctors of the Civill
law, and some other Commissioners, whose Commission of Oyer and Terminer
was read, and then the charge, given by Dr. Exton, which methought was
somewhat dull, though he would seem to intend it to be very rhetoricall,
saying that justice had two wings, one of which spread itself over the
land, and the other over the water, which was this Admiralty Court.  That
being done, and the jury called, they broke up, and to dinner to a tavern
hard by, where a great dinner, and I with them; but I perceive that this
Court is yet but in its infancy (as to its rising again), and their design
and consultation was, I could overhear them, how to proceed with the most
solemnity, and spend time, there being only two businesses to do, which of
themselves could not spend much time.  In the afternoon to the court
again, where, first, Abraham, the boatswain of the King's pleasure boat,
was tried for drowning a man; and next, Turpin, accused by our wicked
rogue Field, for stealing the King's timber; but after full examination,
they were both acquitted, and as I was glad of the first, for the saving
the man's life, so I did take the other as a very good fortune to us; for
if Turpin had been found guilty, it would have sounded very ill in the
ears of all the world, in the business between Field and us.  So home with
my mind at very great ease, over the water to the Tower, and thence, there
being nobody at the office, we being absent, and so no office could be
kept.  Sir W. Batten and I to my Lord Mayor's, where we found my Lord with
Colonel Strangways and Sir Richard Floyd, Parliament-men, in the cellar
drinking, where we sat with them, and then up; and by and by comes in Sir
Richard Ford.  In our drinking, which was always going, we had many
discourses, but from all of them I do find Sir R. Ford a very able man of
his brains and tongue, and a scholler.  But my Lord Mayor I find to be a
talking, bragging Bufflehead, a fellow that would be thought to have led
all the City in the great business of bringing in the King, and that
nobody understood his plots, and the dark lanthorn he walked by; but led
them and plowed with them as oxen and asses (his own words) to do what he
had a mind when in every discourse I observe him to be as very a coxcomb
as I could have thought had been in the City.  But he is resolved to do
great matters in pulling down the shops quite through the City, as he hath
done in many places, and will make a thorough passage quite through the
City, through Canning-street, which indeed will be very fine.  And then
his precept, which he, in vain-glory, said he had drawn up himself, and
hath printed it, against coachmen and carrmen affronting of the gentry in
the street; it is drawn so like a fool, and some faults were openly found
in it, that I believe he will have so much wit as not to proceed upon it
though it be printed. Here we staid talking till eleven at night, Sir R.
Ford breaking to my Lord our business of our patent to be justices of the
Peace in the City, which he stuck at mightily; but, however, Sir R. Ford
knows him to be a fool, and so in his discourse he made him appear, and
cajoled him into a consent to it: but so as I believe when he comes to his
right mind tomorrow he will be of another opinion; and though Sir R. Ford
moved it very weightily and neatly, yet I had rather it had been spared
now.  But to see how he do rant, and pretend to sway all the City in the
Court of Aldermen, and says plainly that they cannot do, nor will he
suffer them to do, any thing but what he pleases; nor is there any officer
of the City but of his putting in; nor any man that could have kept the
City for the King thus well and long but him.  And if the country can be
preserved, he will undertake that the City shall not dare to stir again.
When I am confident there is no man almost in the City cares a turd for
him, nor hath he brains to outwit any ordinary tradesman.  So home and
wrote a letter to Commissioner Pett to Chatham by all means to compose the
business between Major Holmes and Cooper his master, and so to bed.

18th.  Wake betimes and talk a while with my wife about a wench that she
has hired yesterday, which I would have enquired of before she comes, she
having lived in great families, and so up and to my office, where all the
morning, and at noon home to dinner.  After dinner by water to Redriffe,
my wife and Ashwell with me, and so walked and left them at Halfway house;
I to Deptford, where up and down the store-houses, and on board two or
three ships now getting ready to go to sea, and so back, and find my wife
walking in the way.  So home again, merry with our Ashwell, who is a merry
jade, and so awhile to my office, and then home to supper, and to bed.
This day my tryangle, which was put in tune yesterday, did please me very
well, Ashwell playing upon it pretty well.

19th.  Up betimes and to Woolwich all alone by water, where took the
officers most abed.  I walked and enquired how all matters and businesses
go, and by and by to the Clerk of the Cheque's house, and there eat some
of his good Jamaica brawne, and so walked to Greenwich.  Part of the way
Deane walking with me; talking of the pride and corruption of most of his
fellow officers of the yard, and which I believe to be true.  So to
Deptford, where I did the same to great content, and see the people begin
to value me as they do the rest.  At noon Mr. Wayth took me to his house,
where I dined, and saw his wife, a pretty woman, and had a good fish
dinner, and after dinner he and I walked to Redriffe talking of several
errors in the Navy, by which I learned a great deal, and was glad of his
company.  So by water home, and by and by to the office, where we sat till
almost 9 at night.  So after doing my own business in my office, writing
letters, &c., home to supper, and to bed, being weary and vexed that I do
not find other people so willing to do business as myself, when I have
taken pains to find out what in the yards is wanting and fitting to be
done.

20th.  Up betimes and over the water, and walked to Deptford, where up and
down the yarde, and met the two clerks of the Cheques to conclude by our
method their callbooks, which we have done to great perfection, and so
walked home again, where I found my wife in great pain abed .  .  .  .
I staid and dined by her, and after dinner walked forth, and by water to
the Temple, and in Fleet Street bought me a little sword, with gilt
handle, cost 23s., and silk stockings to the colour of my riding cloth
suit, cost I 5s., and bought me a belt there too, cost 15s., and so
calling at my brother's I find he has got a new maid, very likely girl, I
wish he do not play the fool with her.  Thence homewards, and meeting with
Mr. Kirton's kinsman in Paul's Church Yard, he and I to a coffee-house;
where I hear how there had like to have been a surprizall of Dublin by
some discontented protestants, and other things of like nature; and it
seems the Commissioners have carried themselves so high for the Papists
that the others will not endure it.  Hewlett and some others are taken and
clapped up; and they say the King hath sent over to dissolve the
Parliament there, who went very high against the Commissioners.  Pray God
send all well!  Hence home and in comes Captain Ferrers and by and by Mr.
Bland to see me and sat talking with me till 9 or 10 at night, and so
good night.  The Captain to bid my wife to his child's christening.  So my
wife being pretty well again and Ashwell there we spent the evening
pleasantly, and so to bed.

21st.  Up betimes and to my office, where busy all the morning, and at
noon, after a very little dinner, to it again, and by and by, by
appointment, our full board met, and Sir Philip Warwick and Sir Robert
Long came from my Lord Treasurer to speak with us about the state of the
debts of the Navy; and how to settle it, so as to begin upon the new
foundation of L200,000 per annum, which the King is now resolved not to
exceed.  This discourse done, and things put in a way of doing, they went
away, and Captain Holmes being called in he began his high complaint
against his Master Cooper, and would have him forthwith discharged. Which
I opposed, not in his defence but for the justice of proceeding not to
condemn a man unheard, upon [which] we fell from one word to another that
we came to very high terms, such as troubled me, though all and the worst
that I ever said was that that was insolently or ill mannerdly spoken.
When he told me that it was well it was here that I said it. But all the
officers, Sir G. Carteret, Sir J. Minnes, Sir W. Batten, and Sir W. Pen
cried shame of it.  At last he parted and we resolved to bring the dispute
between him and his Master to a trial next week, wherein I shall not at
all concern myself in defence of any thing that is unhandsome on the
Master's part nor willingly suffer him to have any wrong.  So we rose and
I to my office, troubled though sensible that all the officers are of
opinion that he has carried himself very much unbecoming him.  So wrote
letters by the post, and home to supper and to bed.

22d (Lord's day).  Up betimes and in my office wrote out our bill for the
Parliament about our being made justices of Peace in the City.  So home
and to church, where a dull formall fellow that prayed for the Right Hon.
John Lord Barkeley, Lord President of Connaught, &c.  So home to dinner,
and after dinner my wife and I and her woman by coach to Westminster,
where being come too soon for the Christening we took up Mr. Creed and
went out to take some ayre, as far as Chelsey and further, I lighting
there and letting them go on with the coach while I went to the church
expecting to see the young ladies of the school, Ashwell desiring me, but
I could not get in far enough, and so came out and at the coach's coming
back went in again and so back to Westminster, and led my wife and her to
Captain Ferrers, and I to my Lord Sandwich, and with him talking a good
while; I find the Court would have this Indulgence go on, but the
Parliament are against it.  Matters in Ireland are full of discontent.
Thence with Mr. Creed to Captain Ferrers, where many fine ladies; the
house well and prettily furnished.  She [Mrs. Ferrers] lies in, in great
state, Mr. G. Montagu, Collonel Williams, Cromwell that was,

     [Colonel Williams--"Cromwell that was"--appears to have been Henry
     Cromwell, grandson of Sir Oliver Cromwell, and first cousin, once
     removed, to the Protector.  He was seated at Bodsey House, in the
     parish of Ramsey, which had been his father's residence, and held
     the commission of a colonel.  He served in several Parliaments for
     Huntingdonshire, voting, in 1660, for the restoration of the
     monarchy; and as he knew the name of Cromwell would not be grateful
     to the Court, he disused it, and assumed that of Williams, which had
     belonged to his ancestors; and he is so styled in a list of knights
     of the proposed Order of the Royal Oak.  He died at Huntingdon, 3rd
     August, 1673.  (Abridged from Noble's "Memoirs of the Cromwells,"
     vol. i., p. 70.)--B.]

and Mrs. Wright as proxy for my Lady Jemimah, were witnesses.  Very pretty
and plentiful entertainment, could not get away till nine at night, and so
home.  My coach cost me 7s.  So to prayers, and to bed. This day though I
was merry enough yet I could not get yesterday's quarrel out of my mind,
and a natural fear of being challenged by Holmes for the words I did give
him, though nothing but what did become me as a principal officer.

23rd.  Up betimes and to my office, before noon my wife and I eat
something, thinking to have gone abroad together, but in comes Mr. Hunt,
who we were forced to stay to dinner, and so while that was got ready he
and I abroad about 2 or 3 small businesses of mine, and so back to dinner,
and after dinner he went away, and my wife and I and Ashwell by coach, set
my wife down at her mother's and Ashwell at my Lord's, she going to see
her father and mother, and I to Whitehall, being fearful almost, so poor a
spirit I have, of meeting Major Holmes.  By and by the Duke comes, and we
with him about our usual business, and then the Committee for Tangier,
where, after reading my Lord Rutherford's commission and consented to, Sir
R. Ford, Sir W. Rider, and I were chosen to bring in some laws for the
Civill government of it, which I am little able to do, but am glad to be
joyned with them, for I shall learn something of them.  Thence to see my
Lord Sandwich, and who should I meet at the door but Major Holmes.  He
would have gone away, but I told him I would not spoil his visitt, and
would have gone, but however we fell to discourse and he did as good as
desire excuse for the high words that did pass in his heat the other day,
which I was willing enough to close with, and after telling him my mind we
parted, and I left him to speak with my Lord, and I by coach home, where I
found Will. Howe come home to-day with my wife, and staid with us all
night, staying late up singing songs, and then he and I to bed together in
Ashwell's bed and she with my wife. This the first time that I ever lay in
the room.  This day Greatorex brought me a very pretty weather-glass for
heat and cold.

     [The thermometer was invented in the sixteenth century, but it is
     disputed who the inventor was.  The claims of Santorio are supported
     by Borelli and Malpighi, while the title of Cornelius Drebbel is
     considered undoubted by Boerhaave.  Galileo's air thermometer, made
     before 1597, was the foundation of accurate thermometry.  Galileo
     also invented the alcohol thermometer about 1611 or 1612.  Spirit
     thermometers were made for the Accademia del Cimento, and described
     in the Memoirs of that academy.  When the academy was dissolved by
     order of the Pope, some of these thermometers were packed away in a
     box, and were not discovered until early in the nineteenth century.
     Robert Hooke describes the manufacture and graduation of
     thermometers in his "Micrographia" (1665).]

24th.  Lay pretty long, that is, till past six o'clock, and them up and W.
Howe and I very merry together, till having eat our breakfast, he went
away, and I to my office.  By and by Sir J. Minnes and I to the
Victualling Office by appointment to meet several persons upon stating the
demands of some people of money from the King.  Here we went into their
Bakehouse, and saw all the ovens at work, and good bread too, as ever I
would desire to eat.  Thence Sir J. Minnes and I homewards calling at
Browne's, the mathematician in the Minnerys, with a design of buying
White's ruler to measure timber with, but could not agree on the price. So
home, and to dinner, and so to my office, where we sat anon, and among
other things had Cooper's business tried against Captain Holmes, but I
find Cooper a fuddling, troublesome fellow, though a good artist, and so
am contented to have him turned out of his place, nor did I see reason to
say one word against it, though I know what they did against him was with
great envy and pride.  So anon broke up, and after writing letters, &c.,
home to supper and to bed.

25th (Lady-day).  Up betimes and to my office, where all the morning, at
noon dined and to the Exchange, and thence to the Sun Tavern, to my Lord
Rutherford, and dined with him, and some others, his officers, and Scotch
gentlemen, of fine discourse and education.  My Lord used me with great
respect, and discoursed upon his business as with one that he did esteem
of, and indeed I do believe that this garrison is likely to come to
something under him.  By and by he went away, forgetting to take leave of
me, my back being turned, looking upon the aviary, which is there very
pretty, and the birds begin to sing well this spring.  Thence home and to
my office till night, reading over and consulting upon the book and Ruler
that I bought this morning of Browne concerning the lyne of numbers, in
which I find much pleasure.  This evening came Captain Grove about hiring
ships for Tangier.  I did hint to him my desire that I could make some
lawfull profit thereof, which he promises that he will tell me of all that
he gets and that I shall have a share, which I did not demand, but did
silently consent to it, and money I perceive something will be got
thereby.  At night Mr. Bland came and sat with me at my office till late,
and so I home and to bed.  This day being washing day and my maid Susan
ill, or would be thought so, put my house so out of order that we had no
pleasure almost in anything, my wife being troubled thereat for want of a
good cook-maid, and moreover I cannot have my dinner as I ought in memory
of my being cut for the stone, but I must have it a day or two hence.

26th.  Up betimes and to my office, leaving my wife in bed to take her
physique, myself also not being out of some pain to-day by some cold that
I have got by the sudden change of the weather from hot to cold.  This day
is five years since it pleased God to preserve me at my being cut of the
stone, of which I bless God I am in all respects well.  Only now and then
upon taking cold I have some pain, but otherwise in very good health
always.  But I could not get my feast to be kept to-day as it used to be,
because of my wife's being ill and other disorders by my servants being
out of order.  This morning came a new cook-maid at L4 per annum, the
first time I ever did give so much, but we hope it will be nothing lost by
keeping a good cook.  She did live last at my Lord Monk's house, and
indeed at dinner did get what there was very prettily ready and neat for
me, which did please me much.  This morning my uncle Thomas was with me
according to agreement, and I paid him the L50, which was against my heart
to part with, and yet I must be contented; I used him very kindly, and I
desire to continue so voyd of any discontent as to my estate, that I may
follow my business the better.  At the Change I met him again, with intent
to have met with my uncle Wight to have made peace with him, with whom by
my long absence I fear I shall have a difference, but he was not there, so
we missed.  All the afternoon sat at the office about business till 9 or
10 at night, and so dispatch business and home to supper and to bed.  My
maid Susan went away to-day, I giving her something for her lodging and
diet somewhere else a while that I might have room for my new maid.

27th.  Up betimes and at my office all the morning, at noon to the
Exchange, and there by appointment met my uncles Thomas and Wight, and
from thence with them to a tavern, and there paid my uncle Wight three
pieces of gold for himself, my aunt, and their son that is dead, left by
my uncle Robert, and read over our agreement with my uncle Thomas and the
state of our debts and legacies, and so good friendship I think is made up
between us all, only we have the worst of it in having so much money to
pay.  Thence I to the Exchequer again, and thence with Creed into Fleet
Street, and calling at several places about business; in passing, at the
Hercules pillars he and I dined though late, and thence with one that we
found there, a friend of Captain Ferrers I used to meet at the playhouse,
they would have gone to some gameing house, but I would not but parted,
and staying a little in Paul's Churchyard, at the foreign Bookseller's
looking over some Spanish books, and with much ado keeping myself from
laying out money there, as also with them, being willing enough to have
gone to some idle house with them, I got home, and after a while at my
office, to supper, and to bed.

28th.  Up betimes and to my office, where all the morning.  Dined at home
and Creed with me, and though a very cold day and high wind, yet I took
him by land to Deptford, my common walk, where I did some little
businesses, and so home again walking both forwards and backwards, as much
along the street as we could to save going by water.  So home, and after
being a little while hearing Ashwell play on the tryangle, to my office,
and there late, writing a chiding letter--to my poor father about his
being so unwilling to come to an account with me, which I desire he might
do, that I may know what he spends, and how to order the estate so as to
pay debts and legacys as far as may be.  So late home to supper and to
bed.

29th (Lord's day).  Waked as I used to do betimes, but being Sunday and
very cold I lay long, it raining and snowing very hard, which I did never
think it would have done any more this year.  Up and to church, home to
dinner.  After dinner in comes Mr. Moore, and sat and talked with us a
good while; among other things telling me, that [neither] my Lord nor he
are under apprehensions of the late discourse in the House of Commons,
concerning resumption of Crowne lands, which I am very glad of.  He being
gone, up to my chamber, where my wife and Ashwell and I all the afternoon
talking and laughing, and by and by I a while to my office, reading over
some papers which I found in my man William's chest of drawers, among
others some old precedents concerning the practice of this office
heretofore, which I am glad to find and shall make use of, among others an
oath, which the Principal Officers were bound to swear at their entrance
into their offices, which I would be glad were in use still.  So home and
fell hard to make up my monthly accounts, letting my family go to bed
after prayers.  I staid up long, and find myself, as I think, fully worth
L670.  So with good comfort to bed, finding that though it be but little,
yet I do get ground every month.  I pray God it may continue so with me.

30th.  Up betimes and found my weather-glass sunk again just to the same
position which it was last night before I had any fire made in my chamber,
which had made it rise in two hours time above half a degree. So to my
office where all the morning and at the Glass-house, and after dinner by
coach with Sir W. Pen I carried my wife and her woman to Westminster, they
to visit Mrs. Ferrers and Clerke, we to the Duke, where we did our usual
business, and afterwards to the Tangier Committee, where among other
things we all of us sealed and signed the Contract for building the Mole
with my Lord Tiviott, Sir J. Lawson, and Mr. Cholmeley. A thing I did with
a very ill will, because a thing which I did not at all understand, nor
any or few of the whole board.  We did also read over the propositions for
the Civill government and Law Merchant of the town, as they were agreed on
this morning at the Glasshouse by Sir R. Ford and Sir W. Rider, who drew
them, Mr. Povy and myself as a Committee appointed to prepare them, which
were in substance but not in the manner of executing them independent
wholly upon the Governor consenting to. Thence to see my Lord Sandwich,
who I found very merry and every day better and better.  So to my wife,
who waited my coming at my Lord's lodgings, and took her up and by coach
home, where no sooner come but to bed, finding myself just in the same
condition I was lately by the extreme cold weather, my pores stopt and so
my body all inflamed and itching.  So keeping myself warm and provoking
myself to a moderate sweat, and so somewhat better in the morning,

31st.  And to that purpose I lay long talking with my wife about my
father's coming, which I expect to-day, coming up with the horses brought
up for my Lord.  Up and to my office, where doing business all the
morning, and at Sir W. Batten's, whither Mr. Gauden and many others came
to us about business.  Then home to dinner, where W. Joyce came, and he
still a talking impertinent fellow.  So to the office again, and hearing
by and by that Madam Clerke, Pierce, and others were come to see my wife I
stepped in and staid a little with them, and so to the office again, where
late, and so home to supper and to bed.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                  APRIL
                                  1663

April 1st.  Up betimes and abroad to my brother's, but he being gone out I
went to the Temple to my Cozen Roger Pepys, to see and talk with him a
little; who tells me that, with much ado, the Parliament do agree to throw
down Popery; but he says it is with so much spite and passion, and an
endeavour of bringing all Non-conformists into the same condition, that he
is afeard matters will not yet go so well as he could wish. Thence back to
my brother's, in my way meeting Mr. Moore and talking with him about
getting me some money, and calling at my brother's they tell me that my
brother is still abroad, and that my father is not yet up.  At which I
wondered, not thinking that he was come, though I expected him, because I
looked for him at my house.  So I up to his bedside and staid an hour or
two talking with him.  Among other things he tells me how unquiett my
mother is grown, that he is not able to live almost with her, if it were
not for Pall.  All other matters are as well as upon so hard conditions
with my uncle Thomas we can expect them.  I left him in bed, being very
weary, to come to my house to-night or tomorrow, when he pleases, and so I
home, calling on the virginall maker, buying a rest for myself to tune my
tryangle, and taking one of his people along with me to put it in tune
once more, by which I learned how to go about it myself for the time to
come.  So to dinner, my wife being lazily in bed all this morning.
Ashwell and I dined below together, and a pretty girl she is, and I hope
will give my wife and myself good content, being very humble and active,
my cook maid do also dress my meat very well and neatly.  So to my office
all the afternoon till night, and then home, calling at Sir W. Batten's,
where was Sir J. Minnes and Sir W. Pen, I telling them how by my letter
this day from Commissioner Pett I hear that his Stempeese

     [Stemples, cross pieces which are put into a frame of woodwork to
     cure and strengthen a shaft.]

he undertook for the new ship at Woolwich, which we have been so long, to
our shame, in looking for, do prove knotty and not fit for service. Lord!
how Sir J. Minnes, like a mad coxcomb, did swear and stamp, swearing that
Commissioner Pett hath still the old heart against the King that ever he
had, and that this was his envy against his brother that was to build the
ship, and all the damnable reproaches in the world, at which I was
ashamed, but said little; but, upon the whole, I find him still a fool,
led by the nose with stories told by Sir W. Batten, whether with or
without reason.  So, vexed in my mind to see things ordered so unlike
gentlemen, or men of reason, I went home and to bed.

2nd.  Up by very betimes and to my office, where all the morning till
towards noon, and then by coach to Westminster Hall with Sir W. Pen, and
while he went up to the House I walked in the Hall with Mr. Pierce, the
surgeon, that I met there, talking about my business the other day with
Holmes, whom I told my mind, and did freely tell how I do depend upon my
care and diligence in my employment to bear me out against the pride of
Holmes or any man else in things that are honest, and much to that purpose
which I know he will make good use of.  But he did advise me to take as
few occasions as I can of disobliging Commanders, though this is one that
every body is glad to hear that he do receive a check.  By and by the
House rises and I home again with Sir W. Pen, and all the way talking of
the same business, to whom I did on purpose tell him my mind freely, and
let him see that it must be a wiser man than Holmes (in these very words)
that shall do me any hurt while I do my duty.  I to remember him of
Holmes's words against Sir J. Minnes, that he was a knave, rogue, coward,
and that he will kick him and pull him by the ears, which he remembered
all of them and may have occasion to do it hereafter to his owne shame to
suffer them to be spoke in his presence without any reply but what I did
give him, which, has caused all this feud.  But I am glad of it, for I
would now and then take occasion to let the world know that I will not be
made a novice.  Sir W. Pen took occasion to speak about my wife's
strangeness to him and his daughter, and that believing at last that it
was from his taking of Sarah to be his maid, he hath now put her away, at
which I am glad.  He told me, that this day the King hath sent to the
House his concurrence wholly with them against the Popish priests,
Jesuits, &c., which gives great content, and I am glad of it.  So home,
whither my father comes and dines with us, and being willing to be merry
with him I made myself so as much as I could, and so to the office, where
we sat all the afternoon, and at night having done all my business I went
home to my wife and father, and supped, and so to bed, my father lying
with me in Ashwell's bed in the red chamber.

3rd.  Waked betimes and talked half an hour with my father, and so I rose
and to my office, and about 9 o'clock by water from the Old Swan to White
Hall and to chappell, which being most monstrous full, I could not go into
my pew, but sat among the quire.  Dr. Creeton, the Scotchman, preached a
most admirable, good, learned, honest and most severe sermon, yet
comicall, upon the words of the woman concerning the Virgin, "Blessed is
the womb that bare thee (meaning Christ) and the paps that gave thee suck;
and he answered, Nay; rather is he blessed that heareth the word of God,
and keepeth it."  He railed bitterly ever and anon against John Calvin,
and his brood, the Presbyterians, and against the present term, now in
use, of "tender consciences."  He ripped up Hugh Peters (calling him the
execrable skellum--[A villain or scoundrel; the cant term for a
thief.]--), his preaching and stirring up the maids of the city to bring
in their bodkins and thimbles.  Thence going out of White Hall, I met
Captain Grove, who did give me a letter directed to myself from himself. I
discerned money to be in it, and took it, knowing, as I found it to be,
the proceed of the place I have got him to be, the taking up of vessels
for Tangier.  But I did not open it till I came home to my office, and
there I broke it open, not looking into it till all the money was out,
that I might say I saw no money in the paper, if ever I should be
questioned about it.  There was a piece in gold and L4 in silver.  So home
to dinner with my father and wife, and after dinner up to my tryangle,
where I found that above my expectation Ashwell has very good principles
of musique and can take out a lesson herself with very little pains, at
which I am very glad.  Thence away back again by water to Whitehall, and
there to the Tangier Committee, where we find ourselves at a great stand;
the establishment being but L70,000 per annum, and the forces to be kept
in the town at the least estimate that my Lord Rutherford can be got to
bring it is L53,000.  The charge of this year's work of the Mole will be
L13,000; besides L1000 a-year to my Lord Peterborough as a pension, and
the fortifications and contingencys, which puts us to a great stand, and
so unsettled what to do therein we rose, and I to see my Lord Sandwich,
whom I found merry at cards, and so by coach home, and after supper a
little to my office and so home and to bed.  I find at Court that there is
some bad news from Ireland of an insurrection of the Catholiques there,
which puts them into an alarm. I hear also in the City that for certain
there is an embargo upon all our ships in Spayne, upon this action of my
Lord Windsor's at Cuba, which signifies little or nothing, but only he
hath a mind to say that he hath done something before he comes back again.
Late tonight I sent to invite my uncle Wight and aunt with Mrs. Turner
to-morrow.

4th.  Up betimes and to my office.  By and by to Lombard street by
appointment to meet Mr. Moore, but the business not being ready I returned
to the office, where we sat a while, and, being sent for, I returned to
him and there signed to some papers in the conveying of some lands
mortgaged by Sir Rob. Parkhurst in my name to my Lord Sandwich, which I
having done I returned home to dinner, whither by and by comes Roger
Pepys, Mrs. Turner her daughter, Joyce Norton, and a young lady, a
daughter of Coll.  Cockes, my uncle Wight, his wife and Mrs. Anne Wight.
This being my feast, in lieu of what I should have had a few days ago for
my cutting of the stone, for which the Lord make me truly thankful.  Very
merry at, before, and after dinner, and the more for that my dinner was
great, and most neatly dressed by our own only maid.  We had a fricasee of
rabbits and chickens, a leg of mutton boiled, three carps in a dish, a
great dish of a side of lamb, a dish of roasted pigeons, a dish of four
lobsters, three tarts, a lamprey pie (a most rare pie), a dish of
anchovies, good wine of several sorts, and all things mighty noble and to
my great content.  After dinner to Hide Park; my aunt, Mrs. Wight and I in
one coach, and all the rest of the women in Mrs. Turner's; Roger being
gone in haste to the Parliament about the carrying this business of the
Papists, in which it seems there is great contest on both sides, and my
uncle and father staying together behind. At the Park was the King, and in
another coach my Lady Castlemaine, they greeting one another at every
tour.

     [The company drove round and round the Ring in Hyde Park.  The
     following two extracts illustrate this, and the, second one shows
     how the circuit was called the Tour: "Here (1697) the people of
     fashion take the diversion of the Ring.  In a pretty high place,
     which lies very open, they have surrounded a circumference of two or
     three hundred paces diameter with a sorry kind of balustrade, or
     rather with postes placed upon stakes but three feet from the
     ground; and the coaches drive round this.  When they have turned for
     some time round one way they face about and turn t'other: so rowls
     the world!"--Wilson's Memoirs, 1719, p. 126.]

     ["It is in this Park where the Grand Tour or Ring is kept for the
     Ladies to take the air in their coaches, and in fine weather I have
     seen above three hundred at a time."--[Macky's] Journey through
     England, 1724, vol. i., p. 75.]

Here about an hour, and so leaving all by the way we home and found the
house as clean as if nothing had been done there to-day from top to
bottom, which made us give the cook 12d. a piece, each of us.  So to my
office about writing letters by the post, one to my brother John at
Brampton telling him (hoping to work a good effect by it upon my mother)
how melancholy my father is, and bidding him use all means to get my
mother to live peaceably and quietly, which I am sure she neither do nor I
fear can ever do, but frightening her with his coming down no more, and
the danger of her condition if he should die I trust may do good.  So home
and to bed.

5th (Lord's day).  Up and spent the morning, till the Barber came, in
reading in my chamber part of Osborne's Advice to his Son (which I shall
not never enough admire for sense and language), and being by and by
trimmed, to Church, myself, wife, Ashwell, &c.  Home to dinner, it
raining, while that was prepared to my office to read over my vows with
great affection and to very good purpose.  So to dinner, and very well
pleased with it.  Then to church again, where a simple bawling young Scot
preached.  So home to my office alone till dark, reading some papers of my
old navy precedents, and so home to supper, and, after some pleasant talk,
my wife, Ashwell, and I to bed.

6th.  Up very betimes and to my office, and there made an end of reading
my book that I have of Mr. Barlow's of the Journal of the Commissioners of
the Navy, who begun to act in the year 1628 and continued six years,
wherein is fine observations and precedents out of which I do purpose to
make a good collection.  By and by, much against my will, being twice sent
for, to Sir G. Carteret's to pass his accounts there, upon which Sir J.
Minnes, Sir W. Batten, Sir W. Pen, and myself all the morning, and again
after dinner to it, being vexed at my heart to see a thing of that
importance done so slightly and with that neglect for which God pardon us,
and I would I could mend it.  Thence leaving them I made an excuse and
away home, and took my wife by coach and left her at Madam Clerk's, to
make a visit there, and I to the Committee of Tangier, where I found, to
my great joy, my Lord Sandwich, the first time I have seen him abroad
these some months, and by and by he rose and took leave, being, it seems,
this night to go to Kensington or Chelsey, where he hath taken a lodging
for a while to take the ayre.  We staid, and after business done I got Mr.
Coventry into the Matted Gallery and told him my whole mind concerning
matters of our office, all my discontent to see things of so great trust
carried so neglectfully, and what pitiful service the Controller and
Surveyor make of their duties, and I disburdened my mind wholly to him and
he to me his own, many things, telling me that he is much discouraged by
seeing things not to grow better and better as he did well hope they would
have done.  Upon the whole, after a full hour's private discourse, telling
one another our minds, we with great content parted, and with very great
satisfaction for my [having] thus cleared my conscience, went to Dr.
Clerk's and thence fetched my wife, and by coach home.  To my office a
little to set things in order, and so home to supper and to bed.

7th.  Up very betimes, and angry with Will that he made no more haste to
rise after I called him.  So to my office, and all the morning there. At
noon to the Exchange, and so home to dinner, where I found my wife had
been with Ashwell to La Roche's to have her tooth drawn, which it seems
aches much, but my wife could not get her to be contented to have it drawn
after the first twich, but would let it alone, and so they came home with
it undone, which made my wife and me good sport.  After dinner to the
office, where Sir J. Minnes did make a great complaint to me alone, how my
clerk Mr. Hater had entered in one of the Sea books a ticket to have been
signed by him before it had been examined, which makes the old fool mad
almost, though there was upon enquiry the greatest reason in the world for
it.  Which though it vexes me, yet it is most to see from day to day what
a coxcomb he is, and that so great a trust should lie in the hands of such
a fool.  We sat all the afternoon, and I late at my office, it being post
night, and so home to supper, my father being come again to my house, and
after supper to bed, and after some talk to sleep.

8th.  Up betimes and to my office, and by and by, about 8 o'clock, to the
Temple to Commissioner Pett lately come to town and discoursed about the
affairs of our office, how ill they go through the corruption and folly of
Sir W. Batten and Sir J. Minnes.  Thence by water to White Hall, to
chappell; where preached Dr. Pierce, the famous man that preached the
sermon so much cried up, before the King against the Papists.  His matter
was the Devil tempting our Saviour, being carried into the Wilderness by
the spirit.  And he hath as much of natural eloquence as most men that
ever I heard in my life, mixed with so much learning.  After sermon I went
up and saw the ceremony of the Bishop of Peterborough's paying homage upon
the knee to the King, while Sir H. Bennet, Secretary, read the King's
grant of the Bishopric of Lincoln, to which he is translated. His name is
Dr. Lany.  Here I also saw the Duke of Monmouth, with his Order of the
Garter, the first time I ever saw it.  I am told that the University of
Cambridge did treat him a little while since with all the honour possible,
with a comedy at Trinity College, and banquet; and made him Master of Arts
there.  All which, they say, the King took very well. Dr. Raynbow,  Master
of Magdalen, being now Vice-Chancellor.  Home by water to dinner, and with
my father, wife, and Ashwell, after dinner, by water towards Woolwich, and
in our way I bethought myself that we had left our poor little dog that
followed us out of doors at the waterside, and God knows whether he be not
lost, which did not only strike my wife into a great passion but I must
confess myself also; more than was becoming me.  We immediately returned,
I taking another boat and with my father went to Woolwich, while they went
back to find the dog.  I took my father on board the King's pleasure boat
and down to Woolwich, and walked to Greenwich thence and turning into the
park to show my father the steps up the hill, we found my wife, her woman,
and dog attending us, which made us all merry again, and so took boats,
they to Deptford and so by land to Half-way house, I into the King's yard
and overlook them there, and eat and drank with them, and saw a company of
seamen play drolly at our pence, and so home by water.  I a little at the
office, and so home to supper and to bed, after having Ashwell play my
father and me a lesson upon her Tryangle.

9th.  Up betimes and to my office, and anon we met upon finishing the
Treasurer's accounts.  At noon dined at home and am vexed to hear my wife
tell me how our maid Mary do endeavour to corrupt our cook maid, which did
please me very well, but I am resolved to rid the house of her as soon as
I can.  To the office and sat all the afternoon till 9 at night, and an
hour after home to supper and bed.  My father lying at Tom's to-night, he
dining with my uncle Fenner and his sons and a great many more of the gang
at his own cost to-day.  To bed vexed also to think of Sir J. Minnes
finding fault with Mr. Hater for what he had done the other day, though
there be no hurt in the thing at all but only the old fool's jealousy,
made worse by Sir W. Batten.

10th.  Up very betimes and to my office, where most hard at business alone
all the morning.  At noon to the Exchange, where I hear that after great
expectation from Ireland, and long stop of letters, there is good news
come, that all is quiett after our great noise of troubles there, though
some stir hath been as was reported.  Off the Exchange with Sir J. Cutler
and Mr. Grant to the Royall Oak Tavern, in Lumbard Street, where Alexander
Broome the poet was, a merry and witty man, I believe, if he be not a
little conceited, and here drank a sort of French wine, called Ho Bryan,

     [Haut Brion, a claret; one of the first growths of the red wines of
     Medoc.]

that hath a good and most particular taste that I never met with.  Home to
dinner, and then by water abroad to Whitehall, my wife to see Mrs.
Ferrers, I to Whitehall and the Park, doing no business.  Then to my
Lord's lodgings, met my wife, and walked to the New Exchange.  There laid
out 10s. upon pendents and painted leather gloves, very pretty and all the
mode.  So by coach home and to my office till late, and so to supper and
to bed.

11th.  Up betimes and to my office, where we sat also all the morning till
noon, and then home to dinner, my father being there but not very well.
After dinner in comes Captain Lambert of the Norwich, this day come from
Tangier, whom I am glad to see.  There came also with him Captain Wager,
and afterwards in came Captain Allen to see me, of the Resolution.  All
staid a pretty while, and so away, and I a while to my office, then abroad
into the street with my father, and left him to go to see my aunt Wight
and uncle, intending to lie at Tom's to-night, or my cozen Scott's, where
it seems he has hitherto lain and is most kindly used there.  So I home
and to my office very late making up my Lord's navy accounts, wherein I
find him to stand debtor L1200.  So home to supper and to bed.

12th (Lord's day).  Lay till 8 o'clock, which I have not done a great
while, then up and to church, where I found our pew altered by taking some
of the hind pew to make ours bigger, because of the number of women, more
by Sir J. Minnes company than we used to have.  Home to dinner, and after
dinner, intending to go to Chelsey to my Lord Sandwich, my wife would
needs go with me, though she walked on foot to Whitehall.  Which she did
and staid at my Lord's lodgings while Creed and I took a turn at
Whitehall, but no coach to be had, and so I returned to them and sat
talking till evening, and then got a coach and to Gray's Inn walks, where
some handsome faces, and so home and there to supper, and a little after 8
o'clock to bed, a thing I have not done God knows when.  Coming home
to-night, a drunken boy was carrying by our constable to our new pair of
stocks to handsel them, being a new pair and very handsome.

13th.  Up by five o'clock and to my office, where hard at work till
towards noon, and home and eat a bit, and so going out met with Mr. Mount
my old acquaintance, and took him in and drank a glass or two of wine to
him and so parted, having not time to talk together, and I with Sir W.
Batten to the Stillyard, and there eat a lobster together, and Wyse the
King's fishmonger coming in we were very merry half an hour, and so by
water to Whitehall, and by and by being all met we went in to the Duke and
there did our business and so away, and anon to the Tangier Committee,
where we had very fine discourse from Dr. Walker and Wiseman, civilians,
against our erecting a court-merchant at Tangier, and well answered in
many things by my Lord Sandwich (whose speaking I never till now observed
so much to be very good) and Sir R. Ford.  By and by the discourse being
ended, we fell to my Lord Rutherford's dispatch, which do not please him,
he being a Scott, and one resolved to scrape every penny that he can get
by any way, which the Committee will not agree to. He took offence at
something and rose away, without taking leave of the board, which all took
ill, though nothing said but only by the Duke of Albemarle, who said that
we ought to settle things as they ought to be, and if he will not go upon
these terms another man will, no doubt. Here late, quite finishing things
against his going, and so rose, and I walked home, being accompanied by
Creed to Temple Bar, talking of this afternoon's passage, and so I called
at the Wardrobe in my way home, and there spoke at the Horn tavern with
Mr. Moore a word or two, but my business was with Mr. Townsend, who is
gone this day to his country house, about sparing Charles Pepys some money
of his bills due to him when he can, but missing him lost my labour.  So
walked home, finding my wife abroad, at my aunt, Wight's, who coming home
by and by, I home to supper and to bed.

14th.  Up betimes to my office, where busy till 8 o'clock that Sir W.
Batten, Sir J. Minnes, Sir W. Pen and I down by barge to Woolwich, to see
"The Royal James" launched, where she has been under repair a great while.
We staid in the yard till almost noon, and then to Mr. Falconer's to a
dinner of fish of our own sending, and when it was just ready to come upon
the table, word is brought that the King and Duke are come, so they all
went away to shew themselves, while I staid and had a little dish or two
by myself, resolving to go home, and by the time I had dined they came
again, having gone to little purpose, the King, I believe, taking little
notice of them.  So they to dinner, and I staid a little with them, and so
good bye.  I walked to Greenwich, studying the slide rule for measuring of
timber, which is very fine.  Thence to Deptford by water, and walked
through the yard, and so walked to Redriffe, and so home pretty weary, to
my office, where anon they all came home, the ship well launched, and so
sat at the office till 9 at night, and I longer doing business at my
office, and so home to supper, my father being come, and to bed.  Sir G.
Carteret tells me to-night that he perceives the Parliament is likely to
make a great bustle before they will give the King any money; will call
all things into question; and, above all, the expences of the Navy; and do
enquire into the King's expences everywhere, and into the truth of the
report of people being forced to sell their bills at 15 per cent. loss in
the Navy; and, lastly, that they are in a very angry pettish mood at
present, and not likely to be better.

15th.  Up betimes, and after talking with my father awhile, I to my
office, and there hard at it till almost noon, and then went down the
river with Maynes, the purveyor, to show a ship's lading of Norway goods,
and called at Sir W. Warren's yard, and so home to dinner.  After dinner
up with my wife and Ashwell a little to the Tryangle, and so I down to
Deptford by land about looking out a couple of catches fitted to be
speedily set forth in answer to a letter of Mr. Coventry's to me.  Which
done, I walked back again, all the way reading of my book of Timber
measure, comparing it with my new Sliding Rule brought home this morning
with great pleasure.  Taking boat again I went to Shishe's yard, but he
being newly gone out towards Deptford I followed him thither again, and
there seeing him I went with him and pitched upon a couple, and so by
water home, it being late, past 8 at night, the wind cold, and I a little
weary.  So home to my office, then to supper and bed.

16th.  Up betimes and to my office, met to pass Mr. Pitt's (anon Sir J.
Lawson's Secretary and Deputy Treasurer) accounts for the voyage last to
the Streights, wherein the demands are strangely irregular, and I dare not
oppose it alone for making an enemy and do no good, but only bring a
review upon my Lord Sandwich, but God knows it troubles my heart to see
it, and to see the Comptroller, whose duty it is, to make no more matter
of it.  At noon home for an hour to dinner, and so to the office public
and private till late at night, so home to supper and bed with my father.

17th.  Up by five o'clock as I have long done and to my office all the
morning, at noon home to dinner with my father with us.  Our dinner, it
being Good Friday, was only sugarsopps and fish; the only time that we
have had a Lenten dinner all this Lent.  This morning Mr. Hunt, the
instrument maker, brought me home a Basse Viall to see whether I like it,
which I do not very well, besides I am under a doubt whether I had best
buy one yet or no, because of spoiling my present mind and love to
business.  After dinner my father and I walked into the city a little, and
parted and to Paul's Church Yard, to cause the title of my English "Mare
Clausum"

     [Selden's work was highly esteemed, and Charles I. made an order in
     council that a copy should be kept in the Council chest, another in
     the Court of Exchequer, and a third in the Court of Admiralty.  The
     book Pepys refers to is Nedham's translation, which was entitled,
     "Of the Dominion or Ownership of the Sea.  Two Books .  .  .  ,
     written at first in Latin and entituled Mare Clausum, by John
     Selden.  Translated into English by Marchamont Nedham.  London,
     1652."  This has the Commonwealth arms on the title-page and a
     dedication "To the Supreme Autoritie of the Nation-The Parliament of
     the Commonwealth of England."  The dedication to Charles I. in
     Selden's original work was left out.  Apparently a new title-page
     and dedication was prepared in 1663, but the copy in the British
     Museum, which formerly belonged to Charles Killigrew, does not
     contain these additions.]

to be changed, and the new title, dedicated to the King, to be put to it,
because I am ashamed to have the other seen dedicated to the Commonwealth.
So home and to my office till night, and so home to talk with my father,
and supper and to bed, I have not had yet one quarter of an hour's leisure
to sit down and talk with him since he came to town, nor do I know till
the holidays when I shall.

18th.  Up betimes and to my office, where all the morning.  At noon to
dinner.  With us Mr. Creed, who has been deeply engaged at the office this
day about the ending of his accounts, wherein he is most unhappy to have
to do with a company of fools who after they have signed his accounts and
made bills upon them yet dare not boldly assert to the Treasurer that they
are satisfied with his accounts.  Hereupon all dinner, and walking in the
garden the afternoon, he and I talking of the ill management of our
office, which God knows is very ill for the King's advantage.  I would I
could make it better.  In the evening to my office, and at night home to
supper and bed.

19th (Easter day).  Up and this day put on my close-kneed coloured suit,
which, with new stockings of the colour, with belt, and new gilt-handled
sword, is very handsome.  To church alone, and so to dinner, where my
father and brother Tom dined with us, and after dinner to church again, my
father sitting below in the chancel.  After church done, where the young
Scotchman preaching I slept all the while, my father and I to see my uncle
and aunt Wight, and after a stay of an hour there my father to my
brother's and I home to supper, and after supper fell in discourse of
dancing, and I find that Ashwell hath a very fine carriage, which makes my
wife almost ashamed of herself to see herself so outdone, but to-morrow
she begins to learn to dance for a month or two.  So to prayers and to
bed.  Will being gone, with my leave, to his father's this day for a day
or two, to take physique these holydays.

20th.  Up betimes as I use to do, and in my chamber begun to look over my
father's accounts, which he brought out of the country with him by my
desire, whereby I may see what he has received and spent, and I find that
he is not anything extravagant, and yet it do so far outdo his estate that
he must either think of lessening his charge, or I must be forced to spare
money out of my purse to help him through, which I would willing do as far
as L20 goes.  So to my office the remaining part of the morning till
towards noon, and then to Mr. Grant's.  There saw his prints, which he
shewed me, and indeed are the best collection of any things almost that
ever I saw, there being the prints of most of the greatest houses,
churches, and antiquitys in Italy and France and brave cutts.  I had not
time to look them over as I ought, and which I will take time hereafter to
do, and therefore left them and home to dinner.  After dinner, it raining
very hard, by coach to Whitehall, where, after Sir G. Carteret, Sir J.
Minnes, Mr. Coventry and I had been with the Duke, we to the Committee of
Tangier and did matters there dispatching wholly my Lord Teviott, and so
broke up.  With Sir G. Carteret and Sir John Minnes by coach to my Lord
Treasurer's, thinking to have spoken about getting money for paying the
Yards; but we found him with some ladies at cards: and so, it being a bad
time to speak, we parted, and Sir J. Minnes and I home, and after walking
with my wife in the garden late, to supper and to bed, being somewhat
troubled at Ashwell's desiring and insisting over eagerly upon her going
to a ball to meet some of her old companions at a dancing school here in
town next Friday, but I am resolved she shall not go.  So to bed.  This
day the little Duke of Monmouth was marryed at White Hall, in the King's
chamber; and tonight is a great supper and dancing at his lodgings, near
Charing-Cross.  I observed his coat at the tail of his coach he gives the
arms of England, Scotland, and France, quartered upon some other fields,
but what it is that speaks his being a bastard I know not.

21st.  Up betimes and to my office, where first I ruled with red ink my
English "Mare Clausum," which, with the new orthodox title, makes it now
very handsome.  So to business, and then home to dinner, and after dinner
to sit at the office in the afternoon, and thence to my study late, and so
home to supper to play a game at cards with my wife, and so to bed.
Ashwell plays well at cards, and will teach us to play; I wish it do not
lose too much of my time, and put my wife too much upon it.

22nd.  Up betimes and to my office very busy all the morning there,
entering things into my Book Manuscript, which pleases me very much. So to
the Change, and so to my uncle Wight's, by invitation, whither my father,
wife, and Ashwell came, where we had but a poor dinner, and not well
dressed; besides, the very sight of my aunt's hands and greasy manner of
carving, did almost turn my stomach.  After dinner by coach to the King's
Playhouse, where we saw but part of "Witt without mony," which I do not
like much, but coming late put me out of tune, and it costing me four
half-crowns for myself and company.  So, the play done, home, and I to my
office a while and so home, where my father (who is so very melancholy)
and we played at cards, and so to supper and to bed.

23rd.  St. George's day and Coronacion, the King and Court being at
Windsor, at the installing of the King of Denmark by proxy and the Duke of
Monmouth.  I up betimes, and with my father, having a fire made in my
wife's new closet above, it being a wet and cold day, we sat there all the
morning looking over his country accounts ever since his going into the
country.  I find his spending hitherto has been (without extraordinary
charges) at full L100 per annum, which troubles me, and I did let him
apprehend it, so as that the poor man wept, though he did make it well
appear to me that he could not have saved a farthing of it. I did tell him
how things stand with us, and did shew my distrust of Pall, both for her
good nature and housewifery, which he was sorry for, telling me that
indeed she carries herself very well and carefully, which I am glad to
hear, though I doubt it was but his doting and not being able to find her
miscarriages so well nowadays as he could heretofore have done.  We
resolve upon sending for Will Stankes up to town to give us a right
understanding in all that we have in Brampton, and before my father goes
to settle every thing so as to resolve how to find a living for my father
and to pay debts and legacies, and also to understand truly how Tom's
condition is in the world, that we may know what we are like to expect of
his doing ill or well.  So to dinner, and after dinner to the office,
where some of us met and did a little business, and so to Sir W. Batten's
to see a little picture drawing of his by a Dutchman which is very well
done.  So to my office and put a few things in order, and so home to spend
the evening with my father.  At cards till late, and being at supper, my
boy being sent for some mustard to a neat's tongue, the rogue staid half
an hour in the streets, it seems at a bonfire, at which I was very angry,
and resolve to beat him to-morrow.

24th.  Up betimes, and with my salt eel

     [A salt eel is a rope's end cut from the piece to be used on the
     back of a culprit.  "Yeow shall have salt eel for supper" is an
     emphatic threat.]

went down in the parler and there got my boy and did beat him till I was
fain to take breath two or three times, yet for all I am afeard it will
make the boy never the better, he is grown so hardened in his tricks,
which I am sorry for, he being capable of making a brave man, and is a boy
that I and my wife love very well.  So made me ready, and to my office,
where all the morning, and at noon home, whither came Captain Holland, who
is lately come home from sea, and has been much harassed in law about the
ship which he has bought, so that it seems in a despair he endeavoured to
cut his own throat, but is recovered it; and it seems whether by that or
any other persuasion (his wife's mother being a great zealot) he is turned
almost a Quaker, his discourse being nothing but holy, and that
impertinent, that I was weary of him.  At last pretending to go to the
Change we walked thither together, and there I left him and home to
dinner, sending my boy by the way to enquire after two dancing masters at
our end of the town for my wife to learn, of whose names the boy brought
word.  After dinner all the afternoon fiddling upon my viallin (which I
have not done many a day) while Ashwell danced above in my upper best
chamber, which is a rare room for musique, expecting this afternoon my
wife to bring my cozen Scott and Stradwick, but they came not, and so in
the evening we by ourselves to Half-way house to walk, but did not go in
there, but only a walk and so home again and to supper, my father with us,
and had a good lobster intended for part of our entertainment to these
people to-day, and so to cards, and then to bed, being the first day that
I have spent so much to my pleasure a great while.

25th.  Up betimes and to my vyall and song book a pretty while, and so to
my office, and there we sat all the morning.  Among other things Sir W.
Batten had a mind to cause Butler (our chief witness in the business of
Field, whom we did force back from an employment going to sea to come back
to attend our law sute) to be borne as a mate on the Rainbow in the Downes
in compensation for his loss for our sakes.  This he orders an order to be
drawn by Mr. Turner for, and after Sir J. Minnes, Sir W. Batten, and Sir
W. Pen had signed it, it came to me and I was going to put it up into my
book, thinking to consider of it and give them my opinion upon it before I
parted with it, but Sir W. Pen told me I must sign it or give it him
again, for it should not go without my hand. I told him what I meant to
do, whereupon Sir W. Batten was very angry, and in a great heat (which
will bring out any thing which he has in his mind, and I am glad of it,
though it is base in him to have a thing so long in his mind without
speaking of it, though I am glad this is the worst, for if he had worse it
would out as well as this some time or other) told me that I should not
think as I have heretofore done, make them sign orders and not sign them
myself.  Which what ignorance or worse it implies is easy to judge, when
he shall sign to things (and the rest of the board too as appears in this
business) for company and not out of their judgment for.  After some
discourse I did convince them that it was not fit to have it go, and Sir
W. Batten first, and then the rest, did willingly cancel all their hands
and tear the order, for I told them, Butler being such a rogue as I know
him, and we have all signed him to be to the Duke, it will be in his power
to publish this to our great reproach, that we should take such a course
as this to serve ourselves in wronging the King by putting him into a
place he is no wise capable of, and that in an Admiral ship.  At noon we
rose, Sir W. Batten ashamed and vexed, and so home to dinner, and after
dinner walked to the old Exchange and so all along to Westminster Hall,
White Hall, my Lord Sandwich's lodgings, and going by water back to the
Temple did pay my debts in several places in order to my examining my
accounts tomorrow to my great content.  So in the evening home, and after
supper (my father at my brother's) and merrily practising to dance, which
my wife hath begun to learn this day of Mr. Pembleton,

     [Pembleton, the dancing-master, made Pepys very jealous, and there
     are many allusions to him in the following pages.  His lessons
     ceased on May 27th.]

but I fear will hardly do any great good at it, because she is conceited
that she do well already, though I think no such thing.  So to bed.  At
Westminster Hall, this day, I buy a book lately printed and licensed by
Dr. Stradling, the Bishop of London's chaplin, being a book discovering
the practices and designs of the papists, and the fears of some of our own
fathers of the Protestant church heretofore of the return to Popery as it
were prefacing it.

The book is a very good book; but forasmuch as it touches one of the
Queenmother's fathers confessors, the Bishop, which troubles many good men
and members of Parliament, hath called it in, which I am sorry for.
Another book I bought, being a collection of many expressions of the great
Presbyterian Preachers upon publique occasions, in the late times, against
the King and his party, as some of Mr. Marshall, Case, Calamy, Baxter,
&c., which is good reading now, to see what they then did teach, and the
people believe, and what they would seem to believe now.  Lastly, I did
hear that the Queen is much grieved of late at the King's neglecting her,
he having not supped once with her this quarter of a year, and almost
every night with my Lady Castlemaine; who hath been with him this St.
George's feast at Windsor, and came home with him last night; and, which
is more, they say is removed as to her bed from her own home to a chamber
in White Hall, next to the King's own; which I am sorry to hear, though I
love her much.

26th (Lord's-day).  Lay pretty long in bed talking with my wife, and then
up and set to the making up of my monthly accounts, but Tom coming, with
whom I was angry for botching my camlott coat, to tell me that my father
and he would dine with me, and that my father was at our church, I got me
ready and had a very good sermon of a country minister upon "How blessed a
thing it is for brethren to live together in unity!"  So home and all to
dinner, and then would have gone by coach to have seen my Lord Sandwich at
Chelsey if the man would have taken us, but he denying it we staid at
home, and I all the afternoon upon my accounts, and find myself worth full
L700, for which I bless God, it being the most I was ever yet worth in
money.  In the evening (my father being gone to my brother's to lie
to-night) my wife, Ashwell, and the boy and I, and the dogg, over the
water and walked to Half-way house, and beyond into the fields, gathering
of cowslipps, and so to Half-way house, with some cold lamb we carried
with us, and there supped, and had a most pleasant walk back again,
Ashwell all along telling us some parts of their mask at Chelsey School,
which was very pretty, and I find she hath a most prodigious memory,
remembering so much of things acted six or seven years ago.  So home, and
after reading my vows, being sleepy, without prayers to bed, for which God
forgive me!

27th.  Up betimes and to my office, where doing business alone a good
while till people came about business to me.  Will Griffin tells me this
morning that Captain Browne, Sir W. Batten's brother-in-law, is dead of a
blow given him two days ago by a seaman, a servant of his, being drunk,
with a stone striking him on the forehead, for which I am sorry, he having
a good woman and several small children.  At the office all the morning,
at noon dined at home with my wife, merry, and after dinner by water to
White Hall; but found the Duke of York gone to St. James's for this
summer; and thence with Mr. Coventry, to whose chamber I went, and Sir W.
Pen up to the Duke's closett.  And a good while with him about our Navy
business; and so I to White Hall, and there alone a while with my Lord
Sandwich discoursing about his debt to the Navy, wherein he hath given me
some things to resolve him in.  Thence to my Lord's lodging, and thither
came Creed to me, and he and I walked a great while in the garden, and
thence to an alehouse in the market place to drink fine Lambeth ale, and
so to Westminster Hall, and after walking there a great while, home by
coach, where I found Mary gone from my wife, she being too high for her,
though a very good servant, and my boy too will be going in a few days,
for he is not for my family, he is grown so out of order and not to be
ruled, and do himself, against his brother's counsel, desire to be gone,
which I am sorry for, because I love the boy and would be glad to bring
him to good.  At home with my wife and Ashwell talking of her going into
the country this year, wherein we had like to have fallen out, she
thinking that I have a design to have her go, which I have not, and to let
her stay here I perceive will not be convenient, for she expects more
pleasure than I can give her here, and I fear I have done very ill in
letting her begin to learn to dance.  The Queen (which I did not know) it
seems was at Windsor, at the late St. George's feast there; and the Duke
of Monmouth dancing with her with his hat in his hand, the King came in
and kissed him, and made him put on his hat, which every body took notice
of.  After being a while at my office home to supper and to bed, my Will
being come home again after being at his father's all the last week taking
physique.

28th.  Up betimes and to my office, and there all the morning, only
stepped up to see my wife and her dancing master at it, and I think after
all she will do pretty well at it.  So to dinner, Mr. Hunt dining with us,
and so to the office, where we sat late, and then I to my office casting
up my Lord's sea accounts over again, and putting them in order for
payment, and so home to supper and to bed.

29th.  Up betimes, and after having at my office settled some accounts for
my Lord Sandwich, I went forth, and taking up my father at my brother's,
took coach and towards Chelsey, 'lighting at an alehouse near the
Gatehouse at Westminster to drink our morning draught, and so up again and
to Chelsey, where we found my Lord all alone at a little table with one
joynt of meat at dinner; we sat down and very merry talking, and mightily
extolling the manner of his retirement, and the goodness of his diet,
which indeed is so finely dressed: the mistress of the house, Mrs. Becke,
having been a woman of good condition heretofore, a merchant's wife, and
hath all things most excellently dressed; among others, her cakes
admirable, and so good that my Lord's words were, they were fit to present
to my Lady Castlemaine.  From ordinary discourse my Lord fell to talk of
other matters to me, of which chiefly the second part of the fray, which
he told me a little while since of, between Mr. Edward Montagu and
himself, which is that after that he had since been with him three times
and no notice taken at all of any difference between them, and yet since
that he hath forborn coming to him almost two months, and do speak not
only slightly of my Lord every where, but hath complained to my Lord
Chancellor of him, and arrogated all that ever my Lord hath done to be
only by his direction and persuasion.  Whether he hath done the like to
the King or no, my Lord knows not; but my Lord hath been with the King
since, and finds all things fair; and my Lord Chancellor hath told him of
it, but with so much contempt of Mr. Montagu, as my Lord knows himself
very secure against any thing the fool can do; and notwithstanding all
this, so noble is his nature, that he professes himself ready to show
kindness and pity to Mr. Montagu on any occasion. My Lord told me of his
presenting Sir H. Bennet with a gold cupp of L100, which he refuses, with
a compliment; but my Lord would have been glad he had taken it, that he
might have had some obligations upon him which he thinks possible the
other may refuse to prevent it; not that he hath any reason to doubt his
kindness.  But I perceive great differences there are at Court; and Sir H.
Bennet and my Lord Bristol, and their faction, are likely to carry all
things before them (which my Lord's judgment is, will not be for the
best), and particularly against the Chancellor, who, he tells me, is
irrecoverably lost: but, however, that he will not actually joyne in
anything against the Chancellor, whom he do own to be his most sure
friend, and to have been his greatest; and therefore will not openly act
in either, but passively carry himself even.  The Queen, my Lord tells me,
he thinks he hath incurred some displeasure with, for his kindness to his
neighbour, my Lady Castlemaine.  My Lord tells me he hath no reason to
fall for her sake, whose wit, management, nor interest, is not likely to
hold up any man, and therefore he thinks it not his obligation to stand
for her against his own interest.  The Duke and Mr. Coventry my Lord says
he is very well with, and fears not but they will show themselves his very
good friends, specially at this time, he being able to serve them, and
they needing him, which he did not tell me wherein.  Talking of the
business of Tangier, he tells me that my Lord Tiviott is gone away without
the least respect paid to him, nor indeed to any man, but without his
commission; and (if it be true what he says) having laid out seven or
eight thousand pounds in commodities for the place; and besides having not
only disobliged all the Commissioners for Tangier, but also Sir Charles
Barkeley the other day, who, speaking in behalf of Colonel Fitz-Gerald,
that having been deputy-governor there already, he ought to have expected
and had the governorship upon the death or removal of the former governor.
And whereas it is said that he and his men are Irish, which is indeed the
main thing that hath moved the King and Council to put in Tiviott to
prevent the Irish having too great and the whole command there under
Fitz-Gerald; he further said that there was never an Englishman fit to
command Tangier; my Lord Tiviott answered yes, that there were many more
fit than himself or Fitz-Gerald either. So that Fitz-Gerald being so great
with the Duke of York, and being already made deputy-governor, independent
of my Lord Tiviott, and he being also left here behind him for a while, my
Lord Sandwich do think that, putting all these things together, the few
friends he hath left, and the ill posture of his affairs, my Lord Tiviott
is not a man of the conduct and management that either people take him to
be, or is fit for the command of the place.  And here, speaking of the
Duke of York and Sir Charles Barkeley, my Lord tells me that he do very
much admire the good management, and discretion, and nobleness of the
Duke, that whatever he may be led by him or Mr. Coventry singly in
private, yet he did not observe that in publique matters, but he did give
as ready hearing and as good acceptance to any reasons offered by any
other man against the opinions of them, as he did to them, and would
concur in the prosecution of it.  Then we came to discourse upon his own
sea accompts, and came to a resolution what and how to proceed in them;
wherein he resolved, though I offered him a way of evading the greatest
part of his debt honestly, by making himself debtor to the Parliament,
before the King's time, which he might justly do, yet he resolved to go
openly and nakedly in it, and put himself to the kindness of the King and
Duke, which humour, I must confess, and so did tell him (with which he was
not a little pleased) had thriven very well with him, being known to be a
man of candid and open dealing, without any private tricks or hidden
designs as other men commonly have in what they do.  From that we had
discourse of Sir G. Carteret, who he finds kind to him, but it may be a
little envious, and most other men are, and of many others; and upon the
whole do find that it is a troublesome thing for a man of any condition at
Court to carry himself even, and without contracting enemys or envyers;
and that much discretion and dissimulation is necessary to do it.  My
father staid a good while at the window and then sat down by himself while
my Lord and I were thus an hour together or two after dinner discoursing,
and by and by he took his leave, and told me he would stay below for me.
Anon I took leave, and coming down found my father unexpectedly in great
pain and desiring for God's sake to get him a bed to lie upon, which I
did, and W. Howe and I staid by him, in so great pain as I never saw, poor
wretch, and with that patience, crying only: Terrible, terrible pain, God
help me, God help me, with the mournful voice, that made my heart ake.  He
desired to rest a little alone to see whether it would abate, and W. Howe
and I went down and walked in the gardens, which are very fine, and a
pretty fountayne, with which I was finely wetted, and up to a banquetting
house, with a very fine prospect, and so back to my father, who I found in
such pain that I could not bear the sight of it without weeping, never
thinking that I should be able to get him from thence, but at last,
finding it like to continue, I got him to go to the coach, with great
pain, and driving hard, he all the while in a most unsufferable torment
(meeting in the way with Captain Ferrers going to my Lord, to tell him
that my Lady Jemimah is come to town, and that Will Stankes is come with
my father's horses), not staying the coach to speak with any body, but
once, in St. Paul's Churchyard, we were forced to stay, the jogging and
pain making my father vomit, which it never had done before.  At last we
got home, and all helping him we got him to bed presently, and after half
an hour's lying in his naked bed (it being a rupture [with] which he is
troubled, and has been this 20 years, but never in half the pain and with
so great swelling as now, and how this came but by drinking of cold small
beer and sitting long upon a low stool and then standing long after it he
cannot tell) .  .  .  . After which he was at good ease, and so continued,
and so fell to sleep, and we went down whither W. Stankes was come with
his horses.  But it is very pleasant to hear how he rails at the rumbling
and ado that is in London over it is in the country, that he cannot endure
it.  He supped with us, and very merry, and then he to his lodgings at the
Inne with the horses, and so we to bed, I to my father who is very well
again, and both slept very well.

30th.  Up, and after drinking my morning draft with my father and W.
Stankes, I went forth to Sir W. Batten, who is going (to no purpose as he
uses to do) to Chatham upon a survey.  So to my office, where till towards
noon, and then to the Exchange, and back home to dinner, where Mrs. Hunt,
my father, and W. Stankes; but, Lord! what a stir Stankes makes with his
being crowded in the streets and wearied in walking in London, and would
not be wooed by my wife and Ashwell to go to a play, nor to White Hall, or
to see the lyons,

     [The Tower menagerie, with its famous lions, which was one of the
     chief sights of London, and gave rise to a new English word, was not
     abolished until the early part of the present century.]

though he was carried in a coach.  I never could have thought there had
been upon earth a man so little curious in the world as he is.  At the
office all the afternoon till 9 at night, so home to cards with my father,
wife, and Ashwell, and so to bed.




     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     Academy was dissolved by order of the Pope
     After some pleasant talk, my wife, Ashwell, and I to bed
     And so to bed, my father lying with me in Ashwell's bed
     Dare not oppose it alone for making an enemy and do no good
     Dinner was great, and most neatly dressed
     Dog attending us, which made us all merry again
     Galileo's air thermometer, made before 1597
     I do not find other people so willing to do business as myself
     I was very angry, and resolve to beat him to-morrow
     Insurrection of the Catholiques there
     Justice of proceeding not to condemn a man unheard
     Matters in Ireland are full of discontent
     My maid Susan ill, or would be thought so
     Parliament do agree to throw down Popery
     Railed bitterly ever and anon against John Calvin
     She is conceited that she do well already
     So home to supper and bed with my father
     That he is not able to live almost with her
     That I might say I saw no money in the paper
     There is no man almost in the City cares a turd for him
     Though it be but little, yet I do get ground every month





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Diary of Samuel Pepys, March/April
1662/63, by Samuel Pepys

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***

***** This file should be named 4140.txt or 4140.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/4/1/4/4140/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
