The Project Gutenberg EBook of Diary of Samuel Pepys, September/October
1663, by Samuel Pepys

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Diary of Samuel Pepys, September/October 1663

Author: Samuel Pepys

Release Date: November 30, 2004 [EBook #4143]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***




Produced by David Widger





                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A.  F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                           SEPTEMBER & OCTOBER
                                 1663

Sept.  1st.  Up pretty betimes, and after a little at my viall to my
office, where we sat all the morning, and I got my bill among others for
my carved work (which I expected to have paid for myself) signed at the
table, and hope to get the money back again, though if the rest had not
got it paid by the King, I never intended nor did desire to have him pay
for my vanity.  In the evening my brother John coming to me to complain
that my wife seems to be discontented at his being here, and shows him
great disrespect; so I took and walked with him in the garden, and
discoursed long with him about my affairs, and how imprudent it is for my
father and mother and him to take exceptions without great cause at my
wife, considering how much it concerns them to keep her their friend and
for my peace; not that I would ever be led by her to forget or desert them
in the main, but yet she deserves to be pleased and complied with a
little, considering the manner of life that I keep her to, and how
convenient it were for me to have Brampton for her to be sent to when I
have a mind or occasion to go abroad to Portsmouth or elsewhere.  So
directed him how to behave himself to her, and gave him other counsel; and
so to my office, where late.

2nd.  Up betimes and to my office, and thence with Sir J. Minnes by coach
to White Hall, where met us Sir W. Batten, and there staid by the Council
Chamber till the Lords called us in, being appointed four days ago to
attend them with an account of the riott among the seamen the other day,
when Sir J. Minnes did as like a coxcomb as ever I saw any man speak in my
life, and so we were dismissed, they making nothing almost of the matter.
We staid long without, till by and by my Lord Mayor comes, who also was
commanded to be there, and he having, we not being within with him, an
admonition from the Lords to take better care of preserving the peace, we
joyned with him, and the Lords having commanded Sir J. Minnes to prosecute
the fellows for the riott, we rode along with my Lord Mayor in his coach
to the Sessions House in the Old Bayley, where the Sessions are now
sitting.  Here I heard two or three ordinary tryalls, among others one
(which, they say, is very common now-a-days, and therefore in my now
taking of mayds I resolve to look to have some body to answer for them) a
woman that went and was indicted by four names for entering herself a
cookemayde to a gentleman that prosecuted her there, and after 3 days run
away with a silver tankard, a porringer of silver, and a couple of spoons,
and being now found is found guilty, and likely will be hanged.  By and by
up to dinner with my Lord Mayor and the Aldermen, and a very great dinner
and most excellent venison, but it almost made me sick by not daring to
drink wine.  After dinner into a withdrawing room; and there we talked,
among other things, of the Lord Mayor's sword.  They tell me this sword,
they believe, is at least a hundred or two hundred years old; and another
that he hath, which is called the Black Sword, which the Lord Mayor wears
when he mournes, but properly is their Lenten sword to wear upon Good
Friday and other Lent days, is older than that. Thence I, leaving Sir J.
Minnes to look after his indictment drawing up, I home by water, and there
found my wife mightily pleased with a present of shells, fine shells given
her by Captain Hickes, and so she and I up and look them over, and indeed
they are very pleasant ones.  By and by in comes Mr. Lewellin, lately come
from Ireland, to see me, and he tells me how the English interest falls
mightily there, the Irish party being too great, so that most of the old
rebells are found innocent, and their lands, which were forfeited and
bought or given to the English, are restored to them; which gives great
discontent there among the English. He being gone, I to my office, where
late, putting things in order, and so home to supper and to bed.  Going
through the City, my Lord Mayor told me how the piller set up by Exeter
House is only to show where the pipes of water run to the City; and
observed that this City is as well watered as any city in the world, and
that the bringing the water to the City hath cost it first and last above
L300,000; but by the new building, and the building of St. James's by my
Lord St. Albans,

     [It was at this time that the Earl of St. Albans planned St. James's
     Square, which was first styled "The Piazza."  The "Warrant for a
     grant to Baptist May and Abraham Cowley on nomination of the Earl of
     St. Albans of several parcels of ground in Pall Mall described, on
     rental of L80, for building thereon a square of 13 or 14 great and
     good houses," was dated September 24th, 1664.]

which is now about (and which the City stomach I perceive highly, but dare
not oppose it), were it now to be done, it would not be done for a million
of money.

3rd.  Up betimes, and for an hour at my viall before my people rise. Then
up and to the office a while, and then to Sir W. Batten, who is going this
day for pleasure down to the Downes.  I eat a breakfast with them, and at
my Lady's desire with them by coach to Greenwich, where I went aboard with
them on the Charlotte yacht.  The wind very fresh, and I believe they will
be all sicke enough, besides that she is mighty troublesome on the water.
Methinks she makes over much of her husband's ward, young Mr. Griffin, as
if she expected some service from him when he comes to it, being a pretty
young boy.  I left them under sayle, and I to Deptford, and, after a word
or two with Sir J. Minnes, walked to Redriffe and so home.  In my way, it
coming into my head, overtaking of a beggar or two on the way that looked
like Gypsys, what the Gypsys 8 or 9 days ago had foretold, that somebody
that day se'nnight should be with me to borrow money, but I should lend
none; and looking, when I came to my office, upon my journall, that my
brother John had brought a letter that day from my brother Tom to borrow
L20 more of me, which had vexed me so that I had sent the letter to my
father into the country, to acquaint him of it, and how little he is
beforehand that he is still forced to borrow. But it pleased me mightily
to see how, contrary to my expectations, having so lately lent him L20,
and belief that he had money by him to spare, and that after some days not
thinking of it, I should look back and find what the Gypsy had told me to
be so true.  After dinner at home to my office, and there till late doing
business, being very well pleased with Mr. Cutler's coming to me about
some business, and among other things tells me that they value me as a man
of business, which he accounts the best virtuoso, and I know his thinking
me so, and speaking where he comes, may be of good use to me.  Home to
supper, and to bed.

4th.  Up betimes, and an hour at my viall, and then abroad by water to
White Hall and Westminster Hall, and there bought the first newes-books of
L'Estrange's  writing;

     [Roger L'Estrange, a voluminous writer of pamphlets and periodical
     papers, and translator of classics, &c.  Born 1616.  He was Licenser
     of the Press to Charles II. and James II.; and M.P. for Winchester
     in James II.'s parliament.  L'Estrange was knighted in the reign of
     James II., and died 1704.  In 1663 L'Estrange set up a paper called
     "The Public Intelligencer," which came out on August 31st, and
     continued to be published twice a week till January 19th, 1665, when
     it was superseded by the scheme of publishing the "London Gazette,"
     the first number of which appeared on February 4th following.]

he beginning this week; and makes, methinks, but a simple beginning. Then
to speak to Mrs. Lane, who seems desirous to have me come to see her and
to have her company as I had a little while ago, which methinks if she
were very modest, considering how I tumbled her and tost her, she should
not.  Thence to Mrs. Harper, and sent for Creed, and there Mrs. Harper
sent for a maid for me to come to live with my wife.  I like the maid's
looks well enough, and I believe may do well, she looking very modestly
and speaking so too.  I directed her to speak with my wife, and so Creed
and I away to Mr. Povy's, and he not being at home, walked to Lincoln's
Inn walks, which they are making very fine, and about one o'clock went
back to Povy's; and by and by in comes he, and so we sat and down to
dinner, and his lady, whom I never saw before (a handsome old woman that
brought him money that makes him do as he does), and so we had plenty of
meat and drink, though I drunk no wine, though mightily urged to it, and
in the exact manner that I never saw in my life any where, and he the most
full and satisfied in it that man can be in this world with any thing.
After dinner done, to see his new cellars, which he has made so fine with
so noble an arch and such contrivances for his barrels and bottles, and in
a room next to it such a grotto and fountayne, which in summer will be so
pleasant as nothing in the world can be almost.  But to see how he himself
do pride himself too much in it, and command and expect to have all
admiration, though indeed everything do highly deserve it, is a little
troublesome.  Thence Creed and I away, and by his importunity away by
coach to Bartholomew Fayre, where I have no mind to go without my wife,
and therefore rode through the fayre without 'lighting, and away home,
leaving him there; and at home made my wife get herself presently ready,
and so carried her by coach to the fayre, and showed her the monkeys
dancing on the ropes, which was strange, but such dirty sport that I was
not pleased with it.  There was also a horse with hoofs like rams hornes,
a goose with four feet, and a cock with three. Thence to another place,
and saw some German Clocke works, the Salutation of the Virgin Mary, and
several Scriptural stories; but above all there was at last represented
the sea, with Neptune, Venus, mermaids, and Ayrid on a dolphin, the sea
rocking, so well done, that had it been in a gaudy manner and place, and
at a little distance, it had been admirable. Thence home by coach with my
wife, and I awhile to the office, and so to supper and to bed.  This day I
read a Proclamation for calling in and commanding every body to apprehend
my Lord Bristoll.

5th.  Up betimes and to my viall awhile, and so to the office, and there
sat, and busy all the morning.  So at noon to the Exchange, and so home to
dinner, where I met Creed, who dined with me, and after dinner mightily
importuned by Captain Hicks, who came to tell my wife the names and story
of all the shells, which was a pretty present he made her the other day.
He being gone, Creed, my wife, and I to Cornhill, and after many tryalls
bought my wife a chintz, that is, a painted Indian callico, for to line
her new study, which is very pretty.  So home with her, and then I away
(Creed being gone) to Captain Minors upon Tower Hill, and there, abating
only some impertinence of his, I did inform myself well in things relating
to the East Indys; both of the country and the disappointment the King met
with the last voyage, by the knavery of the Portugall Viceroy, and the
inconsiderablenesse of the place of Bombaim,

     [Bombay, which was transferred to the East India Company in 1669.
     The seat of the Western Presidency of India was removed from Surat
     to Bombay in 1685-87.]

if we had had it.  But, above all things, it seems strange to me that
matters should not be understood before they went out; and also that such
a thing as this, which was expected to be one of the best parts of the
Queen's portion, should not be better understood; it being, if we had it,
but a poor place, and not really so as was described to our King in the
draught of it, but a poor little island; whereas they made the King and
Lord Chancellor, and other learned men about the King, believe that that,
and other islands which are near it, were all one piece; and so the
draught was drawn and presented to the King, and believed by the King and
expected to prove so when our men came thither; but it is quite otherwise.
Thence to my office, and after several letters writ, home to supper and to
bed, and took a pill.  I hear this day that Sir W. Batten was fain to put
ashore at Queenborough with my Lady, who has been so sick she swears never
to go to sea again.  But it happens well that Holmes is come home into the
Downes, where he will meet my Lady, and it may be do her more good than
she looked for.  He brings news of the peace between Tangier and the
Moors, but the particulars I know not.  He is come but yesterday.

6th (Lord's day).  My pill I took last night worked very well, and I lay
long in bed and sweat to get away the itching all about my body from head
to foot, which is beginning again as it did the last winter, and I find
after I am up that it is abated.  I staid at home all day and my wife
also, whom, God forgive me, I staid along with me for fear of her seeing
of Pembleton.  But she and I entertained one another all day long with
great pleasure, contriving about my wife's closet and the bedchamber,
whither we intend to go up she and I to-day.  We dined alone and supped
also at night, my brother John with us, and so to prayers and to bed.

7th.  Up pretty betimes, and awhile to my vyall, and then abroad to
several places, to buy things for the furnishing my house and my wife's
closet, and then met my uncle Thomas, by appointment, and he and I to the
Prerogative Office in Paternoster Row, and there searched and found my
uncle Day's will, end read it over and advised upon it, and his wife's
after him, and though my aunt Perkins testimony is very good, yet I fear
the estate being great, and the rest that are able to inform us in the
matter are all possessed of more or less of the estate, it will be hard
for us ever to do anything, nor will I adventure anything till I see what
part will be given to us by my uncle Thomas of all that is gained.  But I
had another end of putting my uncle into some doubt, that so I might keep
him: yet from going into the country that he may be there against the
Court at his own charge, and so I left him and his son at a loss what to
do till I see them again.  And so I to my Lord Crew's, thinking to have
dined there, but it was too late, and so back and called at my brother's
and Mr. Holden's about several businesses, and went all alone to the Black
Spread Eagle in Bride Lane, and there had a chopp of veale and some bread,
cheese, and beer, cost me a shilling to my dinner, and so through Fleet
Ally, God forgive me, out of an itch to look upon the sluts there, against
which when I saw them my stomach turned, and so to Bartholomew Fayre,
where I met with Mr. Pickering, and he and I to see the monkeys at the
Dutch house, which is far beyond the other that my wife and I saw the
other day; and thence to see the dancing on the ropes, which was very poor
and tedious.  But he and I fell in discourse about my Lord Sandwich. He
tells me how he is sorry for my Lord at his being at Chelsey, and that his
but seeming so to my Lord without speaking one word, had put him clear out
of my Lord's favour, so as that he was fain to leave him before he went
into the country, for that he was put to eat with his servants; but I
could not fish from him, though I knew it, what was the matter; but am
very sorry to see that my Lord hath thus much forgot his honour, but am
resolved not to meddle with it.  The play being done, I stole from him and
hied home, buying several things at the ironmonger's--dogs, tongs, and
shovels--for my wife's closett and the rest of my house, and so home, and
thence to my office awhile, and so home to supper and to bed.  By my
letters from Tangier today I hear that it grows very strong by land, and
the Mole goes on.  They have lately killed two hundred of the Moores, and
lost about forty or fifty.  I am mightily afeard of laying out too much
money in goods upon my house, but it is not money flung away, though I
reckon nothing money but when it is in the bank, till I have a good sum
beforehand in the world.

8th.  Up and to my viall a while, and then to my office on Phillips having
brought me a draught of the Katherine yacht, prettily well done for the
common way of doing it.  At the office all the morning making up our last
half year's account to my Lord Treasurer, which comes to L160,000 or there
abouts, the proper expense of this half year, only with an addition of
L13,000 for the third due of the last account to the Treasurer for his
disbursements, and L1100 for this half year's; so that in three years and
a half his thirds come to L14,100.  Dined at home with my wife.  It being
washing day, we had a good pie baked of a leg of mutton; and then to my
office, and then abroad, and among other places to Moxon's, and there
bought a payre of globes cost me L3 10s., with which I am well pleased, I
buying them principally for my wife, who has a mind to understand them,
and I shall take pleasure to teach her.  But here I saw his great window
in his dining room, where there is the two Terrestrial Hemispheres, so
painted as I never saw in my life, and nobly done and to good purpose,
done by his own hand.  Thence home to my office, and there at business
late, and then to supper home and to bed, my people sitting up longer than
ordinary before they had done their washing.

9th.  Up by break of day, and then to my vials a while, and so to Sir W.
Warren's by agreement, and after talking and eating something with him, he
and I down by water to Woolwich, and there I did several businesses, and
had good discourse, and thence walked to Greenwich; in my way a little boy
overtook us with a fine cupp turned out of Lignum Vitae, which the poor
child confessed was made in the King's yard by his father, a turner there,
and that he do often do it, and that I might have one, and God knows what,
which I shall examine.  Thence to Sir W. Warren's again, and there drew up
a contract for masts which he is to sell us, and so home to dinner,
finding my poor wife busy.  I, after dinner, to the office, and then to
White Hall, to Sir G. Carteret's, but did not speak with him, and so to
Westminster Hall, God forgive me, thinking to meet Mrs. Lane, but she was
not there, but here I met with Ned Pickering, with whom I walked 3 or 4
hours till evening, he telling me the whole business of my Lord's folly
with this Mrs. Becke, at Chelsey, of all which I am ashamed to see my Lord
so grossly play the beast and fool, to the flinging off of all honour,
friends, servants, and every thing and person that is good, and only will
have his private lust undisturbed with this common .  .  .  . his sitting
up night after night alone, suffering nobody to come to them, and all the
day too, casting off Pickering, basely reproaching him with his small
estate, which yet is a good one, and other poor courses to obtain privacy
beneath his honour, and with his carrying her abroad and playing on his
lute under her window, and forty other poor sordid things, which I am
grieved to hear; but believe it to no purpose for me to meddle with it,
but let him go on till God Almighty and his own conscience and thoughts of
his lady and family do it.  So after long discourse, to my full
satisfaction but great trouble, I home by water and at my office late, and
so to supper to my poor wife, and so to bed, being troubled to think that
I shall be forced to go to Brampton the next Court, next week.

10th.  Up betimes and to my office, and there sat all the morning making a
great contract with Sir W. Warren for L3,000 worth of masts; but, good
God! to see what a man might do, were I a knave, the whole business from
beginning to end being done by me out of the office, and signed to by them
upon the once reading of it to them, without the least care or
consultation either of quality, price, number, or need of them, only in
general that it was good to have a store.  But I hope my pains was such,
as the King has the best bargain of masts has been bought these 27 years
in this office.  Dined at home and then to my office again, many people
about business with me, and then stepped a little abroad about business to
the Wardrobe, but missed Mr. Moore, and elswhere, and in my way met Mr.
Moore, who tells me of the good peace that is made at Tangier with the
Moores, but to continue but from six months to six months, and that the
Mole is laid out, and likely to be done with great ease and successe, we
to have a quantity of ground for our cattle about the town to our use. To
my office late, and then home to supper, after writing letters, and to
bed.  This day our cook maid (we having no luck in maids now-adays), which
was likely to prove a good servant, though none of the best cooks, fell
sick and is gone to her friends, having been with us but 4 days.

11th.  This morning, about two or three o'clock, knocked up in our back
yard, and rising to the window, being moonshine, I found it was the
constable and his watch, who had found our back yard door open, and so
came in to see what the matter was.  So I desired them to shut the door,
and bid them good night, and so to bed again, and at 6 o'clock up and a
while to my vyall, and then to the office, where all the morning upon the
victualler's accounts, and then with him to dinner at the Dolphin, where I
eat well but drank no wine neither; which keeps me in such good order that
I am mightily pleased with myself for it.  Hither Mr. Moore came to me,
and he and I home and advised about business, and so after an hour's
examining the state of the Navy debts lately cast up, I took coach to Sir
Philip Warwick's, but finding Sir G. Carteret there I did not go in, but
directly home, again, it raining hard, having first of all been with Creed
and Mrs. Harper about a cook maid, and am like to have one from Creed's
lodging.  In my way home visited my Lord Crew and Sir Thomas, thinking
they might have enquired by the by of me touching my Lord's matters at
Chelsey, but they said nothing, and so after some slight common talk I bid
them good night.  At home to my office, and after a while doing business
home to supper and bed.

12th.  Up betimes, and by water to White Hall; and thence to Sir Philip
Warwick, and there had half an hour's private discourse with him; and did
give him some good satisfaction in our Navy matters, and he also me, as to
the money paid and due to the Navy; so as he makes me assured by
particulars, that Sir G. Carteret is paid within L80,000 every farthing
that we to this day, nay to Michaelmas day next have demanded; and that, I
am sure, is above L50,000 snore than truly our expenses have been,
whatever is become of the money.  Home with great content that I have thus
begun an acquaintance with him, who is a great man, and a man of as much
business as any man in England; which I will endeavour to deserve and
keep.  Thence by water to my office, in here all the morning, and so to
the 'Change at noon, and there by appointment met and bring home my uncle
Thomas, who resolves to go with me to Brampton on Monday next. I wish he
may hold his mind.  I do not tell him, and yet he believes that there is a
Court to be that he is to do some business for us there.  The truth is I
do find him a much more cunning fellow than I ever took him for, nay in
his very drink he has his wits about him.  I took him home to dinner, and
after dinner he began, after a glass of wine or two, to exclaim against
Sir G. Carteret and his family in Jersey, bidding me to have a care of
him, and how high, proud, false, and politique a fellow he is, and how low
he has been under his command in the island.  After dinner, and long
discourse, he went away to meet on Monday morning, and I to my office, and
thence by water to White Hall and Westminster Hall about several
businesses, and so home, and to my office writing a laborious letter about
our last account to my Lord Treasurer, which took me to one o'clock in the
morning,

13th (Lord's day).  So that Griffin was fain to carry it to Westminster to
go by express, and my other letters of import to my father and elsewhere
could not go at all.  To bed between one and two and slept till 8, and lay
talking till 9 with great pleasure with my wife.  So up and put my clothes
in order against tomorrow's journey, and then at noon at dinner, and all
the afternoon almost playing and discoursing with my wife with great
content, and then to my office there to put papers in order against my
going.  And by and by comes my uncle Wight to bid us to dinner to-morrow
to a haunch of venison I sent them yesterday, given me by Mr. Povy, but I
cannot go, but my wife will.  Then into the garden to read my weekly vows,
and then home, where at supper saying to my wife, in ordinary fondness,
"Well! shall you and I never travel together again?" she took me up and
offered and desired to go along with me.  I thinking by that means to have
her safe from harm's way at home here, was willing enough to feign, and
after some difficulties made did send about for a horse and other things,
and so I think she will go.  So, in a hurry getting myself and her things
ready, to bed.

14th.  Up betimes, and my wife's mind and mine holding for her going, so
she to get her ready, and I abroad to do the like for myself, and so home,
and after setting every thing at my office and at home in order, by coach
to Bishop's Gate, it being a very promising fair day.  There at the
Dolphin we met my uncle Thomas and his son-in-law, which seems a very
sober man, and Mr. Moore.  So Mr. Moore and my wife set out before, and my
uncle and I staid for his son Thomas, who, by a sudden resolution, is
preparing to go with us, which makes me fear something of mischief which
they design to do us.  He staying a great while, the old man and I before,
and about eight miles off, his son comes after us, and about six miles
further we overtake Mr. Moore and my wife, which makes me mightily
consider what a great deal of ground is lost in a little time, when it is
to be got up again by another, that is to go his own ground and the
other's too; and so after a little bayte (I paying all the reckonings the
whole journey) at Ware, to Buntingford, where my wife, by drinking some
cold beer, being hot herself, presently after 'lighting, begins to be
sick, and became so pale, and I alone with her in a great chamber there,
that I thought she would have died, and so in great horror, and having a
great tryall of my true love and passion for her, called the mayds and
mistresse of the house, and so with some strong water, and after a little
vomit, she came to be pretty well again; and so to bed, and I having put
her to bed with great content, I called in my company, and supped in the
chamber by her, and being very merry in talk, supped and then parted, and
I to bed and lay very well.  This day my cozen Thomas dropped his hanger,
and it was lost.

15th.  Up pretty betimes and rode as far as Godmanehester, Mr. Moore
having two falls, once in water and another in dirt, and there 'light and
eat and drunk, being all of us very weary, but especially my uncle and
wife.  Thence to Brampton to my father's, and there found all well, but
not sensible how they ought to treat my uncle and his son, at least till
the Court be over, which vexed me, but on my counsel they carried it fair
to them; and so my father, cozen Thomas, and I up to Hinchingbroke, where
I find my Lord and his company gone to Boughton, which vexed me; but there
I find my Lady and the young ladies, and there I alone with my Lady two
hours, she carrying me through every part of the house and gardens, which
are, and will be, mighty noble indeed.  Here I saw Mrs. Betty Pickering,
who is a very well-bred and comely lady, but very fat. Thence, without so
much as drinking, home with my father and cozen, who staid for me, and to
a good supper; after I had had an hour's talk with my father abroad in the
fields, wherein he begun to talk very highly of my promises to him of
giving him the profits of Sturtlow, as if it were nothing that I give him
out of my purse, and that he would have me to give this also from myself
to my brothers and sister; I mean Brampton and all, I think: I confess I
was angry to hear him talk in that manner, and took him up roundly in it,
and advised him if he could not live upon L50 per ann., which was another
part of his discourse, that he would think to come and live at Tom's
again, where L50 per ann. will be a good addition to Tom's trade, and I
think that must be done when all is done.  But my father spoke nothing
more of it all the time I was in the country, though at the time he seemed
to like it well enough.  I also spoke with Piggott too this evening before
I went in to supper, and doubt that I shall meet with some knots in my
business to-morrow before I can do it at the Court, but I shall do my
best.  After supper my uncle and his son to Stankes's to bed, which
troubles me, all our father's beds being lent to Hinchingbroke, and so my
wife and I to bed, she very weary.

16th.  Up betimes, and with my wife to Hinchingbroke to see my Lady, she
being to go to my Lord this morning, and there I left her, and so back to
the Court, and heard Sir R. Bernard's charges to the Courts Baron and
Leete, which took up till noon, and were worth hearing, and after putting
my business into some way, went home to my father's to dinner, and after
dinner to the Court, where Sir Robert and his son came again by and by,
and then to our business, and my father and I having given bond to him for
the L21 Piggott owed him, my uncle Thomas did quietly admit himself and
surrender to us the lands first mortgaged for our whole debt, and Sir
Robert added to it what makes it up L209, to be paid in six months.  But
when I came to give him an account of more lands to be surrendered to us,
wherein Piggott's wife was concerned, and she there to give her consent,
Sir Robert would not hear of it, but began to talk very high that we were
very cruel, and we had caution enough for our money, and he could not in
conscience let the woman do it, and reproached my uncle, both he and his
son, with taking use upon use for this money.  To all which I did give him
such answers and spoke so well, and kept him so to it, that all the Court
was silent to hear us, and by report since do confess they did never hear
the like in the place.  But he by a wile had got our bond, and I was
content to have as much as I could though I could not get all, and so took
Piggott's surrender of them without his wife, and by Sir Robert's own
consent did tell the Court that if the money were not paid in the time,
and the security prove not sufficient, I would conclude myself wronged by
Sir Robert, which he granted I should do.  This kept us till night, but am
heartily glad it ended so well on my uncle's part, he doing that and
Prior's little house very willingly.  So the Court broke up, and my father
and Mr. Shepley and I to Gorrum's to drink, and then I left them, and to
the Bull, where my uncle was to .hear what he and the people said of our
business, and here nothing but what liked me very well.  So by and by home
and to supper, and with my mind in pretty good quiett, to bed.

17th.  Up, and my father being gone to bed ill last night and continuing
so this morning, I was forced to come to a new consideration, whether it
was fit for to let my uncle and his son go to Wisbeach about my uncle
Day's estate alone or no, and concluded it unfit; and so resolved to go
with them myself, leaving my wife there, I begun a journey with them, and
with much ado, through the fens, along dikes, where sometimes we were
ready to have our horses sink to the belly, we got by night, with great
deal of stir and hard riding, to Parson's Drove, a heathen place, where I
found my uncle and aunt Perkins, and their daughters, poor wretches! in a
sad, poor thatched cottage, like a poor barn, or stable, peeling of hemp,
in which I did give myself good content to see their manner of preparing
of hemp; and in a poor condition of habitt took them to our miserable inn,
and there, after long stay, and hearing of Frank, their son, the miller,
play, upon his treble, as he calls it, with which he earns part of his
living, and singing of a country bawdy song, we sat down to supper; the
whole crew, and Frank's wife and child, a sad company, of which I was
ashamed, supped with us.  And after supper I, talking with my aunt about
her report concerning my uncle Day's will and surrender, I found her in
such different reports from what she writes and says to the people, and
short of what I expected, that I fear little will be done of good in it.
By and by newes is brought to us that one of our horses is stole out of
the stable, which proves my uncle's, at which I am inwardly glad--I mean,
that it was not mine; and at this we were at a great loss; and they
doubting a person that lay at next door, a Londoner, some lawyer's clerk,
we caused him to be secured in his bed, and other care to be taken to
seize the horse; and so about twelve at night or more, to bed in a sad,
cold, nasty chamber, only the mayde was indifferent handsome, and so I had
a kiss or two of her, and I to bed, and a little after I was asleep they
waked me to tell me that the horse was found, which was good newes, and so
to sleep till the morning, but was bit cruelly, and nobody else of our
company, which I wonder at, by the gnatts.

18th.  Up, and got our people together as soon as we could; and after
eating a dish of cold cream, which was my supper last night too, we took
leave of our beggarly company, though they seem good people, too; and over
most sad Fenns, all the way observing the sad life which the people of the
place which if they be born there, they do call the Breedlings' of the
place, do live, sometimes rowing from one spot to another, and then
wadeing, to Wisbeach, a pretty town, and a fine church and library, where
sundry very old abbey manuscripts; and a fine house, built on the church
ground by Secretary Thurlow, and a fine gallery built for him in the
church, but now all in the Bishop of Ely's hands.  After visiting the
church, &c., we went out of the towne, by the help of a stranger, to find
out one Blinkhorne, a miller, of whom we might inquire something of old
Day's disposal of his estate, and in whose hands it now is; and by great
chance we met him, and brought him to our inn to dinner; and instead of
being informed in his estate by this fellow, we find that he is the next
heir to the estate, which was matter, of great sport to my cozen Thomas
and me, to see such a fellow prevent us in our hopes, he being Day's
brother's, daughter's son, whereas we are but his sister's sons and
grandsons; so that, after all, we were fain to propose our matter to him,
and to get him to give us leave to look after the business, and so he to
have one-third part, and we two to have the other two-third parts, of what
should be recovered of the estate, which he consented to; and after some
discourse and paying the reckoning, we mounted again, and rode, being very
merry at our defeat, to Chatteris, my uncle very weary, and after supper,
and my telling of three stories, to their good liking, of spirits, we all
three in a chamber went to bed.

19th.  Up pretty betimes, and after eating something, we set out and I
(being willing thereto) went by a mistake with them to St. Ives, and
there, it being known that it was their nearer way to London, I took leave
of them there, they going straight to London and I to Brampton, where I
find my father ill in bed still, and Madam Norbery (whom and her fair
daughter and sister I was ashamed to kiss, but did, my lip being sore with
riding in the wind and bit with the gnatts), lately come to town, come to
see my father and mother, and they after a little stay being gone, I told
my father my success.  And after dinner my wife and I took horse, and rode
with marvellous, and the first and only hour of, pleasure, that ever I had
in this estate since I had to do with it, to Brampton woods; and through
the wood rode, and gathered nuts in my way, and then at Graffam to an old
woman's house to drink, where my wife used to go; and being in all
circumstances highly pleased, and in my wife's riding and good company at
this time, I rode, and she showed me the river behind my father's house,
which is very pleasant, and so saw her home, and I straight to Huntingdon,
and there met Mr. Shepley and to the Crown (having sent home my horse by
Stankes), and there a barber came and trimmed me, and thence walked to
Hinchingbroke, where my Lord and ladies all are just alighted.  And so I
in among them, and my Lord glad to see me, and the whole company.  Here I
staid and supped with them, and after a good stay talking, but yet
observing my Lord not to be so mightily ingulphed in his pleasure in the
country as I expected and hoped, I took leave of them, and after a walk in
the courtyard in the dark with Mr. Howe, who tells me that my Lord do not
enjoy himself and please himself as he used to do, but will hasten up to
London, and that he is resolved to go to Chelsey again, which we are
heartily grieved for and studious how to prevent if it be possible, I took
horse, there being one appointed for me, and a groom to attend me, and so
home, where my wife: staid up and sister for me, and so to bed, troubled
for what I hear of my Lord.

20th (Lord's day).  Up, and finding my father somewhat better, walked to
Huntingdon church, where in my Lord's pew, with the young ladies, by my
Lord's own showing me the place, I stayed the sermon, and so to
Hinchingbroke, walking with Mr. Shepley and Dr. King, whom they account a
witty man here, as well as a good physician, and there my Lord took me
with the rest of the company, and singly demanded my opinion in the walks
in his garden, about the bringing of the crooked wall on the mount to a
shape; and so to dinner, there being Collonel Williams and much other
company, and a noble dinner.  But having before got my Lord's warrant for
travelling to-day, there being a proclamation read yesterday against it at
Huntingdon, at which I am very glad, I took leave, leaving them at dinner,
and walked alone to my father's, and there, after a word or two to my
father and mother, my wife and I mounted, and, with my father's boy, upon
a horse I borrowed of Captain Ferrers, we rode to Bigglesworth by the help
of a couple of countrymen, that led us through the very long and dangerous
waters, because of the ditches on each side, though it begun to be very
dark, and there we had a good breast of mutton roasted for us, and supped,
and to bed.

21st.  Up very betimes by break of day, and got my wife up, whom the
thought of this day's long journey do discourage; and after eating
something, and changing of a piece of gold to pay the reckoning, we
mounted, and through Baldwicke, where a fayre is kept to-day, and a great
one for cheese and other such commodities, and so to Hatfield, it being
most curious weather from the time we set out to our getting home, and
here we dined, and my wife being very weary, and believing that it would
be hard to get her home to-night, and a great charge to keep her longer
abroad, I took the opportunity of an empty coach that was to go to London,
and left her to come in it to London, for half-a-crown, and so I and the
boy home as fast as we could drive, and it was even night before we got
home.  So that I account it very good fortune that we took this course,
being myself very weary, much more would my wife have been.  At home found
all very well and my house in good order.  To see Sir W. Pen, who is
pretty well, and Sir J. Minnes, who is a little lame on one foot, and the
rest gone to Chatham, viz.: Sir G. Carteret and Sir W. Batten, who has in
my absence inveighed against my contract the other day for Warren's masts,
in which he is a knave, and I shall find matter of tryumph, but it vexes
me a little.  So home, and by and by comes my wife by coach well home, and
having got a good fowl ready for supper against her coming, we eat
heartily, and so with great content and ease to our own bed, there nothing
appearing so to our content as to be at our own home, after being abroad
awhile.

22nd.  I up, well refreshed after my journey, and to my office and there
set some things in order, and then Sir W. Pen and I met and held an
office, and at noon to dinner, and so by water with my wife to
Westminster, she to see her father and mother, and we met again at my
Lord's lodgings, and thence by water home again, where at the door we met
Sir W. Pen and his daughter coming to visit us, and after their visit I to
my office, and after some discourse to my great satisfaction with Sir W.
Warren about our bargain of masts, I wrote my letters by the post, and so
home to supper and to bed.  This day my wife showed me bills printed,
wherein her father, with Sir John Collidon and Sir Edward Ford, have got a
patent for curing of smoky chimneys.

     [The Patent numbered 138 is printed in the appendix to Wheatley's
     "Samuel Pepys and the World he lived in" (p. 241).  It is drawn in
     favour of John Colladon, Doctor in Physicke, and of Alexander
     Marchant, of St. Michall, and describes "a way to prevent and cure
     the smoakeing of Chimneys, either by stopping the tunnell towards
     the top, and altering the former course of the smoake, or by setting
     tunnells with checke within the chimneyes."  Sir Edward Ford's name
     does not appear in the patent.]

I wish they may do good thereof, but fear it will prove but a poor
project.  This day the King and Queen are to come to Oxford.  I hear my
Lady Castlemaine is for certain gone to Oxford to meet him, having lain
within here at home this week or two, supposed to have miscarried; but for
certain is as great in favour as heretofore;

     [According to Collins, Henry Fitzroy, Lady Castlemaine's second son
     by Charles II., was born on September 20th, 1663.  He was the first
     Duke of Grafton.--B.]

at least Mrs. Sarah at my Lord's, who hears all from their own family, do
say so.  Every day brings newes of the Turke's advance into Germany, to
the awakeing of all the Christian Princes thereabouts, and possessing
himself of Hungary.  My present care is fitting my wife's closett and my
house, and making her a velvet coate, and me a new black cloth suit, and
coate and cloake, and evening my reckoning as well as I can against
Michaelmas Day, hoping for all that to have my balance as great or greater
than ever I had yet.

23rd.  Up betimes and to my office, where setting down my journall while I
was in the country to this day, and at noon by water to my Lord Crew's,
and there dined with him and Sir Thomas, thinking to have them inquire
something about my Lord's lodgings at Chelsey, or any thing of that sort,
but they did not, nor seem to take the least notice of it, which is their
discretion, though it might be better for my Lord and them too if they
did, that so we might advise together for the best, which cannot be while
we seem ignorant one to another, and it is not fit for me to begin the
discourse.  Thence walked to several places about business and to
Westminster Hall, thinking to meet Mrs. Lane, which is my great vanity
upon me at present, but I must correct it.  She was not in the way.  So by
water home and to my office, whither by and by came my brother John, who
is to go to Cambridge to-morrow, and I did give him a most severe
reprimand for his bad account he gives me of his studies.  This I did with
great passion and sharp words, which I was sorry to be forced to say, but
that I think it for his good, forswearing doing anything for him, and that
which I have yet, and now do give him, is against my heart, and will also
be hereafter, till I do see him give me a better account of his studies.
I was sorry to see him give me no answer, but, for aught I see, to hear me
without great resentment, and such as I should have had: in his condition.
But I have done my duty, let him do his, for I am resolved to be as good
as my word.  After two hours walking in the garden, till after it was
dark, I ended with him and to my office, and there set some papers in
order, and so to supper, and my poor wife, who is mighty busy at home;
fitting her closet.  So to bed.

24th.  Up betimes, and after taking leave of my brother, John, who went
from me to my father's this day, I went forth by water to Sir Philip
Warwick's, where I was with him a pretty while; and in discourse he tells
me, and made it; appear to me, that the King cannot be in debt to the Navy
at this time L5,000; and it is my opinion that Sir G. Carteret do owe the
King money, and yet the whole Navy debt paid.  Thence I parted, being
doubtful of myself that I have not, spoke with the gravity and weight that
I ought to do in so great a business.  But I rather hope it is my
doubtfulness of myself, and the haste which he was in, some very great
personages waiting for him without, while he was with me, that made him
willing to be gone.  To the office by water, where we sat doing little,
now Mr. Coventry is not here, but only vex myself to see what a sort of
coxcombs we are when he is not here to undertake such a business as we do.
In the afternoon telling my wife that I go to Deptford, I went, by water
to Westminster Hall, and there finding Mrs. Lane, took her over to
Lambeth, where we were lately, and there, did what I would with her, but
only the main thing, which she; would not consent to, for which God be
praised .  .  .  .  .  But, trust in the Lord, I shall never do so again
while I live.  After being tired with her company I landed her at White;
Hall, and so home and at my office writing letters till 12 at night
almost, and then home to supper and bed, and there found my poor wife hard
at work, which grieved my heart to see that I should abuse so good a
wretch, and that is just with God to make her bad with me for my wrongin
of her, but I do resolve never to do the like again.  So to bed.

25th.  Lay pretty long in bed, and so to my office all the morning till by
and by called out by Sir J. Minnes and Sir W. Batten, with them by water
to Deptford, where it of a sudden did lighten, thunder, and rain so as we
could do nothing but stay in Davis's house, and by and by Sir J. Minnes
and I home again by water, and I home to dinner, and after dinner to the
office, and there till night all alone, even of my clerks being there,
doing of business, and so home and to bed.

26th.  Up and to my office, and there we sat till noon, and then I to the
Exchange, but did little there, but meeting Mr. Rawlinson he would needs
have me home to dinner, and Mr. Deane of Woolwich being with me I took him
with me, and there we dined very well at his own dinner, only no
invitation, but here I sat with little pleasure, considering my wife at
home alone, and so I made what haste home I could, and was forced to sit
down again at dinner with her, being unwilling to neglect her by being
known to dine abroad.  My doing so being only to keep Deane from dining at
home with me, being doubtful what I have to eat.  So to the office, and
there till late at night, and so home to supper and bed, being mightily
pleased to find my wife so mindful of her house.

27th (Lord's day).  Lay chatting with my wife a good while, then up and
got me ready and to church, without my man William, whom I have not seen
to-day, nor care, but would be glad to have him put himself far enough out
of my favour that he may not wonder to have me put him away.  So home to
dinner, being a little troubled to see Pembleton out again, but I do not
discern in my wife the least memory of him.  Dined, and so to my office a
little, and then to church again, where a drowsy sermon, and so home to
spend the evening with my poor wife, consulting about her closett,
clothes, and other things.  At night to supper, though with little
comfort, I finding myself both head and breast in great pain, and what
troubles me most my right ear is almost deaf.  It is a cold, which God
Almighty in justice did give me while I sat lewdly sporting with Mrs. Lane
the other day with the broken window in my neck.  I went to bed with a
posset, being very melancholy in consideration of the loss of my hearing.

28th.  Up, though with pain in my head, stomach, and ear, and that deaf so
as in my way by coach to White Hall with Sir J. Minnes I called at Mr.
Holliard's, who did give me some pills, and tells me I shall have my
hearing again and be well.  So to White Hall, where Sir J. Minnes and I
did spend an hour in the Gallery, looking upon the pictures, in which he
hath some judgment.  And by and by the Commissioners for Tangier met: and
there my Lord Teviott, together with Captain Cuttance, Captain Evans, and
Jonas Moore, sent to that purpose, did bring us a brave draught of the
Mole to be built there; and report that it is likely to be the most
considerable place the King of England hath in the world; and so I am apt
to think it will.  After discourse of this, and of supplying the garrison
with some more horse, we rose; and Sir J. Minnes and I home again, finding
the street about our house full, Sir R. Ford beginning his shrievalty
to-day and, what with his and our houses being new painted, the street
begins to look a great deal better than it did, and more gracefull.  Home
and eat one bit of meat, and then by water with him and Sir W. Batten to a
sale of old provisions at Deptford, which we did at Captain Boddily's
house, to the value of L600 or L700, but I am not satisfied with the
method used in this thing.  Then home again by water, and after a little
at my office, and visit Sir W. Pen, who is not very well again, with his
late pain, home to supper, being hungry, and my ear and cold not so bad I
think as it was.  So to bed, taking one of my pills.  Newes that the King
comes to town for certain on Thursday next from his progresse.

29th.  Took two pills more in the morning and they worked all day, and I
kept the house.  About noon dined, and then to carry several heavy things
with my wife up and down stairs, in order to our going to lie above, and
Will to come down to the Wardrobe, and that put me into a violent sweat,
so I had a fire made, and then, being dry again, she and I to put up some
paper pictures in the red chamber, where we go to lie very pretty, and the
map of Paris.  Then in the evening, towards night, it fell to thunder,
lighten, and rain so violently that my house was all afloat, and I in all
the rain up to the gutters, and there dabbled in the rain and wet half an
hour, enough to have killed a man.  That done downstairs to dry myself
again, and by and by come Mr. Sympson to set up my wife's chimney-piece in
her closett, which pleases me, and so that being done, I to supper and to
bed, shifting myself from top to toe, and doubtful of my doing myself
hurt.

30th.  Rose very well, and my hearing pretty well again, and so to my
office, by and by Mr. Holliard come, and at my house he searched my ear,
and I hope all will be well, though I do not yet hear so well as I used to
do with my right ear.  So to my office till noon, and then home to dinner,
and in the afternoon by water to White Hall, to the Tangier Committee;
where my Lord Tiviott about his accounts; which grieves me to see that his
accounts being to be examined by us, there are none of the great men at
the Board that in compliment will except against any thing in his
accounts, and so none of the little persons dare do it: so the King is
abused.  Thence home again by water with Sir W. Rider, and so to my
office, and there I sat late making up my month's accounts, and, blessed
be God, do find myself L760 creditor, notwithstanding that for clothes for
myself and wife, and layings out on her closett, I have spent this month
L47.  So home, where I found our new cooke-mayde Elizabeth, whom my wife
never saw at all, nor I but once at a distance before, but recommended
well by Mr. Creed, and I hope will prove well.  So to supper, prayers, and
bed.  This evening Mr. Coventry is come to St. James's, but I did not go
see him, and tomorrow the King, Queen, Duke and his Lady, and the whole
Court comes to towne from their progresse.  Myself and family well, only
my father sicke in the country.  All the common talke for newes is the
Turke's advance in Hungary, &c.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                 OCTOBER
                                  1663

October 1st.  Up and betimes to my office, and then to sit, where Sir G.
Carteret, Sir W. Batten, Sir W. Pen, Sir J. Minnes, Mr. Coventry and
myself, a fuller board than by the King's progresse and the late pays and
my absence has been a great while.  Sat late, and then home to dinner.
After dinner I by water to Deptford about a little business, and so back
again, buying a couple of good eeles by the way, and after writing by the
post, home to see the painter at work, late, in my wife's closet, and so
to supper and to bed, having been very merry with the painter, late, while
he was doing his work.  This day the King and Court returned from their
progress.

2nd.  Up betimes and by water to St. James's, and there visited Mr.
Coventry as a compliment after his new coming to town, but had no great
talk with him, he being full of business.  So back by foot through London,
doing several errands, and at the 'Change met with Mr. Cutler, and he and
I to a coffee-house, and there discoursed, and he do assure me that there
is great likelyhood of a war with Holland, but I hope we shall be in good
condition before it comes to break out.  I like his company, and will make
much of his acquaintance.  So home to dinner with my wife, who is over
head and eares in getting her house up, and so to the office, and with Mr.
Lewes, late, upon some of the old victuallers' accounts, and so home to
supper and to bed, up to our red chamber, where we purpose always to lie.
This day I received a letter from Mr. Barlow, with a Terella,

     [Professor Silvanus P. Thompson, F.R.S., has kindly supplied me with
     the following interesting note on the terrella (or terella): The
     name given by Dr. William Gilbert, author of the famous treatise,
     "De Magnete" (Lond.  1600), to a spherical loadstone, on account of
     its acting as a model, magnetically, of the earth; compass-needles
     pointing to its poles, as mariners' compasses do to the poles of
     the earth.  The term was adopted by other writers who followed
     Gilbert, as the following passage from Wm.  Barlowe's "Magneticall
     Advertisements" (Lond.  1616) shows: "Wherefore the round Loadstone
     is significantly termed by Doct. Gilbert Terrella, that is, a
     little, or rather a very little Earth: For it representeth in an
     exceeding small model (as it were) the admirable properties
     magneticall of the huge Globe of the earth" (op. cit, p. 55).
     Gilbert set great store by his invention of the terrella, since it
     led him to propound the true theory of the mariners' compass.  In
     his portrait of himself which he had painted for the University of
     Oxford he was represented as holding in his hand a globe inscribed
     terella.  In the Galileo Museum in Florence there is a terrella
     twenty-seven inches in diameter, of loadstone from Elba, constructed
     for Cosmo de' Medici.  A smaller one contrived by Sir Christopher
     Wren was long preserved in the museum of the Royal Society (Grew's
     "Rarities belonging to the Royal Society," p.  364).  Evelyn was
     shown "a pretty terrella described with all ye circles and skewing
     all y magnetic deviations" (Diary, July 3rd, 1655).]

which I had hoped he had sent me, but to my trouble I find it is to
present from him to my Lord Sandwich, but I will make a little use of it
first, and then give it him.

3rd.  Up, being well pleased with my new lodging and the convenience of
having our mayds and none else about us, Will lying below.  So to the
office, and there we sat full of business all the morning.  At noon I home
to dinner, and then abroad to buy a bell to hang by our chamber door to
call the mayds.  Then to the office, and met Mr. Blackburne, who came to
know the reason of his kinsman (my Will) his being observed by his friends
of late to droop much.  I told him my great displeasure against him and
the reasons of it, to his great trouble yet satisfaction, for my care over
him, and how every thing I said was for the good of the fellow, and he
will take time to examine the fellow about all, and to desire my pleasure
concerning him, which I told him was either that he should became a better
servant or that we would not have him under my roof to be a trouble.  He
tells me in a few days he will come to me again and we shall agree what to
do therein.  I home and told my wife all, and am troubled to see that my
servants and others should be the greatest trouble I have in the world,
more than for myself.  We then to set up our bell with a smith very well,
and then I late at the office.  So home to supper and to bed.

4th (Lord's day).  Up and to church, my house being miserably overflooded
with rayne last night, which makes me almost mad.  At home to dinner with
my wife, and so to talk, and to church again, and so home, and all the
evening most pleasantly passed the time in good discourse of our fortune
and family till supper, and so to bed, in some pain below, through cold
got.

5th.  Up with pain, and with Sir J. Minnes by coach to the Temple, and
then I to my brother's, and up and down on business, and so to the New
Exchange, and there met Creed, and he and I walked two or three hours,
talking of many businesses, especially about Tangier, and my Lord Tiviot's
bringing in of high accounts, and yet if they were higher are like to pass
without exception, and then of my Lord Sandwich sending a messenger to
know whether the King intends to come to Newmarket, as is talked, that he
may be ready to entertain him at Hinchingbroke.  Thence home and dined,
and my wife all day putting up her hangings in her closett, which she do
very prettily herself with her own hand, to my great content.  So I to the
office till night, about several businesses, and then went and sat an hour
or two with Sir W. Pen, talking very largely of Sir J. Minnes's simplicity
and unsteadiness, and of Sir W. Batten's suspicious dealings, wherein I
was open, and he sufficiently, so that I do not care for his telling of
tales, for he said as much, but whether that were so or no I said nothing
but what is my certain knowledge and belief concerning him.  Thence home
to bed in great pain.

6th.  Slept pretty well, and my wife waked to ring the bell to call up our
mayds to the washing about 4 o'clock, and I was and she angry that our
bell did not wake them sooner, but I will get a bigger bell.  So we to
sleep again till 8 o'clock, and then I up in some ease to the office,
where we had a full board, where we examined Cocke's second account, when
Mr. Turner had drawn a bill directly to be paid the balance thereof, as
Mr. Cocke demanded, and Sir J. Minnes did boldly assert the truth of it,
and that he had examined it, when there is no such thing, but many
vouchers, upon examination, missing, and we saw reason to strike off
several of his demands, and to bring down his 5 per cent. commission to 3
per cent.  So we shall save the King some money, which both the
Comptroller and his clerke had absolutely given away.  There was also two
occasions more of difference at the table; the one being to make out a
bill to Captain Smith for his salary abroad as commander-in-chief in the
Streights.  Sir J. Minnes did demand an increase of salary for his being
Vice-Admiral in the Downes, he having received but 40s. without an
increase, when Sir J. Lawson, in the same voyage, had L3, and others have
also had increase, only he, because he was an officer of the board, was
worse used than any body else, and particularly told Sir W. Batten that he
was the opposer formerly of his having an increase, which I did wonder to
hear him so boldly lay it to him.  So we hushed up the dispute, and
offered, if he would, to examine precedents, and report them, if there was
any thing to his advantage to be found, to the Duke.  The next was, Mr.
Chr. Pett and Deane were summoned to give an account of some knees

     ["Naturally grown timber or bars of iron bent to a right angle or to
     fit the surfaces and to secure bodies firmly together as hanging
     knees secure the deck beams to the sides."--Smyth's Sailor's Word-
     Book.  There are several kinds of knees.]

which Pett reported bad, that were to be served in by Sir W. Warren, we
having contracted that none should be served but such as were to be
approved of by our officers.  So that if they were bad they were to be
blamed for receiving them.  Thence we fell to talk of Warren's other
goods, which Pett had said were generally bad, and falling to this
contract again, I did say it was the most cautious and as good a contract
as had been made here, and the only [one] that had been in such terms. Sir
J. Minnes told me angrily that Winter's timber, bought for 33s. per load,
was as good and in the same terms.  I told him that it was not so, but
that he and Sir W. Batten were both abused, and I would prove it was as
dear a bargain as had been made this half year, which occasioned high
words between them and me, but I am able to prove it and will.  That also
was so ended, and so to other business.  At noon Lewellin coming to me I
took him and Deane, and there met my uncle Thomas, and we dined together,
but was vexed that, it being washing-day, we had no meat dressed, but sent
to the Cook's, and my people had so little witt to send in our meat from
abroad in that Cook's dishes, which were marked with the name of the Cook
upon them, by which, if they observed anything, they might know it was not
my own dinner.  After dinner we broke up, and I by coach, setting down
Luellin in Cheapside.  So to White Hall, where at the Committee of
Tangier, but, Lord! how I was troubled to see my Lord Tiviott's accounts
of L10,000 paid in that manner, and wish 1000 times I had not been there.
Thence rose with Sir G. Carteret and to his lodgings, and there discoursed
of our frays at the table to-day, and particularly of that of the
contract, and the contract of masts the other day, declaring my fair
dealing, and so needing not any man's good report of it, or word for it,
and that I would make it so appear to him, if he desired it, which he did,
and I will do it.  Thence home by water in great pain, and at my office a
while, and thence a little to Sir W. Pen, and so home to bed, and finding
myself beginning to be troubled with wind as I used to be, and in pain in
making water, I took a couple of pills that I had by me of Mr. Hollyard's.

7th.  They wrought in the morning, and I did keep my bed, and my pain
continued on me mightily that I kept within all day in great pain, and
could break no wind nor have any stool after my physic had done working.
So in the evening I took coach and to Mr. Holliard's, but he was not at
home, and so home again, and whether the coach did me good or no I know
not .  .  .  .  So to bed and lay in good ease all night, and .  .  .  .
pretty well to the morning .  .  .  .  .

     [Pepys's prescription for the colic:

     "Balsom of Sulphur, 3 or 4 drops in a spoonfull of Syrrup of Colts
     foote, not eating or drinking two hours before or after.

     "The making of this Balsom:

     "2/3ds of fine Oyle, and 1/3d of fine Brimstone, sett 13 or 14
     houres upon yt fire, simpring till a thicke Stufte lyes at ye
     Bottome, and ye Balsom at ye topp.  Take this off &c.

     "Sir Rob. Parkhurst for ye Collique."--M. B.]

8th.  So, keeping myself warm, to the office, and at noon home to dinner,
my pain coming again by breaking no wind nor having any stool.  So to Mr.
Holliard, and by his direction, he assuring me that it is nothing of the
stone, but only my constitution being costive, and that, and cold from
without, breeding and keeping the wind, I took some powder that he did
give me in white wine, and sat late up, till past eleven at night, with my
wife in my chamber till it had done working, which was so weakly that I
could hardly tell whether it did work or no.  My mayds being at this time
in great dirt towards getting of all my house clean, and weary and having
a great deal of work to do therein to-morrow and next day, were gone to
bed before my wife and I, who also do lie in our room more like beasts
than Christians, but that is only in order to having of the house shortly
in a cleaner, or rather very clean condition.  Some ease I had so long as
this did keep my body loose, and I slept well.

9th.  And did keep my bed most of this morning, my body I find being still
bound and little wind, and so my pain returned again, though not so bad,
but keeping my body with warm clothes very hot I made shift to endure it,
and at noon sent word to Mr. Hollyard of my condition, that I could
neither have a natural stool nor break wind, and by that means still in
pain and frequent offering to make water.  So he sent me two bottles of
drink and some syrup, one bottle to take now and the other to-morrow
morning.  So in the evening, after Commissioner Pett, who came to visit
me, and was going to Chatham, but methinks do talk to me in quite another
manner, doubtfully and shyly, and like a stranger, to what he did
heretofore.  After I saw he was gone I did drink one of them, but it was a
most loathsome draught, and did keep myself warm after it, and had that
afternoon still a stool or two, but in no plenty, nor any wind almost
carried away, and so to bed.  In no great pain, but do not think myself
likely to be well till I have a freedom of stool and wind.  Most of this
day and afternoon my wife and I did spend together in setting things now
up and in order in her closet, which indeed is, and will be, when I can
get her some more things to put in it, a very pleasant place, and is at
present very pretty, and such as she, I hope, will find great content in.
So to bed.

10th.  Up, and not in any good ease yet, but had pain in making water, and
some course.  I see I must take besides keeping myself warm to make myself
break wind and go freely to stool before I can be well, neither of which I
can do yet, though I have drank the other bottle of Mr. Hollyard's against
my stomach this morning.  I did, however, make shift to go to the office,
where we sat, and there Sir J. Minnes and Sir W. Batten did advise me to
take some juniper water, and Sir W. Batten sent to his Lady for some for
me, strong water made of juniper.  Whether that or anything else of my
draught this morning did it I cannot tell, but I had a couple of stools
forced after it .  .  .  .  but whether I shall grow better upon it I
cannot tell.  Dined at home at noon, my wife and house in the dirtiest
pickle that ever she and it was in almost, but in order, I hope, this
night to be very clean.  To the office all the afternoon upon victualling
business, and late at it, so after I wrote by the post to my father, I
home.  This evening Mr. Hollyard sends me an electuary to take (a walnut
quantity of it) going to bed, which I did. 'Tis true I slept well, and
rose in a little ease in the morning.

11th (Lord's day).  And was mightily pleased to see my house clean and in
good condition, but something coming into my wife's head, and mine, to be
done more about bringing the green bed into our chamber, which is
handsomer than the red one, though not of the colour of our hangings, my
wife forebore to make herself clean to-day, but continued in a sluttish
condition till to-morrow.  I after the old passe, all the day within
doors, .  .  .  .  the effect of my electuary last night, and the greatest
of my pain I find to come by my straining .  .  .  .  For all this I eat
with a very good stomach, and as much as I use to do, and so I did this
noon, and staid at home discoursing and doing things in my chamber,
altering chairs in my chamber, and set them above in the red room, they
being Turkey work, and so put their green covers upon those that were
above, not so handsome.  At night fell to reading in the Church History of
Fuller's, and particularly Cranmer's letter to Queen Elizabeth, which
pleases me mightily for his zeal, obedience, and boldness in a cause of
religion.  After supper to bed as I use to be, in pain .  .  .  .  .

12th.  Up (though slept well) and made some water in the morning [as] I
used to do, and a little pain returned to me, and some fears, but being
forced to go to the Duke at St. James's, I took coach and in my way called
upon Mr. Hollyard and had his advice to take a glyster.  At St. James's we
attended the Duke all of us.  And there, after my discourse, Mr. Coventry
of his own accord begun to tell the Duke how he found that discourse
abroad did run to his prejudice about the fees that he took, and how he
sold places and other things; wherein he desired to appeal to his
Highness, whether he did any thing more than what his predecessors did,
and appealed to us all.  So Sir G. Carteret did answer that some fees were
heretofore taken, but what he knows not; only that selling of places never
was nor ought to be countenanced.  So Mr. Coventry very hotly answered to
Sir G. Carteret, and appealed to himself whether he was not one of the
first that put him upon looking after this taking of fees, and that he
told him that Mr. Smith should say that he made L5000 the first year, and
he believed he made L7000.  This Sir G. Carteret denied, and said, that if
he did say so he told a lie, for he could not, nor did know, that ever he
did make that profit of his place; but that he believes he might say L2500
the first year.  Mr. Coventry instanced in another thing, particularly
wherein Sir G. Carteret did advise with him about the selling of the
Auditor's place of the stores, when in the beginning there was an
intention of creating such an office.  This he confessed, but with some
lessening of the tale Mr. Coventry told, it being only for a respect to my
Lord Fitz-Harding.  In fine, Mr. Coventry did put into the Duke's hand a
list of above 250 places that he did give without receiving one farthing,
so much as his ordinary fees for them, upon his life and oath; and that
since the Duke's establishment of fees he had never received one token
more of any man; and that in his whole life he never conditioned or
discoursed of any consideration from any commanders since he came to the
Navy.  And afterwards, my Lord Barkeley merrily discoursing that he wished
his profit greater than it was, and that he did believe that he had got
L50,000 since he came in, Mr. Coventry did openly declare that his
Lordship, or any of us, should have not only all he had got, but all that
he had in the world (and yet he did not come a beggar into the Navy, nor
would yet be thought to speak in any contempt of his Royall Highness's
bounty), and should have a year to consider of it too, for L25,000.  The
Duke's answer was, that he wished we all had made more profit than he had
of our places, and that we had all of us got as much as one man below
stayres in the Court, which he presently named, and it was Sir George
Lane!  This being ended, and the list left in the Duke's hand, we parted,
and I with Sir G. Carteret, Sir J. Minnes, and Sir W. Batten by coach to
the Exchange, and there a while, and so home, and whether it be the
jogging, or by having my mind more employed (which I believe is a great
matter) I know not, but .  .  .  . I begin to be suddenly well, at least
better than I was.  So home and to dinner, and thence by coach to the Old
Exchange, and there cheapened some laces for my wife, and then to
Mr.-----the great laceman in Cheapside, and bought one cost me L4. more by
20s.  than I intended, but when I came to see them I was resolved to buy
one worth wearing with credit, and so to the New Exchange, and there put
it to making, and so to my Lord's lodgings and left my wife, and so I to
the Committee of Tangier, and then late home with my wife again by coach,
beginning to be very well, and yet when I came home .  .  .  .  the little
straining which I thought was no strain at all at the present did by and
by bring me some pain for a good while.  Anon, about 8 o'clock, my wife
did give me a clyster which Mr. Hollyard directed, viz., a pint of strong
ale, 4 oz. of sugar, and 2 oz. of butter.  It lay while I lay upon the bed
above an hour, if not two, and then thinking it quite lost I rose, and by
and by it began with my walking to work, and gave me three or four most
excellent stools and carried away wind, put me in excellent ease, and
taking my usual walnut quantity of electuary at my going into bed I had
about two stools in the night .  .  .  .  .

13th.  And so rose in the morning in perfect good ease .  .  .  .
continued all the morning well, and in the afternoon had a natural easily
and dry stoole, the first I have had these five days or six, for which God
be praised, and so am likely to continue well, observing for the time to
come when any of this pain comes again

(1) To begin to keep myself as warm as I can.

(2) Strain as little as ever I can backwards, remembering that my pain
will come by and by, though in the very straining I do not feel it.

(3) Either by physic forward or by clyster backward or both ways to get an
easy and plentiful going to stool and breaking of wind.

(4) To begin to suspect my health immediately when I begin to become
costive and bound, and by all means to keep my body loose, and that to
obtain presently after I find myself going the contrary.

This morning at the office, and at noon with Creed to the Exchange, where
much business, but, Lord!  how my heart, though I know not reason for it,
began to doubt myself, after I saw Stint, Field's one-eyed solicitor,
though I know not any thing that they are doing, or that they endeavour
any thing further against us in the business till the terme.  Home, and
Creed with me to dinner, and after dinner John Cole, my old friend, came
to see and speak with me about a friend.  I find him ingenious, but more
and more discern his city pedantry; but however, I will endeavour to have
his company now and then, for that he knows much of the temper of the
City, and is able to acquaint therein as much as most young men, being of
large acquaintance, and himself, I think, somewhat unsatisfied with the
present state of things at Court and in the Church.  Then to the office,
and there busy till late, and so home to my wife, with some ease and
pleasure that I hope to be able to follow my business again, which by
God's leave I am resolved to return to with more and more eagerness. I
find at Court, that either the King is doubtfull of some disturbance, or
else would seem so (and I have reason to hope it is no worse), by his
commanding all commanders of castles, &c., to repair to their charges; and
mustering the Guards the other day himself, where he found reason to
dislike their condition to my Lord Gerard, finding so many absent men, or
dead pays.

     [This is probably an allusion to the practice of not reporting the
     deaths of soldiers, that the officers might continue to draw their
     pay.--B.]

My Lady Castlemaine, I hear, is in as great favour as ever, and the King
supped with her the very first night he came from Bath: and last night and
the night before supped with her; when there being a chine of beef to
roast, and the tide rising into their kitchen that it could not be roasted
there, and the cook telling her of it, she answered, "Zounds! she must set
the house on fire but it should be roasted!" So it was carried to Mrs.
Sarah's husband's, and there it was roasted.  So home to supper and to
bed, being mightily pleased with all my house and my red chamber, where my
wife and I intend constantly to lie, and the having of our dressing room
and mayds close by us without any interfering or trouble.

14th.  Up and to my office, where all the morning, and part of it Sir J.
Minnes spent, as he do every thing else, like a fool, reading the Anatomy
of the body to me, but so sillily as to the making of me understand any
thing that I was weary of him, and so I toward the 'Change and met with
Mr. Grant, and he and I to the Coffee-house, where I understand by him
that Sir W. Petty and his vessel are coming, and the King intends to go to
Portsmouth to meet it.  Thence home and after dinner my wife and I, by Mr.
Rawlinson's conduct, to the Jewish Synagogue: where the men and boys in
their vayles, and the women behind a lattice out of sight; and some things
stand up, which I believe is their Law, in a press to which all coming in
do bow; and at the putting on their vayles do say something, to which
others that hear him do cry Amen, and the party do kiss his vayle.  Their
service all in a singing way, and in Hebrew.  And anon their Laws that
they take out of the press are carried by several men, four or five
several burthens in all, and they do relieve one another; and whether it
is that every one desires to have the carrying of it, I cannot tell, thus
they carried it round about the room while such a service is singing.  And
in the end they had a prayer for the King, which they pronounced his name
in Portugall; but the prayer, like the rest, in Hebrew.  But, Lord! to see
the disorder, laughing, sporting, and no attention, but confusion in all
their service, more like brutes than people knowing the true God, would
make a man forswear ever seeing them more and indeed I never did see so
much, or could have imagined there had been any religion in the whole
world so absurdly performed as this.  Away thence with my mind strongly
disturbed with them, by coach and set down my wife in Westminster Hall,
and I to White Hall, and there the Tangier Committee met, but the Duke and
the Africa Committee meeting in our room, Sir G. Carteret; Sir W. Compton,
Mr. Coventry, Sir W. Rider, Cuttance and myself met in another room, with
chairs set in form but no table, and there we had very fine discourses of
the business of the fitness to keep Sally, and also of the terms of our
King's paying the Portugees that deserted their house at Tangier, which
did much please me, and so to fetch my wife, and so to the New Exchange
about her things, and called at Thomas Pepys the turner's and bought
something there, an so home to supper and to bed, after I had been a good
while with Sir W. Pen, railing and speaking freely our minds against Sir
W. Batten and Sir J. Minnes, but no more than the folly of one and the
knavery of the other do deserve.

15th.  Up, I bless God being now in pretty good condition, but cannot come
to make natural stools yet .  .  .  .  .  So up and to the office, where
we sat all the morning, and at noon dined at home, my head full of
business, and after stepping abroad to buy a thing or two, compasses and
snuffers for my wife, I returned to my office and there mighty busy till
it was late, and so home well contented with the business that I had done
this afternoon, and so to supper and to bed.

16th.  Up and to my office, where all the morning doing business, and at
noon home to dinner, and then up to remove my chest and clothes up stairs
to my new wardrobe, that I may have all my things above where I lie, and
so by coach abroad with my wife, leaving her at my Lord's till I went to
the Tangier Committee, where very good discourse concerning the Articles
of peace to be continued with Guyland, and thence took up my wife, and
with her to her tailor's, and then to the Exchange and to several places,
and so home and to my office, where doing some business, and then home to
supper and to bed.

17th.  Up and to my office, and there we sat a very full board all the
morning upon some accounts of Mr. Gauden's.  Here happened something
concerning my Will which Sir W. Batten would fain charge upon him, and I
heard him mutter something against him of complaint for his often
receiving people's money to Sir G. Carteret, which displeased me much, but
I will be even with him.  Thence to the Dolphin Tavern, and there Mr.
Gauden did give us a great dinner.  Here we had some discourse of the
Queen's being very sick, if not dead, the Duke and Duchess of York being
sent for betimes this morning to come to White Hall to her.  So to my
office and there late doing business, and so home to supper, my house
being got mighty clean to my great content from top to toe, and so to bed,
myself beginning to be in good condition of health also, but only my
laying out so much money upon clothes for myself and wife and her closet
troubles me.

18th (Lord's day).  Up, and troubled at a distaste my wife took at a small
thing that Jane did, and to see that she should be so vexed that I took
part with Jane, wherein I had reason; but by and by well again, and so my
wife in her best gown and new poynt that I bought her the other day, to
church with me, where she has not been these many weeks, and her mayde
Jane with her.  I was troubled to see Pembleton there, but I thought it
prudence to take notice myself first of it and show my wife him, and so by
little and little considering that it mattered not much his being there I
grew less concerned and so mattered it not much, and the less when, anon,
my wife showed me his wife, a pretty little woman, and well dressed, with
a good jewel at her breast.  The parson, Mr. Mills, I perceive, did not
know whether to pray for the Queen or no, and so said nothing about her;
which makes me fear she is dead.  But enquiring of Sir J. Minnes, he told
me that he heard she was better last night.  So home to dinner, and Tom
came and dined with me, and so, anon, to church again, and there a simple
coxcomb preached worse than the Scot, and no Pembleton nor his wife there,
which pleased me not a little, and then home and spent most of the evening
at Sir W. Pen's in complaisance, seeing him though he deserves no respect
from me.  This evening came my uncle Wight to speak with me about my uncle
Thomas's business, and Mr. Moore came, 4 or 5 days out of the country and
not come to see me before, though I desired by two or three messengers
that he would come to me as soon as he came to town.  Which do trouble me
to think he should so soon forget my kindness to him, which I am afraid he
do.  After walking a good while in the garden with these, I went up again
to Sir W. Pen, and took my wife home, and after supper to prayers, and
read very seriously my vowes, which I am fearful of forgetting by my late
great expenses, but I hope in God I do not, and so to bed.

19th.  Waked with a very high wind, and said to my wife, "I pray God I
hear not of the death of any great person, this wind is so high!" fearing
that the Queen might be dead.  So up; and going by coach with Sir W.
Batten and Sir J. Minnes to St. James's, they tell me that Sir W. Compton,
who it is true had been a little sickly for a week or fortnight, but was
very well upon Friday at night last at the Tangier Committee with us, was
dead--died yesterday: at which I was most exceedingly surprised, he being,
and so all the world saying that he was, one of the worthyest men and best
officers of State now in England; and so in my conscience he was: of the
best temper, valour, abilities of mind, integrity, birth, fine person, and
diligence of any one man he hath left behind him in the three kingdoms;
and yet not forty years old, or if so, that is all.

     [Sir William Compton (1625-1663) was knighted at Oxford, December
     12th, 1643.  He was called by Cromwell "the sober young man and the
     godly cavalier."  After the Restoration he was M.P. for Cambridge
     (1661), and appointed Master of the Ordnance.  He died in Drury
     Lane, suddenly, as stated in the text, and was buried at Compton
     Wynyates, Warwickshire.]

I find the sober men of the Court troubled for him; and yet not so as to
hinder or lessen their mirth, talking, laughing, and eating, drinking, and
doing every thing else, just as if there was no such thing, which is as
good an instance for me hereafter to judge of death, both as to the
unavoidableness, suddenness, and little effect of it upon the spirits of
others, let a man be never so high, or rich, or good; but that all die
alike, no more matter being made of the death of one than another, and
that even to die well, the praise of it is not considerable in the world,
compared to the many in the world that know not nor make anything of it,
nor perhaps to them (unless to one that like this poor gentleman, who is
one of a thousand, there nobody speaking ill of him) that will speak ill
of a man.  Coming to St. James's, I hear that the Queen did sleep five
hours pretty well to-night, and that she waked and gargled her mouth, and
to sleep again; but that her pulse beats fast, beating twenty to the
King's or my Lady Suffolk's eleven; but not so strong as it was.  It seems
she was so ill as to be shaved and pidgeons put to her feet, and to have
the extreme unction given her by the priests, who were so long about it
that the doctors were angry.  The King, they all say; is most fondly
disconsolate for her, and weeps by her, which makes her weep;

     ["The queen was given over by her physicians, .  .  .  , and the
     good nature of the king was much affected with the situation in
     which he saw!  a princess whom, though he did not love her, yet he
     greatly esteemed.  She loved him tenderly, and thinking that it was
     the last time she should ever speak to him, she told him 'That the
     concern he showed for her death was enough to make her quit life
     with regret; but that not possessing charms sufficient to merit his
     tenderness, she had at least the consolation in dying to give place
     to a consort who might be more worthy, of it and to whom heaven,
     perhaps, might grant a blessing that had been refused to her.'  At
     these words she bathed his hands with some tears which he thought
     would be her last; he mingled his own with hers, and without
     supposing she would take him at his word, he conjured her to live
     for his sake."--Grammont Memoirs, chap.  vii.]

which one this day told me he reckons a good sign, for that it carries
away some rheume from the head.  This morning Captain Allen tells me how
the famous Ned Mullins, by a slight fall, broke his leg at the ancle,
which festered; and he had his leg cut off on Saturday, but so ill done,
notwithstanding all the great chyrurgeons about the town at the doing of
it, that they fear he will not live with it, which is very strange,
besides the torment he was put to with it.  After being a little with the
Duke, and being invited to dinner to my Lord Barkeley's, and so, not
knowing how to spend our time till noon, Sir W. Batten and I took coach,
and to the Coffee-house in Cornhill;

     [This may be the Coffee House in Exchange Alley, which had for a
     sign, Morat the Great, or The Great Turk, where coffee was sold in
     berry, in powder, and pounded in a mortar.  There is a token of the
     house, see "Boyne's Tokens," ed.  Williamson, vol.  i., p.  592.]

where much talk about the Turk's proceedings, and that the plague is got
to Amsterdam, brought by a ship from Argier; and it is also carried to
Hambrough.  The Duke says the King purposes to forbid any of their ships
coming into the river.  The Duke also told us of several Christian
commanders (French) gone over to the Turks to serve them; and upon inquiry
I find that the King of France do by this aspire to the Empire, and so to
get the Crown of Spayne also upon the death of the King, which is very
probable, it seems.  Back to St. James's, and there dined with my Lord
Barkeley and his lady, where Sir G. Carteret, Sir W. Batten, and myself,
with two gentlemen more; my Lady, and one of the ladies of honour to the
Duchesse (no handsome woman, but a most excellent hand).  A fine French
dinner, and so we after dinner broke up and to Creed's new lodgings in
Axe-yard, which I like very well and so with him to White Hall and walked
up and down in the galleries with good discourse, and anon Mr. Coventry
and Povy, sad for the loss of one of our number we sat down as a Committee
for Tangier and did some business and so broke up, and I down with Mr.
Coventry and in his chamber discoursing of business of the office and Sir
J. Minnes and Sir W. Batten's carriage, when he most ingeniously tells me
how they have carried themselves to him in forbearing to speak the other
day to the Duke what they know they have so largely at other times said to
him, and I told him what I am put to about the bargain for masts.  I
perceive he thinks of it all and will remember it.  Thence took up my wife
at Mrs. Harper's where she and Jane were, and so called at the New
Exchange for some things for her, and then at Tom's went up and saw his
house now it is finished, and indeed it is very handsome, but he not
within and so home and to my office; and then to supper and to bed.

20th.  Up and to the office, where we sat; and at noon Sir G. Carteret,
Sir J. Minnes, and I to dinner to my Lord Mayor's, being invited, where
was the Farmers of the Customes, my Lord Chancellor's three sons, and
other great and much company, and a very great noble dinner, as this
Mayor--[Sir John Robinson.]--is good for nothing else.  No extraordinary
discourse of any thing, every man being intent upon his dinner, and myself
willing to have drunk some wine to have warmed my belly, but I did for my
oath's sake willingly refrain it, but am so well pleased and satisfied
afterwards thereby, for it do keep me always in so good a frame of mind
that I hope I shall not ever leave this practice.  Thence home, and took
my wife by coach to White Hall, and she set down at my Lord's lodgings, I
to a Committee of Tangier, and thence with her homeward, calling at
several places by the way.  Among others at Paul's Churchyard, and while I
was in Kirton's shop, a fellow came to offer kindness or force to my wife
in the coach, but she refusing, he went away, after the coachman had
struck him, and he the coachman.  So I being called, went thither, and the
fellow coming out again of a shop, I did give him a good cuff or two on
the chops, and seeing him not oppose me, I did give him another; at last
found him drunk, of which I was glad, and so left him, and home, and so to
my office awhile, and so home to supper and to bed. This evening, at my
Lord's lodgings, Mrs. Sarah talking with my wife and I how the Queen do,
and how the King tends her being so ill.  She tells us that the Queen's
sickness is the spotted fever; that she was as full of the spots as a
leopard which is very strange that it should be no more known; but perhaps
it is not so.  And that the King do seem to take it much to heart, for
that he hath wept before her; but, for all that; that he hath not missed
one night since she was sick, of supping with my Lady Castlemaine; which I
believe is true, for she [Sarah] says that her husband hath dressed the
suppers every night; and I confess I saw him myself coming through the
street dressing of a great supper to-night, which Sarah says is also for
the King and her; which is a very strange thing.

21st.  Up, and by and by comes my brother Tom to me, though late (which do
vex me to the blood that I could never get him to come time enough to me,
though I have spoke a hundred times; but he is very sluggish, and too
negligent ever to do well at his trade I doubt), and having lately
considered with my wife very much of the inconvenience of my going in no
better plight, we did resolve of putting me into a better garb, and, among
other things, to have a good velvet cloake; that is, of cloth lined with
velvet and other things modish, and a perruque, and so I sent him and her
out to buy me velvet, and I to the Exchange, and so to Trinity House, and
there dined with Sir W. Batten, having some business to speak with him,
and Sir W. Rider.  Thence, having my belly full, away on foot to my
brother's, all along Thames Streete, and my belly being full of small
beer, I did all alone, for health's sake, drink half a pint of Rhenish
wine at the Still-yard, mixed with beer.  From my brother's with my wife
to the Exchange, to buy things for her and myself, I being in a humour of
laying out money, but not prodigally, but only in clothes, which I every
day see that I suffer for want of, I so home, and after a little at my
office, home to supper and to bed.  Memorandum: This morning one Mr.
Commander, a scrivener, came to me from Mr. Moore with a deed of which.
Mr. Moore had told me, that my Lord had made use of my name, and that I
was desired by my Lord to sign it.  Remembering this very well, though
understanding little of the particulars, I read it over, and found it
concern Sir Robt. Bernard and Duckinford, their interest in the manor of
Brampton.  So I did sign it, declaring to Mr. Commander that I am only
concerned in having my name at my Lord Sandwich's desire used therein, and
so I sealed it up after I had signed and sealed the deed, and desired him
to give it so sealed to Mr. Moore.  I did also call at the Wardrobe this
afternoon to have told Mr. Moore of it, but he was not within, but knowing
Mr. Commander to have the esteem of a good and honest man with my Lord
Crew, I did not doubt to intrust him with the deed after I had signed it.
This evening after I came home I begun to enter my wife in arithmetique,
in order to her studying of the globes, and she takes it very well, and, I
hope, with great pleasure, I shall bring her to understand many fine
things.

22nd.  Up to the office, where we sat till noon and then I home to dinner,
and after dinner with my wife to her study and there read some more
arithmetique, which she takes with great ease and pleasure.  This morning,
hearing that the Queen grows worse again, I sent to stop the making of my
velvet cloake, till I see whether she lives or dies.  So a little abroad
about several businesses, and then home and to my office till night, and
then home to supper, teach my wife, and so to bed.

23rd.  Up, and this morning comes Mr. Clerke, and tells me that the
Injunction against Trice is dismissed again, which troubles me much.  So I
am to look after it in the afternoon.  There comes also by appointment my
uncle Thomas, to receive the first payment of his daughter's money. But
showing of me the original of the deed by which his daughter gives her
right to her legacy to him, and the copy of it attested by the Scrivener,
for me to keep by me, I did find some difference, and thereupon did look
more into it, and at last did find the whole thing a forgery; yet he
maintained it again and again, upon oath, that it had been signed and
sealed by my cozen Mary ever since before her marriage. So I told him to
his teeth he did like a knave, and so he did, and went with him to the
Scrivener at Bedlam, and there found how it came to pass, viz., that he
had lost, or pretends to have lost, the true original, and that so he was
forced to take this course; but a knave, at least a man that values not
what he swears to, I perceive he is.  But however I am now better able to
see myself fully secured before I part with the money, for I find that his
son Charles has right to this legacy till the first L100 of his daughter's
portion be paid, he being bond for it.  So I put him upon getting both his
sons to be bound for my security, and so left him and so home, and then
abroad to my brother's, but found him abroad at the young couple that was
married yesterday, and he one of the Br[ide's] men, a kinswoman
(Brumfield) of the Joyces married to an upholster. Thence walked to the
King's Head at Charing Cross and there dined, and hear that the Queen
slept pretty well last night, but her fever continues upon her still.  It
seems she hath never a Portuguese doctor here. Thence by appointment to
the Six Clerks' office to meet Mr. Clerke, which I did and there waited
all the afternoon for Wilkinson my attorney, but he came not, and so vexed
and weary we parted, and I endeavoured but in vain to have found Dr.
Williams, of whom I shall have use in Trice's business, but I could not
find him.  So weary walked home; in my way bought a large kitchen knife
and half dozen oyster knives.  Thence to Mr. Holliard, who tells me that
Mullins is dead of his leg cut off the other day, but most basely done.
He tells me that there is no doubt but that all my slyme do come away in
my water, and therefore no fear of the stone; but that my water being so
slymy is a good sign.  He would have me now and then to take a clyster,
the same I did the other day, though I feel no pain, only to keep me
loose, and instead of butter, which he would have to be salt butter, he
would have me sometimes use two or three ounces of honey, at other times
two or three ounces of Linseed oil. Thence to Mr. Rawlinson's and saw some
of my new bottles made, with my crest upon them, filled with wine, about
five or six dozen.  So home and to my office a little, and thence home to
prepare myself against T. Trice, and also to draw a bond fit for my uncle
and his sons to enter into before I pay them the money.  That done to bed.

24th.  Up and to my office, where busy all the morning about Mr. Gauden's
account, and at noon to dinner with him at the Dolphin, where mighty merry
by pleasant stories of Mr. Coventry's and Sir J. Minnes's, which I have
put down some of in my book of tales.  Just as I was going out my uncle
Thomas came to the with a draught of a bond for him and his sons to sign
to me about the payment of the L20 legacy, which I agreed to, but he would
fain have had from me the copy of the deed, which he had forged and did
bring me yesterday, but I would not give him it.  Says [he] I perceive
then you will keep it to defame me with, and desired me not to speak of
it, for he did it innocently.  Now I confess I do not find any great hurt
in the thing, but only to keep from me a sight of the true original deed,
wherein perhaps there was something else that may touch this business of
the legacy which he would keep from me, or it may be, it is really lost as
he says it is.  But then he need not have used such a slight, but confess
it without danger.  Thence by coach with Mr. Coventry to the Temple, and
thence I to the Six Clerks' office, and discoursed with my Attorney and
Solicitor, and he and I to Mr. Turner, who puts me in great fear that I
shall not get retayned again against Tom Trice; which troubles me.
Thence, it being night, homewards, and called at Wotton's and tried some
shoes, but he had none to fit me.  He tells me that by the Duke of York's
persuasion Harris is come again to Sir W. Davenant upon his terms that he
demanded, which will make him very high and proud.  Thence to another
shop, and there bought me a pair of shoes, and so walked home and to my
office, and dispatch letters by the post, and so home to supper and to
bed, where to my trouble I find my wife begin to talk of her being alone
all day, which is nothing but her lack of something to do, for while she
was busy she never, or seldom, complained .  .  .  .  . The Queen is in a
good way of recovery; and Sir Francis Pridgeon hath got great honour by
it, it being all imputed to his cordiall, which in her dispaire did give
her rest and brought her to some hopes of recovery.  It seems that, after
the much talk of troubles and a plot, something is found in the North that
a party was to rise, and some persons that were to command it are found,
as I find in a letter that Mr. Coventry read to-day about it from those
parts.

     [This refers to a rising in the West Riding of Yorkshire, which took
     place on October 12th, and was known as the Farneley Wood Plot.  The
     rising was easily put down, and several prisoners were taken.  A
     special commission of oyer and terminer was sent down to York to try
     the prisoners in January, 1663-64, when twenty-one were convicted
     and executed.  (See Whitaker's "Loidis and Elmete," 1816.)]

25th (Lord's day).  Up, and my wife and I to church, where it is strange
to see how the use and seeing Pembleton come with his wife thither to
church, I begin now to make too great matter of it, which before was so
terrible to me.  Dined at home, my wife and I alone, a good dinner, and so
in the afternoon to church again, where the Scot preached, and I slept
most of the afternoon.  So home, and my wife and I together all the
evening discoursing, and then after reading my vowes to myself, and my
wife with her mayds (who are mighty busy to get it dispatched because of
their mistress's promise, that when it is done they shall have leave all
to go see their friends at Westminster, whither my wife will carry them)
preparing for their washing to-morrow, we hastened to supper and to bed.

26th.  Waked about one o'clock in the morning .  .  .  .  My wife being
waked rung her bell, and the mayds rose and went to washing, we to sleep
again till 7 o'clock, and then up, and I abroad to look out Dr. Williams,
but being gone out I went to Westminster, and there seeing my Lord
Sandwich's footman knew he was come to town, and so I went in and saw him,
and received a kind salute from him, but hear that my father is very ill
still.  Thence to Westminster Hall with Creed, and spent the morning
walking there, where, it being Terme time, I met several persons, and
talked with them, among others Dr. Pierce, who tells me that the Queen is
in a way to be pretty well again, but that her delirium in her head
continues still; that she talks idle, not by fits, but always, which in
some lasts a week after so high a fever, in some more, and in some for
ever; that this morning she talked mightily that she was brought to bed,
and that she wondered that she should be delivered without pain and
without spueing or being sicke, and that she was troubled that her boy was
but an ugly boy.  But the King being by, said, "No, it is a very pretty
boy."--"Nay," says she, "if it be like you it is a fine boy indeed, and I
would be very well pleased with it."  The other day she talked mightily of
Sir H. Wood's lady's great belly, and said if she should miscarry he would
never get another, and that she never saw such a man as this Sir H. Wood
in her life, and seeing of Dr. Pridgeon, she said, "Nay, Doctor, you need
not scratch your head, there is hair little enough already in the place."
But methinks it was not handsome for the weaknesses of Princes to be
talked of thus.  Thence Creed and I to the King's Head ordinary, where
much and very good company, among others one very talking man, but a
scholler, that would needs put in his discourse and philosophy upon every
occasion, and though he did well enough, yet his readiness to speak spoilt
all.  Here they say that the Turkes go on apace, and that my Lord
Castlehaven is going to raise 10,000 men here for to go against him; that
the King of France do offer to assist the Empire upon condition that he
may be their Generalissimo, and the Dolphin chosen King of the Romans: and
it is said that the King of France do occasion this difference among the
Christian Princes of the Empire, which gives the Turke such advantages.
They say also that the King of Spayne is making all imaginable force
against Portugall again.  Thence Creed and I to one or two periwigg shops
about the Temple, having been very much displeased with one that we saw, a
head of greasy and old woman's haire, at Jervas's in the morning; and
there I think I shall fit myself of one very handsomely made.  Thence by
coach, my mind being troubled for not meeting with Dr. Williams, to St.
Catharine's to look at a Dutch ship or two for some good handsome maps,
but met none, and so back to Cornhill to Moxon's, but it being dark we
staid not to see any, then to coach again, and presently spying Sir W.
Batten; I 'light and took him in and to the Globe in Fleete Streete, by
appointment, where by and by he and I with our solicitor to Sir F. Turner
about Field's business, and back to the Globe, and thither I sent for Dr.
Williams, and he is willing to swear in my behalf against T. Trice, viz.,
that at T. Trice's desire we have met to treat about our business.  Thence
(I drinking no wine) after an hour's stay Sir W. Batten and another, and
he drinking, we home by coach, and so to my office and set down my
Journall, and then home to supper and to bed, my washing being in a good
condition over.  I did give Dr. Williams 20s. tonight, but it was after he
had answered me well to what I had to ask him about this business, and it
was only what I had long ago in my petty bag book allotted for him besides
the bill of near L4 which I paid him a good while since by my brother Tom
for physique for my wife, without any consideration to this business that
he is to do for me, as God shall save me.  Among the rest, talking of the
Emperor at table to-day one young gentleman, a pretty man, and it seems a
Parliament man, did say that he was a sot;

     [Leopold I, the Holy Roman Emperor, was born June 9th, 1640.  He
     became King of Hungary in 1655, and King of Bohemia in 1658, in
     which year he received the imperial crown.  The Princes of the
     German Empire watched for some time the progress of his struggle
     with the Turks with indifference, but in 1663 they were induced to
     grant aid to Leopold after he had made a personal appeal to them in
     the diet at Ratisbon.]

for he minded nothing of the Government, but was led by the Jesuites.
Several at table took him up, some for saying that he was a sot in being
led by the Jesuites, [who] are the best counsel he can take.  Another
commander, a Scott[ish] Collonell, who I believe had several under him,
that he was a man that had thus long kept out the Turke till now, and did
many other great things, and lastly Mr. Progers, one of our courtiers, who
told him that it was not a thing to be said of any Soveraigne Prince, be
his weaknesses what they will, to be called a sot, which methinks was very
prettily said.

27th.  Up, and my uncle Thomas and his scrivener bringing me a bond and
affidavit to my mind, I paid him his L20 for his daughter's legacy, and L5
more for a Quarter's annuity, in the manner expressed in each acquittance,
to which I must be referred on any future occasion, and to the bond and
affidavit.  Thence to the office and there sat till noon, and then home to
dinner, and after dinner (it being a foul house to-day among my maids,
making up their clothes) abroad with my Will with me by coach to Dr,
Williams, and with him to the Six Clerks's office, and there, by advice of
his acquaintance, I find that my case, through my neglect and the neglect
of my lawyers, is come to be very bad, so as that it will be very hard to
get my bill retayned again.  However, I got him to sign and swear an
affidavit that there was treaties between T. Trice and me with as much
advantage as I could for me, but I will say that for him he was most exact
as ever I saw man in my life, word by word what it was that he swore to,
and though, God forgive me, I could have been almost naturally willing to
have let him ignorantly have sworn to something that was not of itself
very certain, either or no, yet out of his own conscience and care he
altered the words himself so as to make them very safe for him to swear.
This I carrying to my clerk Wilkinson, and telling him how I heard matters
to stand, he, like a conceited fellow, made nothing of it but advised me
to offer Trice's clerks the cost of the dismission, viz., 46s. 8d., which
I did, but they would not take it without his client.  Immediately
thereupon we parted, and met T. Trice coming into the room, and he came to
me and served me with a subpoena for these very costs, so I paid it him,
but Lord! to see his resolution, and indeed discretion, in the wording of
his receipt, he would have it most express to my greatest disadvantage
that could be, yet so as I could not deny to give it him.  That being
paid, my clerke, and then his began to ask why we could not think, being
friends, of referring it, or stating it, first ourselves, and then put it
to some good lawyer to judge in it.  From one word to more we were
resolved to try, and to that end to step to the Pope's Head Taverne, and
there he and his Clerke and Attorney and I and my Clerke, and sent for Mr.
Smallwood, and by and by comes Mr. Clerke, my Solicitor, and after I had
privately discoursed with my men and seen how doubtfully they talked, and
what future certain charge and trouble it would be, with a doubtful
victory, I resolved to condescend very low, and after some talke all
together Trice and I retired, and he came to L150 the lowest, and I bid
him L80.  So broke off and then went to our company, and they putting us
to a second private discourse, at last I was contented to give him L100,
he to spend 40s. of it among this good company that was with us.  So we
went to our company, both seeming well pleased that we were come to an
end, and indeed I am in the respects above said, though it be a great sum
for us to part with. I am to pay him by giving him leave to buy about L40
worth of Piggott's land and to strike off so much of Piggott's debt, and
the other to give him bond to pay him in 12 months after without interest,
only giving him a power to buy more land of Piggott and paying him that
way as he did for the other, which I am well enough contented with, or at
least to take the land at that price and give him the money.  This last I
did not tell him, but I shall order it so.  Having agreed upon to-morrow
come se'nnight for the spending of the 40s. at Mr. Rawlinson's, we parted,
and I set T. Trice down in Paul's Churchyard and I by coach home and to my
office, and there set down this day's passages, and so home to supper and
to bed. Mr. Coventry tells me to-day that the Queen had a very good night
last night; but yet it is strange that still she raves and talks of little
more than of her having of children, and fancys now that she hath three
children, and that the girle is very like the King.  And this morning
about five o'clock waked (the physician feeling her pulse, thinking to be
better able to judge, she being still and asleep, waked her) and the first
word she said was, "How do the children?"

28th.  Up and at my office all the morning, and at noon Mr. Creed came to
me and dined with me, and after dinner Murford came to me and he and I
discoursed wholly upon his breach of contract with us.  After that Mr.
Creed and I abroad, I doing several errands, and with him at last to the
great coffee-house, and there after some common discourse we parted and I
home, paying what I owed at the Mitre in my way, and at home Sympson the
joyner coming he set up my press for my cloaks and other small things, and
so to my office a little, and to supper, and to bed.  This morning Mr.
Blackburne came to me, and telling me what complaints Will made of the
usage he had from my wife and other discouragements, and, I seeing him,
instead of advising, rather favouring his kinsman, I told him freely my
mind, but friendlily, and so we have concluded to have him have a lodging
elsewhere, and that I will spare him L15 of his salary, and if I do not
need to keep another L20.

29th.  Up, it being my Lord Mayor's day, Sir Anthony Bateman.  This
morning was brought home my new velvet cloake, that is, lined with velvet,
a good cloth the outside, the first that ever I had in my life, and I pray
God it may not be too soon now that I begin to wear it.  I had it this day
brought, thinking to have worn it to dinner, but I thought it would be
better to go without it because of the crowde, and so I did not wear it.
We met a little at the office, and then home again and got me ready to go
forth, my wife being gone forth by my consent before to see her father and
mother, and taken her cooke mayde and little girle to Westminster with her
for them to see their friends.  This morning in dressing myself and
wanting a band,

     [The band succeeded the ruff as the ordinary civil costume.  The
     lawyers, who now retain bands, and the clergy, who have only lately
     left them off, formerly wore ruffs.]

I found all my bands that were newly made clean so ill smoothed that I
crumpled them, and flung them all on the ground, and was angry with Jane,
which made the poor girle mighty sad, so that I were troubled for it
afterwards.  At noon I went forth, and by coach to Guild Hall (by the way
calling at Mr. Rawlinson's), and there was admitted, and meeting with Mr.
Proby (Sir R. Ford's son), and Lieutenant-Colonel Baron, a City commander,
we went up and down to see the tables; where under every salt there was a
bill of fare, and at the end of the table the persons proper for the
table.  Many were the tables, but none in the Hall but the Mayor's and the
Lords of the Privy Council that had napkins

     [As the practice of eating with forks gradually was introduced from
     Italy into England, napkins were not so generally used, but
     considered more as an ornament than a necessary.

                    "The laudable use of forks,
          Brought into custom here, as they are in Italy,
          To the sparing of napkins."

                         Ben Jonson, The Devil is an Ass, act v., sc.  3.

     The guests probably brought their own knife and fork with them in a
     case.--M.B.]

or knives, which was very strange.  We went into the Buttry, and there
stayed and talked, and then into the Hall again: and there wine was
offered and they drunk, I only drinking some hypocras, which do not break
my vowe, it being, to the best of my present judgement, only a mixed
compound drink, and not any wine.

     [A drink, composed usually of red wine, but sometimes of white, with
     the addition of sugar and spices.  Sir Walter Scott ("Quarterly
     Review," vol.  xxxiii.) says, after quoting this passage of Pepys,
     "Assuredly his pieces of bacchanalian casuistry can only be matched
     by that of Fielding's chaplain of Newgate, who preferred punch to
     wine, because the former was a liquor nowhere spoken against in
     Scripture."]

If I am mistaken, God forgive me!  but I hope and do think I am not.  By
and by met with Creed; and we, with the others, went within the several
Courts, and there saw the tables prepared for the Ladies and Judges and
Bishopps: all great sign of a great dinner to come.  By and by about one
o'clock, before the Lord Mayor came, come into the Hall, from the room
where they were first led into, the Lord Chancellor (Archbishopp before
him), with the Lords of the Council, and other Bishopps, and they to
dinner.  Anon comes the Lord Mayor, who went up to the lords, and then to
the other tables to bid wellcome; and so all to dinner.  I sat near Proby,
Baron, and Creed at the Merchant Strangers' table; where ten good dishes
to a messe, with plenty of wine of all sorts, of which I drunk none; but
it was very unpleasing that we had no napkins nor change of trenchers, and
drunk out of earthen pitchers and wooden dishes.--[The City plate was
probably melted during the Civil War.-M.B.]--It happened that after the
lords had half dined, came the French Embassador, up to the lords' table,
where he was to have sat; but finding the table set, he would not sit down
nor dine with the Lord Mayor, who was not yet come, nor have a table to
himself, which was offered; but in a discontent went away again.  After I
had dined, I and Creed rose and went up and down the house, and up to the
lady's room, and there stayed gazing upon them.  But though there were
many and fine, both young and old, yet I could not discern one handsome
face there; which was very strange, nor did I find the lady that young
Dawes married so pretty as I took her for, I having here an opportunity of
looking much upon her very near.  I expected musique, but there was none
but only trumpets and drums, which displeased me.  The dinner, it seems,
is made by the Mayor and two Sheriffs for the time being, the Lord Mayor
paying one half, and they the other.  And the whole, Proby says, is
reckoned to come to about 7 or L800 at most.  Being wearied with looking
upon a company of ugly women, Creed and I went away, and took coach and
through Cheapside, and there saw the pageants, which were very silly, and
thence to the Temple, where meeting Greatorex, he and we to Hercules
Pillars, there to show me the manner of his going about of draining of
fenns, which I desired much to know, but it did not appear very
satisfactory to me, as he discoursed it, and I doubt he will faile in it.
Thence I by coach home, and there found my wife come home, and by and by
came my brother Tom, with whom I was very angry for not sending me a bill
with my things, so as that I think never to have more work done by him if
ever he serves me so again, and so I told him.  The consideration of
laying out L32 12s. this very month in his very work troubles me also, and
one thing more, that is to say, that Will having been at home all the day,
I doubt is the occasion that Jane has spoken to her mistress tonight that
she sees she cannot please us and will look out to provide herself
elsewhere, which do trouble both of us, and we wonder also at her, but yet
when the rogue is gone I do not fear but the wench will do well.  To the
office a little, to set down my Journall, and so home late to supper and
to bed.  The Queen mends apace, they say; but yet talks idle still.

30th.  Lay long in bed with my wife, and then up and a while at my office,
and so to the Change, and so [home] again, and there I found my wife in a
great passion with her mayds.  I upstairs to set some things in order in
our chamber and wardrobe, and so to dinner upon a good dish of stewed
beef, then up again about my business.  Then by coach with my wife to the
New Exchange, and there bought and paid for several things, and then back,
calling at my periwigg-makers, and there showed my wife the periwigg made
for me, and she likes it very well, and so to my brother's, and to buy a
pair of boddice for her, and so home, and to my office late, and then home
to my wife, purposing to go on to a new lesson in arithmetique with her.
So to supper and to bed.  The Queen mends apace, but her head still light.
My mind very heavy thinking of my great layings out lately, and what they
must still be for clothes, but I hope it is in order to getting of
something the more by it, for I perceive how I have hitherto suffered for
lack of going as becomes my place.  After a little discourse with my wife
upon arithmetique, to bed.

31st.  Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and at noon
home to dinner, where Creed came and dined with me, and after dinner he
and I upstairs, and I showed him my velvet cloake and other things of
clothes, that I have lately bought, which he likes very well, and I took
his opinion as to some things of clothes, which I purpose to wear, being
resolved to go a little handsomer than I have hitherto.  Thence to the
office; where busy till night, and then to prepare my monthly account,
about which I staid till 10 or 11 o'clock at night, and to my great sorrow
find myself L43 worse than I was the last month, which was then L760, and
now it is but L717.  But it hath chiefly arisen from my layings-out in
clothes for myself and wife; viz., for her about L12, and for myself L55,
or thereabouts; having made myself a velvet cloake, two new cloth suits,
black, plain both; a new shagg

     [Shag was a stuff similar to plush.  In 1703 a youth who was missing
     is described in an advertisement as wearing "red shag breeches,
     striped with black stripes." (Planche's "Cyclopxdia of Costume ").]

gowne, trimmed with gold buttons and twist, with a new hat, and, silk tops
for my legs, and many other things, being resolved henceforward to go like
myself.  And also two perriwiggs, one whereof costs me L3, and the other
40s.--I have worn neither yet, but will begin next week, God willing.  So
that I hope I shall not need now to lay out more money a great while, I
having laid out in clothes for myself and wife, and for her closett and
other things without, these two months, this and the last, besides
household expenses of victuals, &c., above L110.  But I hope I shall with
more comfort labour to get more, and with better successe than when, for
want of clothes, I was forced to sneake like a beggar.  Having done this I
went home, and after supper to bed, my mind being eased in knowing my
condition, though troubled to think that I have been forced to spend so
much.

Thus I end this month worth L717, or thereabouts, with a good deal of good
goods more than I had, and a great deal of new and good clothes.  My
greatest trouble and my wife's is our family, mighty out of order by this
fellow Will's corrupting the mayds by his idle talke and carriage, which
we are going to remove by hastening him out of the house, which his uncle
Blackburne is upon doing, and I am to give him L20 per annum toward his
maintenance.  The Queene continues lightheaded, but in hopes to recover.
The plague is much in Amsterdam, and we in fears of it here, which God
defend.

     [Defend is used in the sense of forbid.  It is a Gallicism from the
     French "defendre."]

The Turke goes on mightily in the Emperor's dominions, and the Princes
cannot agree among themselves how to go against him.  Myself in pretty
good health now, after being ill this month for a week together, but
cannot yet come to .  .  .  .  well, being so costive, but for this month
almost I have not had a good natural stool, but to this hour am forced to
take physic every night, which brings me neither but one stool, and that
in the morning as soon as I am up, all the rest of the day very costive.
My father has been very ill in the country, but I hope better again now. I
am lately come to a conclusion with Tom Trice to pay him L100, which is a
great deale of money, but I hope it will save a great deale more.  But
thus everything lessens, which I have and am like to have, and therefore I
must look about me to get something more than just my salary, or else I
may resolve to live well and die a beggar.




     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     And so to sleep till the morning, but was bit cruelly
     And there, did what I would with her
     Content as to be at our own home, after being abroad awhile
     Found guilty, and likely will be hanged (for stealing spoons)
     Half a pint of Rhenish wine at the Still-yard, mixed with beer
     His readiness to speak spoilt all
     No more matter being made of the death of one than another
     Out of an itch to look upon the sluts there
     Plague is much in Amsterdam, and we in fears of it here
     Pride himself too much in it
     Reckon nothing money but when it is in the bank
     Resolve to live well and die a beggar
     Scholler, that would needs put in his discourse (every occasion)
     She was so ill as to be shaved and pidgeons put to her feet
     The plague is got to Amsterdam, brought by a ship from Argier
     We having no luck in maids now-a-days
     Who is over head and eares in getting her house up





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Diary of Samuel Pepys,
September/October 1663, by Samuel Pepys

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***

***** This file should be named 4143.txt or 4143.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/4/1/4/4143/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
