The Project Gutenberg EBook of Diary of Samuel Pepys, January/February
1663/64, by Samuel Pepys

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Diary of Samuel Pepys, January/February 1663/64

Author: Samuel Pepys

Release Date: November 30, 2004 [EBook #4146]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***




Produced by David Widger





                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A. F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.

                                1664 N.S.

January 1st, 1663-64.

Went to bed between 4 and 5 in the morning with my mind in good temper of
satisfaction and slept till about 8, that many people came to speak with
me.  Among others one came with the best New Year's gift that ever I had,
namely from Mr. Deering, with a bill of exchange drawn upon himself for
the payment of L50 to Mr. Luellin.  It being for my use with a letter of
compliment.  I am not resolved what or how to do in this business, but I
conclude it is an extraordinary good new year's gift, though I do not take
the whole, or if I do then give some of it to Luellin.  By and by comes
Captain Allen and his son Jowles and his wife, who continues pretty still.
They would have had me set my hand to a certificate for his loyalty, and I
know not what his ability for any employment.  But I did not think it fit,
but did give them a pleasing denial, and after sitting with me an hour
they went away.  Several others came to me about business, and then being
to dine at my uncle Wight's I went to the Coffee-house, sending my wife by
Will, and there staid talking an hour with Coll. Middleton, and others,
and among other things about a very rich widow, young and handsome, of one
Sir Nicholas Gold's, a merchant, lately fallen, and of great courtiers
that already look after her: her husband not dead a week yet.  She is
reckoned worth L80,000.  Thence to my uncle Wight's, where Dr. of-----,
among others, dined, and his wife, a seeming proud conceited woman, I know
not what to make of her, but the Dr's. discourse did please me very well
about the disease of the stone, above all things extolling Turpentine,
which he told me how it may be taken in pills with great ease.  There was
brought to table a hot pie made of a swan I sent them yesterday, given me
by Mr. Howe, but we did not eat any of it.  But my wife and I rose from
table, pretending business, and went to the Duke's house, the first play I
have been at these six months, according to my last vowe, and here saw the
so much cried-up play of "Henry the Eighth;" which, though I went with
resolution to like it, is so simple a thing made up of a great many
patches, that, besides the shows and processions in it, there is nothing
in the world good or well done.  Thence mightily dissatisfied back at
night to my uncle Wight's, and supped with them, but against my stomach
out of the offence the sight of my aunt's hands gives me, and ending
supper with a mighty laugh, the greatest I have had these many months, at
my uncle's being out in his grace after meat, we rose and broke up, and my
wife and I home and to bed, being sleepy since last night.

2nd.  Up and to the office, and there sitting all the morning, and at noon
to the 'Change, in my going met with Luellin and told him how I had
received a letter and bill for L50 from Mr. Deering, and delivered it to
him, which he told me he would receive for me.  To which I consented,
though professed not to desire it if he do not consider himself
sufficiently able by the service I have done, and that it is rather my
desire to have nothing till he be further sensible of my service.  From
the 'Change I brought him home and dined with us, and after dinner I took
my wife out, for I do find that I am not able to conquer myself as to
going to plays till I come to some new vowe concerning it, and that I am
now come, that is to say, that I will not see above one in a month at any
of the publique theatres till the sum of 50s. be spent, and then none
before New Year's Day next, unless that I do become worth L1000 sooner
than then, and then am free to come to some other terms, and so leaving
him in Lombard Street I took her to the King's house, and there met Mr.
Nicholson, my old colleague, and saw "The Usurper," which is no good play,
though better than what I saw yesterday.  However, we rose unsatisfied,
and took coach and home, and I to the office late writing letters, and so
to supper and to bed.

3rd (Lord's day).  Lay long in bed, and then rose and with a fire in my
chamber staid within all day, looking over and settling my accounts in
good order, by examining all my books, and the kitchen books, and I find
that though the proper profit of my last year was but L305, yet I did by
other gain make it up L444., which in every part of it was unforeseen of
me, and therefore it was a strange oversight for lack of examining my
expenses that I should spend L690 this year, but for the time to come I
have so distinctly settled all my accounts in writing and the particulars
of all my several layings out, that I do hope I shall hereafter make a
better judgment of my spendings than ever.  I dined with my wife in her
chamber, she in bed, and then down again and till 11 at night, and broke
up and to bed with great content, but could not make an end of writing
over my vows as I purposed, but I am agreed in every thing how to order
myself for the year to come, which I trust in God will be much for my
good.  So up to prayers and to bed.  This evening Sir W. Pen came to
invite me against next Wednesday, being Twelfth day, to his usual feast,
his wedding day.

4th.  Up betimes, and my wife being ready, and her mayd Besse and the
girl, I carried them by coach and set them all down in Covent Garden and
there left them, and I to my Lord Sandwich's lodgings, but he not being
up, I to the Duke's chamber, and there by and by to his closett, where
since his lady was ill, a little red bed of velvet is brought for him to
lie alone, which is a very pretty one.  After doing business here, I to my
Lord's again, and there spoke with him, and he seems now almost friends
again as he used to be.  Here meeting Mr. Pierce, the chyrurgeon, he told
me among other Court newes, how the Queene is very well again, and the
King lay with her on Saturday night last; and that she speaks now very
pretty English, and makes her sense out now and then with pretty phrazes:
as among others this is mightily cried up; that, meaning to say that she
did not like such a horse so well as the rest, he being too prancing and
full of tricks, she said he did make too much vanity. Thence to the Tennis
Court, after I had spent a little time in Westminster Hall, thinking to
have met with Mrs. Lane, but I could not and am glad of it, and there saw
the King play at Tennis and others: but to see how the King's play was
extolled without any cause at all, was a loathsome sight, though
sometimes, indeed, he did play very well and deserved to be commended; but
such open flattery is beastly.  Afterwards to St. James's Parke, being
unwilling to go to spend money at the ordinary, and there spent an hour or
two, it being a pleasant day, seeing people play at Pell Mell; where it
pleased me mightily to hear a gallant, lately come from France, swear at
one of his companions for suffering his man (a spruce blade) to be so
saucy as to strike a ball while his master was playing on the Mall.

     [When Egerton was Bishop of Durham, he often played at bowls with
     his guests on the public days.  On an occasion of this sort, a
     visitor happening to cross the lawn, one of the chaplains exclaimed,
     "You must not shake the green, for the bishop is going to bowl."-B.]

Thence took coach at White Hall and took up my wife, who is mighty sad to
think of her father, who is going into Germany against the Turkes; but
what will become of her brother I know not.  He is so idle, and out of all
capacity, I think, to earn his bread.  Home and at my office till is at
night making my solemn vowes for the next year, which I trust in the Lord
I shall keep, but I fear I have a little too severely bound myself in some
things and in too many, for I fear I may forget some.  But however, I know
the worst, and shall by the blessing of God observe to perform or pay my
forfeits punctually.  So home and to bed with my mind at rest.

5th.  Up and to our office, where we sat all the morning, where my head
being willing to take in all business whatever, I am afraid I shall over
clogg myself with it.  But however, it is my desire to do my duty and
shall the willinger bear it.  At noon home and to the 'Change, where I met
with Luellin, who went off with me and parted to meet again at the
Coffeehouse, but missed.  So home and found him there, and Mr. Barrow came
to speak with me, so they both dined with me alone, my wife not being
ready, and after dinner I up in my chamber with Barrow to discourse about
matters of the yard with him, and his design of leaving the place, which I
am sorry for, and will prevent if I can.  He being gone then Luellin did
give me the L50 from Mr. Deering, which he do give me for my pains in his
business and what I may hereafter take for him, though there is not the
least word or deed I have yet been guilty of in his behalf but what I am
sure has been to the King's advantage and the profit of the service, nor
ever will.  And for this money I never did condition with him or expected
a farthing at the time when I did do him the service, nor have given any
receipt for it, it being brought me by Luellin, nor do purpose to give him
any thanks for it, but will wherein I can faithfully endeavour to see him
have the privilege of his Patent as the King's merchant.  I did give
Luellin two pieces in gold for a pair of gloves for his kindness herein.
Then he being gone, I to my office, where busy till late at night, that
through my room being over confounded in business I could stay there no
longer, but went home, and after a little supper to bed.

6th (Twelfth day).  Up and to my office, where very busy all the morning,
being indeed over loaded with it through my own desire of doing all I can.
At noon to the 'Change, but did little, and so home to dinner with my poor
wife, and after dinner read a lecture to her in Geography, which she takes
very prettily and with great pleasure to her and me to teach her, and so
to the office again, where as busy as ever in my life, one thing after
another, and answering people's business, particularly drawing up things
about Mr. Wood's masts, which I expect to have a quarrel about with Sir W.
Batten before it be ended, but I care not. At night home to my wife, to
supper, discourse, prayers, and to bed. This morning I began a practice
which I find by the ease I do it with that I shall continue, it saving me
money and time; that is, to trimme myself with a razer: which pleases me
mightily.

7th.  Up, putting on my best clothes and to the office, where all the
morning we sat busy, among other things upon Mr. Wood's performance of his
contract for masts, wherein I was mightily concerned, but I think was
found all along in the right, and shall have my desire in it to the King's
advantage.  At noon, all of us to dinner to Sir W. Pen's, where a very
handsome dinner, Sir J. Lawson among others, and his lady and his
daughter, a very pretty lady and of good deportment, with looking upon
whom I was greatly pleased, the rest of the company of the women were all
of our own house, of no satisfaction or pleasure at all.  My wife was not
there, being not well enough, nor had any great mind.  But to see how Sir
W. Pen imitates me in everything, even in his having his chimney piece in
his dining room the same with that in my wife's closett, and in every
thing else I perceive wherein he can.  But to see again how he was out in
one compliment: he lets alone drinking any of the ladies' healths that
were there, my Lady Batten and Lawson, till he had begun with my Lady
Carteret, who was absent, and that was well enough, and then Mr.
Coventry's mistresse, at which he was ashamed, and would not have had him
have drunk it, at least before the ladies present, but his policy, as he
thought, was such that he would do it.  After dinner by coach with Sir G.
Carteret and Sir J. Minnes by appointment to Auditor Beale's in Salisbury
Court, and there we did with great content look over some old ledgers to
see in what manner they were kept, and indeed it was in an extraordinary
good method, and such as (at least out of design to keep them employed) I
do persuade Sir J. Minnes to go upon, which will at least do as much good
it may be to keep them for want of something to do from envying those that
do something.  Thence calling to see whether Mrs. Turner was returned,
which she is, and I spoke one word only to her, and away again by coach
home and to my office, where late, and then home to supper and bed.

8th.  Up and all the morning at my office and with Sir J. Minnes,
directing him and Mr. Turner about keeping of their books according to
yesterday's work, wherein I shall make them work enough.  At noon to the
'Change, and there long, and from thence by appointment took Luellin,
Mount, and W. Symons, and Mr. Pierce, the chirurgeon, home to dinner with
me and were merry.  But, Lord! to hear how W. Symons do commend and look
sadly and then talk bawdily and merrily, though his wife was dead but the
other day, would make a dogg laugh.  After dinner I did go in further part
of kindness to Luellin for his kindness about Deering's L50 which he
procured me the other day of him.  We spent all the afternoon together and
then they to cards with my wife, who this day put on her Indian blue gowne
which is very pretty, where I left them for an hour, and to my office, and
then to them again, and by and by they went away at night, and so I again
to my office to perfect a letter to Mr. Coventry about Department
Treasurers, wherein I please myself and hope to give him content and do
the King service therein.  So having done, I home and to teach my wife a
new lesson in the globes, and to supper, and to bed.  We had great
pleasure this afternoon; among other things, to talk of our old passages
together in Cromwell's time; and how W. Symons did make me laugh and
wonder to-day when he told me how he had made shift to keep in, in good
esteem and employment, through eight governments in one year (the dear
1659, which were indeed, and he did name them all), and then failed
unhappy in the ninth, viz. that of the King's coming in.  He made good to
me the story which Luellin did tell me the other day, of his wife upon her
death-bed; how she dreamt of her uncle Scobell, and did foretell, from
some discourse she had with him, that she should die four days thence, and
not sooner, and did all along say so, and did so.  Upon the 'Change a
great talke there was of one Mr. Tryan, an old man, a merchant in
Lyme-Streete, robbed last night (his man and mayde being gone out after he
was a-bed), and gagged and robbed of L1050 in money and about L4000 in
jewells, which he had in his house as security for money.  It is believed
by many circumstances that his man is guilty of confederacy, by their
ready going to his secret till in his desk, wherein the key of his
cash-chest lay.

9th.  Up (my underlip being mightily swelled, I know not how but by
overrubbing it, it itching) and to the office, where we sat all the
morning, and at noon I home to dinner, and by discourse with my wife
thought upon inviting my Lord Sandwich to a dinner shortly.  It will cost
me at least ten or twelve pounds; but, however, some arguments of prudence
I have, which however I shall think again upon before I proceed to that
expence.  After dinner by coach I carried my wife and Jane to Westminster,
leaving her at Mr. Hunt's, and I to Westminster Hall, and there visited
Mrs. Lane, and by appointment went out and met her at the Trumpet, Mrs.
Hare's, but the room being damp we went to the Bell tavern, and there I
had her company, but could not do as I used to do (yet nothing but what
was honest) .  .  .  .  .  So I to talk about her having Hawley, she told
me flatly no, she could not love him.  I took occasion to enquire of
Howlett's daughter, with whom I have a mind to meet a little to see what
mettle the young wench is made of, being very pretty, but she tells me she
is already betrothed to Mrs. Michell's son, and she in discourse tells me
more, that Mrs. Michell herself had a daughter before marriage, which is
now near thirty years old, a thing I could not have believed.  Thence
leading her to the Hall, I took coach and called my wife and her mayd, and
so to the New Exchange, where we bought several things of our pretty Mrs.
Dorothy Stacy, a pretty woman, and has the modestest look that ever I saw
in my life and manner of speech.  Thence called at Tom's and saw him
pretty well again, but has not been currant. So homeward, and called at
Ludgate, at Ashwell's uncle's, but she was not within, to have spoke to
her to have come to dress my wife at the time my Lord dines here.  So
straight home, calling for Walsingham's Manuals at my bookseller's to read
but not to buy, recommended for a pretty book by Sir W. Warren, whose
warrant however I do not much take till I do read it.  So home to supper
and to bed, my wife not being very well since she came home, being
troubled with a fainting fit, which she never yet had before since she was
my wife.

10th (Lord's day).  Lay in bed with my wife till 10 or 11 o'clock, having
been very sleepy all night.  So up, and my brother Tom being come to see
me, we to dinner, he telling me how Mrs. Turner found herself discontented
with her late bad journey, and not well taken by them in the country, they
not desiring her coming down, nor the burials of Mr. Edward Pepys's corps
there.  After dinner I to the office, where all the afternoon, and at
night my wife and I to my uncle Wight's, and there eat some of their swan
pie, which was good, and I invited them to my house to eat a roasted swan
on Tuesday next, which after I was come home did make a quarrels between
my wife and I, because she had appointed a wish to-morrow.  But, however,
we were friends again quickly.  So to bed. All our discourse to-night was
Mr. Tryan's late being robbed; and that Collonell Turner (a mad, swearing,
confident fellow, well known by all, and by me), one much indebted to this
man for his very livelihood, was the man that either did or plotted it;
and the money and things are found in his hand, and he and his wife now in
Newgate for it; of which we are all glad, so very a known rogue he was.

11th.  Waked this morning by 4 o'clock by my wife to call the mayds to
their wash, and what through my sleeping so long last night and vexation
for the lazy sluts lying so long again and their great wash, neither my
wife nor I could sleep one winke after that time till day, and then I rose
and by coach (taking Captain Grove with me and three bottles of Tent,
which I sent to Mrs. Lane by my promise on Saturday night last) to White
Hall, and there with the rest of our company to the Duke and did our
business, and thence to the Tennis Court till noon, and there saw several
great matches played, and so by invitation to St. James's; where, at Mr.
Coventry's chamber, I dined with my Lord Barkeley, Sir G. Carteret, Sir
Edward Turner, Sir Ellis Layton, and one Mr. Seymour, a fine gentleman;
were admirable good discourse of all sorts, pleasant and serious.  Thence
after dinner to White Hall, where the Duke being busy at the Guinny
business, the Duke of Albemarle, Sir W. Rider, Povy, Sir J. Lawson and I
to the Duke of Albemarle's lodgings, and there did some business, and so
to the Court again, and I to the Duke of York's lodgings, where the Guinny
company are choosing their assistants for the next year by ballotting.
Thence by coach with Sir J. Robinson, Lieutenant of the Tower, he set me
down at Cornhill, but, Lord!  the simple discourse that all the way we
had, he magnifying his great undertakings and cares that have been upon
him for these last two years, and how he commanded the city to the content
of all parties, when the loggerhead knows nothing almost that is sense.
Thence to the Coffee-house, whither comes Sir W. Petty and Captain Grant,
and we fell in talke (besides a young gentleman, I suppose a merchant, his
name Mr. Hill, that has travelled and I perceive is a master in most sorts
of musique and other things) of musique; the universal character; art of
memory; Granger's counterfeiting of hands and other most excellent
discourses to my great content, having not been in so good company a great
while, and had I time I should covet the acquaintance of that Mr. Hill.
This morning I stood by the King arguing with a pretty Quaker woman, that
delivered to him a desire of hers in writing.  The King showed her Sir J.
Minnes, as a man the fittest for her quaking religion, saying that his
beard was the stiffest thing about him, and again merrily said, looking
upon the length of her paper, that if all she desired was of that length
she might lose her desires; she modestly saying nothing till he begun
seriously to discourse with her, arguing the truth of his spirit against
hers; she replying still with these words, "O King!" and thou'd him all
along.  The general talke of the towne still is of Collonell Turner, about
the robbery; who, it is thought, will be hanged.  I heard the Duke of York
tell to-night, how letters are come that fifteen are condemned for the
late plot by the judges at York; and, among others, Captain Oates, against
whom it was proved that he drew his sword at his going out, and flinging
away the scabbard, said that he would either return victor or be hanged.
So home, where I found the house full of the washing and my wife mighty
angry about Will's being here to-day talking with her mayds, which she
overheard, idling of their time, and he telling what a good mayd my old
Jane was, and that she would never have her like again.  At which I was
angry, and after directing her to beat at least the little girl, I went to
the office and there reproved Will, who told me that he went thither by my
wife's order, she having commanded him to come thither on Monday morning.
Now God forgive me! how apt I am to be jealous of her as to this fellow,
and that she must needs take this time, when she knows I must be gone out
to the Duke, though methinks had she that mind she would never think it
discretion to tell me this story of him, to let me know that he was there,
much less to make me offended with him, to forbid him coming again.  But
this cursed humour I cannot cool in myself by all the reason I have, which
God forgive me for, and convince me of the folly of it, and the disquiet
it brings me.  So home, where, God be thanked, when I came to speak to my
wife my trouble of mind soon vanished, and to bed.  The house foul with
the washing and quite out of order against to-morrow's dinner.

12th.  Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and at noon to
the 'Change awhile, and so home, getting things against dinner ready, and
anon comes my uncle Wight and my aunt, with their cozens Mary and Robert,
and by chance my uncle Thomas Pepys.  We had a good dinner, the chief dish
a swan roasted, and that excellent meate.  At, dinner and all day very
merry.  After dinner to cards, where till evening, then to the office a
little, and to cards again with them, and lost half-a-crowne. They being
gone, my wife did tell me how my uncle did this day accost her alone, and
spoke of his hoping she was with child, and kissing her earnestly told her
he should be very glad of it, and from all circumstances methinks he do
seem to have some intention of good to us, which I shall endeavour to
continue more than ever I did yet.  So to my office till late, and then
home to bed, after being at prayers, which is the first time after my late
vowe to say prayers in my family twice in every week.

13th.  Up and to my office a little, and then abroad to many several
places about business, among others to the geometrical instrument makers,
and through Bedlam (calling by the way at an old bookseller's and there
fell into looking over Spanish books and pitched upon some, till I thought
of my oathe when I was going to agree for them, and so with much ado got
myself out of the shop glad at my heart and so away) to the African House
to look upon their book of contracts for several commodities for my
information in the prices we give in the Navy.  So to the Coffee [house]
where extraordinary good discourse of Dr. Whistler's' upon my question
concerning the keeping of masts, he arguing against keeping them dry, by
showing the nature of corruption in bodies and the several ways thereof.
So to the 'Change, and thence with Sir W. Rider to the Trinity House to
dinner, and then home and to my office till night, and then with Mr. Bland
to Sir T. Viner's about pieces of eight for Sir J. Lawson, and so back to
my office, and there late upon business, and so home to supper and to bed.

14th.  Up and to the office, where all the morning, and at noon all of us,
viz., Sir G. Carteret and Sir W. Batten at one end, and Mr. Coventry, Sir
J. Minnes and I (in the middle at the other end, being taught how to sit
there all three by my sitting so much the backwarder) at the other end, to
Sir G. Carteret's, and there dined well.  Here I saw Mr. Scott, the
bastard that married his youngest daughter.  Much pleasant talk at table,
and then up and to the office, where we sat long upon our design of
dividing the Controller's work into some of the rest of our hands for the
better doing of it, but he would not yield to it, though the simple man
knows in his heart that he do not do one part of it.  So he taking upon
him to do it all we rose, I vexed at the heart to see the King's service
run after this manner, but it cannot be helped.  Thence to the Old James
to the reference about Mr. Bland's business.  Sir W. Rider being now added
to us, and I believe we shall soon come to some determination in it.  So
home and to my office, did business, and then up to Sir W. Pen and did
express my trouble about this day's business, he not being there, and
plainly told him what I thought of it, and though I know him a false
fellow yet I adventured, as I have done often, to tell him clearly my
opinion of Sir W. Batten and his design in this business, which is very
bad.  Hence home, and after a lecture to my wife in her globes, to prayers
and to bed.

15th.  Up and to my office, where all the morning, and among other things
Mr. Turner with me, and I did tell him my mind about the Controller his
master and all the office, and my mind touching himself too, as he did
carry himself either well or ill to me and my clerks, which I doubt not
but it will operate well.  Thence to the 'Change, and there met my uncle
Wight, who was very kind to me, and would have had me home with him, and
so kind that I begin to wonder and think something of it of good to me.
Thence home to dinner, and after dinner with Mr. Hater by water, and
walked thither and back again from Deptford, where I did do something
checking the iron business, but my chief business was my discourse with
Mr. Hater about what had passed last night and to-day about the office
business, and my resolution to do him all the good I can therein.  So
home, and my wife tells me that my uncle Wight hath been with her, and
played at cards with her, and is mighty inquisitive to know whether she is
with child or no, which makes me wonder what his meaning is, and after all
my thoughts, I cannot think, unless it be in order to the making his will,
that he might know how to do by me, and I would to God my wife had told
him that she was.

16th.  Up, and having paid some money in the morning to my uncle Thomas on
his yearly annuity, to the office, where we sat all the morning.  At noon
I to the 'Change about some pieces of eight for Sir J. Lawson. There I
hear that Collonell Turner is found guilty of felony at the Sessions in
Mr. Tryan's business, which will save his life.  So home and met there J.
Hasper come to see his kinswoman our Jane.  I made much of him and made
him dine with us, he talking after the old simple manner that he used to
do.  He being gone, I by water to Westminster Hall, and there did see Mrs.
Lane.  .  .  .  .  So by coach home and to my office, where Browne of the
Minerys brought me an Instrument made of a Spyral line very pretty for all
questions in Arithmetique almost, but it must be some use that must make
me perfect in it.  So home to supper and to bed, with my mind 'un peu
troubled pour ce que fait' to-day, but I hope it will be 'la dernier de
toute ma vie.'

17th (Lord's day).  Up, and I and my wife to church, where Pembleton
appeared, which, God forgive me, did vex me, but I made nothing of it. So
home to dinner, and betimes my wife and I to the French church and there
heard a good sermon, the first time my wife and I were there ever
together.  We sat by three sisters, all pretty women.  It was pleasant to
hear the reader give notice to them, that the children to be catechized
next Sunday were them of Hounsditch and Blanche Chapiton.  Thence home,
and there found Ashwell come to see my wife (we having called at her
lodging the other, day to speak with her about dressing my wife when my
Lord Sandwich dines here), and is as merry as ever, and speaks as
disconcerned for any difference between us on her going away as ever. She
being gone, my wife and I to see Sir W. Pen and there supped with him much
against my stomach, for the dishes were so deadly foule that I could not
endure to look upon them.  So after supper home to prayers and to bed.

18th.  Up, being troubled to find my wife so ready to have me go out of
doors.  God forgive me for my jealousy! but I cannot forbear, though God
knows I have no reason to do so, or to expect her being so true to me as I
would have her.  I abroad to White Hall, where the Court all in mourning
for the Duchesse of Savoy.  We did our business with the Duke, and so I to
W. Howe at my Lord's lodgings, not seeing my Lord, he being abroad, and
there I advised with W. Howe about my having my Lord to dinner at my
house, who likes it well, though it troubles me that I should come to need
the advice of such a boy, but for the present it is necessary.  Here I
found Mr. Mallard, and had from him a common tune set by my desire to the
Lyra Vyall, which goes most admirably.  Thence home by coach to the
'Change, after having been at the Coffee-house, where I hear Turner is
found guilty of felony and burglary; and strange stories of his confidence
at the barr, but yet great indiscretion in his argueing.  All desirous of
his being hanged.  So home and found that Will had been with my wife.
But, Lord! why should I think any evil of that; and yet I cannot forbear
it.  But upon enquiry, though I found no reason of doubtfulness, yet I
could not bring my nature to any quiet or content in my wife all day and
night, nor though I went with her to divert myself at my uncle Wight's,
and there we played at cards till 12 at night and went home in a great
shower of rain, it having not rained a great while before.  Here was one
Mr. Benson, a Dutchman, played and supped with us, that pretends to sing
well, and I expected great matters but found nothing to be pleased with at
all.  So home and to bed, yet troubled in my mind.

19th.  Up, without any kindness to my wife, and so to the office, where we
sat all the morning, and at noon I to the 'Change, and thence to Mr.
Cutler's with Sir W. Rider to dinner, and after dinner with him to the Old
James upon our reference of Mr. Bland's, and, having sat there upon the
business half an hour, broke up, and I home and there found Madame Turner
and her sister Dike come to see us, and staid chatting till night, and so
away, and I to my office till very late, and my eyes began to fail me, and
be in pain which I never felt to now-a-days, which I impute to sitting up
late writing and reading by candle-light.  So home to supper and to bed.

20th.  Up and by coach to my Lord Sandwich's, and after long staying till
his coming down (he not sending for me up, but it may be he did not know I
was there), he came down, and I walked with him to the Tennis Court, and
there left him, seeing the King play.  At his lodgings this morning there
came to him Mr. W. Montague's fine lady, which occasioned my Lord's
calling me to her about some business for a friend of hers preferred to be
a midshipman at sea.  My Lord recommended the whole matter to me. She is a
fine confident lady, I think, but not so pretty as I once thought her.  My
Lord did also seal a lease for the house he is now taking in Lincoln's Inn
Fields, which stands him in 250 per annum rent. Thence by water to my
brother's, whom I find not well in bed, sicke, they think, of a
consumption, and I fear he is not well, but do not complain, nor desire to
take anything.  From him I visited Mr. Honiwood, who is lame, and to thank
him for his visit to me the other day, but we were both abroad.  So to Mr.
Commander's in Warwicke Lane, to speak to him about drawing up my will,
which he will meet me about in a day or two.  So to the 'Change and walked
home, thence with Sir Richard Ford, who told me that Turner is to be
hanged to-morrow, and with what impudence he hath carried out his trial;
but that last night, when he brought him newes of his death, he began to
be sober and shed some tears, and he hopes will die a penitent; he having
already confessed all the thing, but says it was partly done for a joke,
and partly to get an occasion of obliging the old man by his care in
getting him his things again, he having some hopes of being the better by
him in his estate at his death.  Home to dinner, and after dinner my wife
and I by water, which we have not done together many a day, that is not
since last summer, but the weather is now very warm, and left her at Axe
Yard, and I to White Hall, and meeting Mr. Pierce walked with him an hour
in the Matted Gallery; among other things he tells me that my Lady
Castlemaine is not at all set by by the King, but that he do doat upon
Mrs. Stewart only; and that to the leaving of all business in the world,
and to the open slighting of the Queene; that he values not who sees him
or stands by him while he dallies with her openly; and then privately in
her chamber below, where the very sentrys observe his going in and out;
and that so commonly, that the Duke or any of the nobles, when they would
ask where the King is, they will ordinarily say, "Is the King above, or
below?"  meaning with Mrs. Stewart: that the King do not openly disown my
Lady Castlemaine, but that she comes to Court; but that my Lord
FitzHarding and the Hambletons,

     [The three brothers, George Hamilton, James Hamilton, and the Count
     Antoine Hamilton, author of the "Memoires de Grammont."]

and sometimes my Lord Sandwich, they say, have their snaps at her.  But he
says my Lord Sandwich will lead her from her lodgings in the darkest and
obscurest manner, and leave her at the entrance into the Queene's
lodgings, that he might be the least observed; that the Duke of Monmouth
the King do still doat on beyond measure, insomuch that the King only, the
Duke of York, and Prince Rupert, and the Duke of Monmouth, do now wear
deep mourning, that is, long cloaks, for the Duchesse of Savoy; so that he
mourns as a Prince of the Blood, while the Duke of York do no more, and
all the nobles of the land not so much; which gives great offence, and he
says the Duke of York do consider.  But that the Duke of York do give
himself up to business, and is like to prove a noble Prince; and so indeed
I do from my heart think he will.  He says that it is believed, as well as
hoped, that care is taken to lay up a hidden treasure of money by the King
against a bad day, pray God it be so!  but I should be more glad that the
King himself would look after business, which it seems he do not in the
least.  By and by came by Mr. Coventry, and so we broke off; and he and I
took a turn or two and so parted, and then my Lord Sandwich came upon me,
to speak with whom my business of coming again to-night to this ende of
the town chiefly was, in order to the seeing in what manner he received
me, in order to my inviting him to dinner to my house, but as well in the
morning as now, though I did wait upon him home and there offered occasion
of talk with him, yet he treated me, though with respect, yet as a
stranger, without any of the intimacy or friendship which he used to do,
and which I fear he will never, through his consciousness of his faults,
ever do again.  Which I must confess do trouble me above anything in the
world almost, though I neither do need at present nor fear to need to be
so troubled, nay, and more, though I do not think that he would deny me
any friendship now if I did need it, but only that he has not the face to
be free with me, but do look upon me as a remembrancer of his former
vanity, and an espy upon his present practices, for I perceive that
Pickering to-day is great with him again, and that he has done a great
courtesy for Mr. Pierce, the chirurgeon, to a good value, though both
these and none but these did I mention by name to my Lord in the business
which has caused all this difference between my Lord and me.  However, I
am resolved to forbear my laying out my money upon a dinner till I see him
in a better posture, and by grave and humble, though high deportment, to
make him think I do not want him, and that will make him the readier to
admit me to his friendship again, I believe the soonest of anything but
downright impudence, and thrusting myself, as others do, upon him, which
yet I cannot do, not [nor] will not endeavour.  So home, calling with my
wife to see my brother again, who was up, and walks up and down the house
pretty well, but I do think he is in a consumption.  Home, troubled in
mind for these passages with my Lord, but am resolved to better my case in
my business to make my stand upon my owne legs the better and to lay up as
well as to get money, and among other ways I will have a good fleece out
of Creed's coat ere it be long, or I will have a fall.  So to my office
and did some business, and then home to supper and to bed, after I had by
candlelight shaved myself and cut off all my beard clear, which will make
my worke a great deal the less in shaving.

21st.  Up, and after sending my wife to my aunt Wight's to get a place to
see Turner hanged, I to the office, where we sat all the morning, and at
noon going to the 'Change; and seeing people flock in the City, I
enquired, and found that Turner was not yet hanged.  And so I went among
them to Leadenhall Street, at the end of Lyme Street, near where the
robbery was done; and to St. Mary Axe, where he lived.  And there I got
for a shilling to stand upon the wheel of a cart, in great pain, above an
houre before the execution was done; he delaying the time by long
discourses and prayers one after another, in hopes of a reprieve; but none
came, and at last was flung off the ladder in his cloake.  A comely-looked
man he was, and kept his countenance to the end: I was sorry to see him.
It was believed there were at least 12 or 14,000 people in the street.  So
I home all in a sweat, and dined by myself, and after dinner to the Old
James, and there found Sir W. Rider and Mr. Cutler at dinner, and made a
second dinner with them, and anon came Mr. Bland and Custos, and Clerke,
and so we fell to the business of reference, and upon a letter from Mr.
Povy to Sir W. Rider and I telling us that the King is concerned in it, we
took occasion to fling off the business from off our shoulders and would
have nothing to do with it, unless we had power from the King or
Commissioners of Tangier, and I think it will be best for us to continue
of that mind, and to have no hand, it being likely to go against the King.
Thence to the Coffee-house, and heard the full of Turner's discourse on
the cart, which was chiefly to clear himself of all things laid to his
charge but this fault, for which he now suffers, which he confesses.  He
deplored the condition of his family, but his chief design was to lengthen
time, believing still a reprieve would come, though the sheriff advised
him to expect no such thing, for the King was resolved to grant none.
After that I had good discourse with a pretty young merchant with mighty
content.  So to my office and did a little business, and then to my aunt
Wight's to fetch my wife home, where Dr. Burnett did tell me how poorly
the sheriffs did endeavour to get one jewell returned by Turner, after he
was convicted, as a due to them, and not to give it to Mr. Tryan, the true
owner, but ruled against them, to their great dishonour.  Though they
plead it might be another jewell for ought they know and not Tryan's.
After supper home, and my wife tells me mighty stories of my uncle's fond
and kind discourses to her to-day, which makes me confident that he has
thoughts of kindness for us, he repeating his desire for her to be with
child, for it cannot enter into my head that he should have any unworthy
thoughts concerning her.  After doing some business at my office, I home
to supper, prayers, and to bed.

22nd.  Up, and it being a brave morning, with a gaily to Woolwich, and
there both at the Ropeyarde and the other yarde did much business, and
thence to Greenwich to see Mr. Pett and others value the carved work of
the "Henrietta" (God knows in an ill manner for the King), and so to
Deptford, and there viewed Sir W. Petty's vessel; which hath an odd
appearance, but not such as people do make of it, for I am of the opinion
that he would never have discoursed so much of it, if it were not better
than other vessels, and so I believe that he was abused the other day, as
he is now, by tongues that I am sure speak before they know anything good
or bad of her.  I am sorry to find his ingenuity discouraged so.  So home,
reading all the way a good book, and so home to dinner, and after dinner a
lesson on the globes to my wife, and so to my office till 10 or 11 o'clock
at night, and so home to supper and to bed.

23rd.  Up, and to the office, where we sat all the morning.  At noon home
to dinner, where Mr. Hawly came to see us and dined with us, and after we
had dined came Mr. Mallard, and after he had eat something, I brought down
my vyall which he played on, the first maister that ever touched her yet,
and she proves very well and will be, I think, an admirable instrument.
He played some very fine things of his owne, but I was afeard to enter too
far in their commendation for fear he should offer to copy them for me
out, and so I be forced to give or lend him something. So to the office in
the evening, whither Mr. Commander came to me, and we discoursed about my
will, which I am resolved to perfect the next week by the grace of God.
He being gone, I to write letters and other business late, and so home to
supper and to bed.

24th (Lord's day).  Lay long in bed, and then up, and being desirous to
perform my vowes that I lately made, among others, to be performed this
month, I did go to my office, and there fell on entering, out of a
bye-book, part of my second journall-book, which hath lain these two years
and more unentered.  Upon this work till dinner, and after dinner to it
again till night, and then home to supper, and after supper to read a
lecture to my wife upon the globes, and so to prayers and to bed.  This
evening also I drew up a rough draught of my last will to my mind.

25th.  Up and by coach to Whitehall to my Lord's lodgings, and seeing that
knowing that I was in the house, my Lord did not nevertheless send for me
up, I did go to the Duke's lodgings, and there staid while he was making
ready, in which time my Lord Sandwich came, and so all into his closet and
did our common business, and so broke up, and I homeward by coach with Sir
W. Batten, and staid at Warwicke Lane and there called upon Mr. Commander
and did give him my last will and testament to write over in form, and so
to the 'Change, where I did several businesses.  So home to dinner, and
after I had dined Luellin came and we set him something to eat, and I left
him there with my wife, and to the office upon a particular meeting of the
East India Company, where I think I did the King good service against the
Company in the business of their sending our ships home empty from the
Indies contrary to their contract, and yet, God forgive me!  I found that
I could be willing to receive a bribe if it were offered me to conceal my
arguments that I found against them, in consideration that none of my
fellow officers, whose duty it is more than mine, had ever studied the
case, or at this hour do understand it, and myself alone must do it.  That
being done Mr. Povy and Bland came to speak with me about their business
of the reference, wherein I shall have some more trouble, but cannot help
it, besides I hope to make some good use of Mr. Povy to my advantage.  So
home after business done at my office, to supper, and then to the globes
with my wife, and so to bed. Troubled a little in mind that my Lord
Sandwich should continue this strangeness to me that methinks he shows me
now a days more than while the thing was fresh.

26th.  Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning.  At noon to the
'Change, after being at the Coffee-house, where I sat by Tom Killigrew,
who told us of a fire last night in my Lady Castlemaine's lodging, where
she bid L40 for one to adventure the fetching of a cabinet out, which at
last was got to be done; and the fire at last quenched without doing much
wrong.  To 'Change and there did much business, so home to dinner, and
then to the office all the afternoon.  And so at night my aunt Wight and
Mrs. Buggin came to sit with my wife, and I in to them all the evening, my
uncle coming afterward, and after him Mr. Benson the Dutchman, a frank,
merry man.  We were very merry and played at cards till late and so broke
up and to bed in good hopes that this my friendship with my uncle and aunt
will end well.

27th.  Up and to the office, and at noon to the Coffeehouse, where I sat
with Sir G. Ascue

     [Sir George Ayscue or Askew.  After his return from his imprisonment
     he declined to go to sea again, although he was twice afterwards
     formally appointed.  He sat on the court-martial on the loss of the
     "Defiance" in 1668.]

and Sir William Petty, who in discourse is, methinks, one of the most
rational men that ever I heard speak with a tongue, having all his notions
the most distinct and clear, and, among other things (saying, that in all
his life these three books were the most esteemed and generally cried up
for wit in the world "Religio Medici," "Osborne's Advice to a Son,"

     [Francis Osborne, an English writer of considerable abilities and
     popularity, was the author of "Advice to a Son," in two parts,
     Oxford, 1656-8, 8vo.  He died in 1659.  He is the same person
     mentioned as "My Father Osborne," October 19th, 1661.--B.]

and "Hudibras "), did say that in these--in the two first principally--the
wit lies, and confirming some pretty sayings, which are generally like
paradoxes, by some argument smartly and pleasantly urged, which takes with
people who do not trouble themselves to examine the force of an argument,
which pleases them in the delivery, upon a subject which they like;
whereas, as by many particular instances of mine, and others, out of
Osborne, he did really find fault and weaken the strength of many of
Osborne's arguments, so as that in downright disputation they would not
bear weight; at least, so far, but that they might be weakened, and better
found in their rooms to confirm what is there said.  He shewed finely
whence it happens that good writers are not admired by the present age;
because there are but few in any age that do mind anything that is
abstruse and curious; and so longer before any body do put the true
praise, and set it on foot in the world, the generality of mankind
pleasing themselves in the easy delights of the world, as eating,
drinking, dancing, hunting, fencing, which we see the meanest men do the
best, those that profess it.  A gentleman never dances so well as the
dancing master, and an ordinary fiddler makes better musique for a
shilling than a gentleman will do after spending forty, and so in all the
delights of the world almost.  Thence to the 'Change, and after doing much
business, home, taking Commissioner Pett with me, and all alone dined
together.  He told me many stories of the yard, but I do know him so well,
and had his character given me this morning by Hempson, as well as my own
too of him before, that I shall know how to value any thing he says either
of friendship or other business.  He was mighty serious with me in
discourse about the consequence of Sir W. Petty's boat, as the most
dangerous thing in the world, if it should be practised by endangering our
losse of the command of the seas and our trade, while the Turkes and
others shall get the use of them, which, without doubt, by bearing more
sayle will go faster than any other ships, and, not being of burden, our
merchants cannot have the use of them and so will be at the mercy of their
enemies.  So that I perceive he is afeard that the honour of his trade
will down, though (which is a truth) he pretends this consideration to
hinder the growth of this invention.  He being gone my wife and I took
coach and to Covent Garden, to buy a maske at the French House, Madame
Charett's, for my wife; in the way observing the streete full of coaches
at the new play, "The Indian Queene;" which for show, they say, exceeds
"Henry the Eighth."  Thence back to Mrs. Turner's and sat a while with
them talking of plays and I know not what, and so called to see Tom, but
not at home, though they say he is in a deep consumption, and Mrs. Turner
and Dike and they say he will not live two months to an end.  So home and
to the office, and then to supper and to bed.

28th.  Up and to the office, where all the morning sitting, and at noon
upon several things to the 'Change, and thence to Sir G. Carteret's to
dinner of my own accord, and after dinner with Mr. Wayth down to Deptford
doing several businesses, and by land back again, it being very cold, the
boat meeting me after my staying a while for him at an alehouse by
Redriffe stairs.  So home, and took Will coming out of my doors, at which
I was a little moved, and told my wife of her keeping him from the office
(though God knows my base jealous head was the cause of it), which she
seemed troubled at, and that it was only to discourse with her about
finding a place for her brother.  So I to my office late, Mr. Commander
coming to read over my will in order to the engrossing it, and so he being
gone I to other business, among others chiefly upon preparing matters
against Creed for my profit, and so home to supper and bed, being mightily
troubled with my left eye all this evening from some dirt that is got into
it.

29th.  Up, and after shaving myself (wherein twice now, one after another,
I have cut myself much, but I think it is from the bluntness of the razor)
there came Mr. Deane to me and staid with me a while talking about masts,
wherein he prepared me in several things against Mr. Wood, and also about
Sir W. Petty's boat, which he says must needs prove a folly, though I do
not think so unless it be that the King will not have it encouraged.  At
noon, by appointment, comes Mr. Hartlibb and his wife, and a little before
them Messrs. Langley and Bostocke (old acquaintances of mine at
Westminster, clerks), and after shewing them my house and drinking they
set out by water, my wife and I with them down to Wapping on board the
"Crowne," a merchantman, Captain Floyd, a civil person. Here was
Vice-Admiral Goodson, whom the more I know the more I value for a serious
man and staunch.  Here was Whistler the flagmaker, which vexed me, but it
mattered not.  Here was other sorry company and the discourse poor, so
that we had no pleasure there at all, but only to see and bless God to
find the difference that is now between our condition and that heretofore,
when we were not only much below Hartlibb in all respects, but even these
two fellows above named, of whom I am now quite ashamed that ever my
education should lead me to such low company, but it is God's goodness
only, for which let him be praised.  After dinner I. broke up and with my
wife home, and thence to the Fleece in Cornhill, by appointment, to meet
my Lord Marlborough, a serious and worthy gentleman, who, after doing our
business, about the company, he and they began to talk of the state of the
Dutch in India, which is like to be in a little time without any controll;
for we are lost there, and the Portuguese as bad.  Thence to the
Coffee-house, where good discourse, specially of Lt.-Coll. Baron touching
the manners of the Turkes' Government, among whom he lived long.  So to my
uncle Wight's, where late playing at cards, and so home.

30th.  Up, and a sorry sermon of a young fellow I knew at Cambridge; but
the day kept solemnly for the King's murder, and all day within doors
making up my Brampton papers, and in the evening Mr. Commander came and we
made perfect and signed and sealed my last will and testament, which is so
to my mind, and I hope to the liking of God Almighty, that I take great
joy in myself that it is done, and by that means my mind in a good
condition of quiett.  At night to supper and to bed.  This evening, being
in a humour of making all things even and clear in the world, I tore some
old papers; among others, a romance which (under the title of "Love a
Cheate ") I begun ten years ago at Cambridge; and at this time reading it
over to-night I liked it very well, and wondered a little at myself at my
vein at that time when I wrote it, doubting that I cannot do so well now
if I would try.

31st (Lord's day).  Up, and in my chamber all day long (but a little at
dinner) settling all my Brampton accounts to this day in very good order,
I having obliged myself by oathe to do that and some other things within
this month, and did also perfectly prepare a state of my estate and
annexed it to my last will and testament, which now is perfect, and,
lastly, I did make up my monthly accounts, and find that I have gained
above L50 this month clear, and so am worth L858 clear, which is the
greatest sum I ever yet was master of, and also read over my usual vowes,
as I do every Lord's day, but with greater seriousness than ordinary, and
I do hope that every day I shall see more and more the pleasure of looking
after my business and laying up of money, and blessed be God for what I
have already been enabled by his grace to do.  So to supper and to bed
with my mind in mighty great ease and content, but my head very full of
thoughts and business to dispatch this next month also, and among others
to provide for answering to the Exchequer for my uncle's being
Generall-Receiver in the year 1647, which I am at present wholly unable to
do, but I must find time to look over all his papers.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                               FEBRUARY
                               1663-1664

February 1st.  Up (my maids rising early this morning to washing), and
being ready I found Mr. Strutt the purser below with 12 bottles of sacke,
and tells me (which from Sir W. Batten I had heard before) how young Jack
Davis has railed against Sir W. Batten for his endeavouring to turn him
out of his place, at which for the fellow's sake, because it will likely
prove his ruin, I am sorry, though I do believe he is a very arch rogue. I
took Strutt by coach with me to White Hall, where I set him down, and I to
my Lord's, but found him gone out betimes to the Wardrobe, which I am glad
to see that he so attends his business, though it troubles me that my
counsel to my prejudice must be the cause of it.  They tell me that he
goes into the country next week, and that the young ladies come up this
week before the old lady.  Here I hear how two men last night, justling
for the wall about the New Exchange, did kill one another, each thrusting
the other through; one of them of the King's Chappell, one Cave, and the
other a retayner of my Lord Generall Middleton's.  Thence to White Hall;
where, in the Duke's chamber, the King came and stayed an hour or two
laughing at Sir W. Petty, who was there about his boat; and at Gresham
College in general; at which poor Petty was, I perceive, at some loss; but
did argue discreetly, and bear the unreasonable follies of the King's
objections and other bystanders with great discretion; and offered to take
oddes against the King's best boates; but the King would not lay, but
cried him down with words only.  Gresham College he mightily laughed at,
for spending time only in weighing of ayre, and doing nothing else since
they sat.  Thence to Westminster Hall, and there met with diverse people,
it being terme time.  Among others I spoke with Mrs. Lane, of whom I
doubted to hear something of the effects of our last meeting about a
fortnight or three weeks ago, but to my content did not. Here I met with
Mr. Pierce, who tells me of several passages at Court, among others how
the King, coming the other day to his Theatre to see "The Indian Queene"
(which he commends for a very fine thing), my Lady Castlemaine was in the
next box before he came; and leaning over other ladies awhile to whisper
to the King, she rose out of the box and went into the King's, and set
herself on the King's right hand, between the King and the Duke of York;
which, he swears, put the King himself, as well as every body else, out of
countenance; and believes that she did it only to show the world that she
is not out of favour yet, as was believed.  Thence with Alderman Maynell
by his coach to the 'Change, and there with several people busy, and so
home to dinner, and took my wife out immediately to the King's Theatre, it
being a new month, and once a month I may go, and there saw "The Indian
Queene" acted; which indeed is a most pleasant show, and beyond my
expectation; the play good, but spoiled with the ryme, which breaks the
sense.  But above my expectation most, the eldest Marshall did do her part
most excellently well as I ever heard woman in my life; but her voice not
so sweet as Ianthe's; but, however, we came home mightily contented.  Here
we met Mr. Pickering and his mistress, Mrs. Doll Wilde; he tells me that
the business runs high between the Chancellor and my Lord Bristoll against
the Parliament; and that my Lord Lauderdale and Cooper open high against
the Chancellor; which I am sorry for.  In my way home I 'light and to the
Coffee-house, where I heard Lt. Coll. Baron tell very good stories of his
travels over the high hills in Asia above the clouds, how clear the heaven
is above them, how thicke like a mist the way is through the cloud that
wets like a sponge one's clothes, the ground above the clouds all dry and
parched, nothing in the world growing, it being only a dry earth, yet not
so hot above as below the clouds.  The stars at night most delicate bright
and a fine clear blue sky, but cannot see the earth at any time through
the clouds, but the clouds look like a world below you.  Thence home and
to supper, being hungry, and so to the office, did business, specially
about Creed, for whom I am now pretty well fitted, and so home to bed.
This day in Westminster Hall W. Bowyer told me that his father is dead
lately, and died by being drowned in the river, coming over in the night;
but he says he had not been drinking.  He was taken with his stick in his
hand and cloake over his shoulder, as ruddy as before he died.  His horse
was taken overnight in the water, hampered in the bridle, but they were so
silly as not to look for his master till the next morning, that he was
found drowned.

2nd.  Up and to the office, where, though Candlemas day, Mr. Coventry and
Sir W. Pen and I all the morning, the others being at a survey at
Deptford.  At noon by coach to the 'Change with Mr. Coventry, thence to
the Coffee-house with Captain Coeke, who discoursed well of the good
effects in some kind of a Dutch warr and conquest (which I did not
consider before, but the contrary) that is, that the trade of the world is
too little for us two, therefore one must down: 2ndly, that though our
merchants will not be the better husbands by all this, yet our wool will
bear a better price by vaunting of our cloths, and by that our tenants
will be better able to pay rents, and our lands will be more worth, and
all our owne manufactures, which now the Dutch outvie us in; that he
thinks the Dutch are not in so good a condition as heretofore because of
want of men always, and now from the warrs against the Turke more than
ever.  Then to the 'Change again, and thence off to the Sun Taverne with
Sir W. Warren, and with him discoursed long, and had good advice, and
hints from him, and among other things he did give me a payre of gloves
for my wife wrapt up in paper, which I would not open, feeling it hard;
but did tell him that my wife should thank him, and so went on in
discourse.  When I came home, Lord! in what pain I was to get my wife out
of the room without bidding her go, that I might see what these gloves
were; and, by and by, she being gone, it proves a payre of white gloves
for her and forty pieces in good gold, which did so cheer my heart, that I
could eat no victuals almost for dinner for joy to think how God do bless
us every day more and more, and more yet I hope he will upon the increase
of my duty and endeavours.  I was at great losse what to do, whether tell
my wife of it or no, which I could hardly forbear, but yet I did and will
think of it first before I do, for fear of making her think me to be in a
better condition, or in a better way of getting money, than yet I am.
After dinner to the office, where doing infinite of business till past to
at night to the comfort of my mind, and so home with joy to supper and to
bed.  This evening Mr. Hempson came and told me how Sir W, Batten his
master will not hear of continuing him in his employment as Clerk of the
Survey at Chatham, from whence of a sudden he has removed him without any
new or extraordinary cause, and I believe (as he himself do in part write,
and J. Norman do confess) for nothing but for that he was twice with me
the other day and did not wait upon him.  So much he fears me and all that
have to do with me.  Of this more in the Mem. Book of my office upon this
day, there I shall find it.

3rd.  Up, and after a long discourse with my cozen Thomas Pepys, the
executor, I with my wife by coach to Holborn, where I 'light, and she to
her father's, I to the Temple and several places, and so to the 'Change,
where much business, and then home to dinner alone; and so to the Mitre
Taverne by appointment (and there met by chance with W. Howe come to buy
wine for my Lord against his going down to Hinchingbroke, and I private
with him a great while discoursing of my Lord's strangeness to me; but he
answers that I have no reason to think any such thing, but that my Lord is
only in general a more reserved man than he was before) to meet Sir W.
Rider and Mr. Clerke, and there after much ado made an end, giving Mr.
Custos L202 against Mr. Bland, which I endeavoured to bring down but could
not, and think it is well enough ended for Mr. Bland for all that. Thence
by coach to fetch my wife from her brother's, and found her gone home.
Called at Sir Robert Bernard's about surrendering my estate in reversion
to the use of my life, which will be done, and at Roger Pepys, who was
gone to bed in pain of a boyle that he could not sit or stand. So home,
where my wife is full of sad stories of her good-natured father and
roguish brother, who is going for Holland and his wife, to be a soldier.
And so after a little at the office to bed.  This night late coming in my
coach, coming up Ludgate Hill, I saw two gallants and their footmen taking
a pretty wench, which I have much eyed, lately set up shop upon the hill,
a seller of riband and gloves.  They seek to drag her by some force, but
the wench went, and I believe had her turn served, but, God forgive me!
what thoughts and wishes I had of being in their place. In Covent Garden
to-night, going to fetch home my wife, I stopped at the great
Coffee-house' there, where I never was before; where Dryden the poet (I
knew at Cambridge), and all the wits of the town, and Harris the player,
and Mr. Hoole of our College.  And had I had time then, or could at ether
times, it will be good coming thither, for there, I perceive, is very
witty and pleasant discourse.  But I could not tarry, and as it was late,
they were all ready to go away.

4th.  Up and to the office, where after a while sitting, I left the board
upon pretence of serious business, and by coach to Paul's School, where I
heard some good speeches of the boys that were to be elected this year.
Thence by and by with Mr. Pullen and Barnes (a great Non-Conformist) with
several others of my old acquaintance to the Nag's Head Taverne, and there
did give them a bottle of sacke, and away again and I to the School, and
up to hear the upper form examined; and there was kept by very many of the
Mercers, Clutterbucke, a Barker, Harrington, and others; and with great
respect used by them all, and had a noble dinner.  Here they tell me, that
in Dr. Colett's will he says that he would have a Master found for the
School that hath good skill in Latin, and (if it could be) one that had
some knowledge of the Greeke; so little was Greeke known here at that
time.  Dr. Wilkins and one Mr. Smallwood, Posers. After great pleasure
there, and specially to Mr. Crumlum, so often to tell of my being a
benefactor to the School, I to my bookseller's and there spent an hour
looking over Theatrum Urbium and Flandria illustrata, with excellent cuts,
with great content.  So homeward, and called at my little milliner's,
where I chatted with her, her husband out of the way, and a mad merry slut
she is.  So home to the office, and by and by comes my wife home from the
burial of Captain Grove's wife at Wapping (she telling me a story how her
mayd Jane going into the boat did fall down and show her arse in the
boat), and alone comes my uncle Wight and Mr. Maes with the state of their
case, which he told me very discreetly, and I believe is a very hard one,
and so after drinking a bottle of ale or two they gone, and I a little
more to the office, and so home to prayers and to bed.  This evening I
made an end of my letter to Creed about his pieces of eight, and sent it
away to him.  I pray God give good end to it to bring me some money, and
that duly as from him.

5th.  Up, and down by water, a brave morning, to Woolwich, and there spent
an houre or two to good purpose, and so walked to Greenwich and thence to
Deptford, where I found (with Sir W. Batten upon a survey) Sir J. Minnes,
Sir W. Pen, and my Lady Batten come down and going to dinner. I dined with
them, and so after dinner by water home, all the way going and coming
reading "Faber Fortunae," which I can never read too often. At home a
while with my wife, and so to my office, where till 8 o'clock, and then
home to look over some Brampton papers, and my uncle's accounts as
Generall-Receiver of the County for 1647 of our monthly assessment, which,
contrary to my expectation, I found in such good order and so, thoroughly
that I did not expect, nor could have thought, and that being done, having
seen discharges for every farthing of money he received, I went to bed
late with great quiett.

6th.  Up, and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and so at noon
to the 'Change, where I met Mr. Coventry, the first time I ever saw him
there, and after a little talke with him and other merchants, I up and
down about several businesses, and so home, whither came one Father
Fogourdy, an Irish priest, of my wife's and her mother's acquaintance in
France, a sober, discreet person, but one that I would not have converse
with my wife for fear of meddling with her religion, but I like the man
well.  Thence with my wife abroad, and left her at Tom's, while I abroad
about several businesses and so back to her, myself being vexed to find at
my first coming Tom abroad, and all his books, papers, and bills loose
upon the open table in the parlour, and he abroad, which I ranted at him
for when he came in.  Then by coach home, calling at my cozen Scott's, who
(she) lies dying, they say, upon a miscarriage.  My wife could not be
admitted to see her, nor anybody.  At home to the office late writing
letters, and then home to supper and to bed.  Father Fogourdy confirms to
me the newes that for certain there is peace between the Pope and King of
France.

7th (Lord's day).  Up and to church, and thence home, my wife being ill
.  .  .  kept her bed all day, and I up and dined by her bedside, and then
all the afternoon till late at night writing some letters of business to
my father stating of matters to him in general of great import, and other
letters to ease my mind in the week days that I have not time to think of,
and so up to my wife, and with great mirth read Sir W. Davenant's two
speeches in dispraise of London and Paris, by way of reproach one to
another, and so to prayers and to bed.

8th.  Up, and by coach called upon Mr. Phillips, and after a little talk
with him away to my Lord Sandwich's, but he being gone abroad, I staid a
little and talked with Mr. Howe, and so to Westminster in term time, and
there met Mr. Pierce, who told me largely how the King still do doat upon
his women, even beyond all shame; and that the good Queen will of herself
stop before she goes sometimes into her dressing-room, till she knows
whether the King be there, for fear he should be, as she hath sometimes
taken him, with Mrs. Stewart; and that some of the best parts of the
Queen's joynture are, contrary to faith, and against the opinion of my
Lord Treasurer and his Council, bestowed or rented, I know not how, to my
Lord Fitz-Harding and Mrs. Stewart, and others of that crew that the King
do doat infinitely upon the Duke of Monmouth, apparently as one that he
intends to have succeed him.  God knows what will be the end of it! After
he was gone I went and talked with Mrs. Lane about persuading her to
Hawly, and think she will come on, which I wish were done, and so to Mr.
Howlett and his wife, and talked about the same, and they are mightily for
it, and I bid them promote it, for I think it will be for both their goods
and my content.  But I was much pleased to look upon their pretty
daughter, which is grown a pretty mayd, and will make a fine modest woman.
Thence to the 'Change by coach, and after some business done, home to
dinner, and thence to Guildhall, thinking to have heard some pleading, but
there were no Courts, and so to Cade's, the stationer, and there did look
upon some pictures which he promised to give me the buying of, but I found
he would have played the Jacke with me, but at last he did proffer me what
I expected, and I have laid aside L10 or L12 worth, and will think of it,
but I am loth to lay out so much money upon them.  So home a little vexed
in my mind to think how to-day I was forced to compliment W. Howe and
admit myself to an equality with Mr. Moore, which is come to challenge in
his discourse with me, but I will admit it no more, but let me stand or
fall, I will show myself as strange to them as my Lord do himself to me.
After at the office till 9 o'clock, I home in fear of some pain by taking
cold, and so to supper and to bed.

9th.  Up and to the office, where sat all the morning.  At noon by coach
with Mr. Coventry to the 'Change, where busy with several people.  Great
talke of the Dutch proclaiming themselves in India, Lords of the Southern
Seas, and deny traffick there to all ships but their owne, upon pain of
confiscation; which makes our merchants mad.  Great doubt of two ships of
ours, the "Greyhound" and another, very rich, coming from the Streights,
for fear of the Turkes.  Matters are made up between the Pope and the King
of France; so that now all the doubt is, what the French will do with
their armies.  Thence home, and there found Captain Grove in mourning for
his wife, and Hawly, and they dined with me.  After dinner, and Grove
gone, Hawly and I talked of his mistress, Mrs. Lane, and I seriously
advising him and inquiring his condition, and do believe that I shall
bring them together.  By and by comes Mr. Moore, with whom much good
discourse of my Lord, and among other things told me that my Lord is
mightily altered, that is, grown very high and stately, and do not admit
of any to come into his chamber to him, as heretofore, and that I must not
think much of his strangeness to me, for it was the same he do to every
body, and that he would not have me be solicitous in the matter, but keep
off and give him now and then a visit and no more, for he says he himself
do not go to him now a days but when he sends for him, nor then do not
stay for him if he be not there at the hour appointed, for, says he, I do
find that I can stand upon my own legs and I will not by any over
submission make myself cheap to any body and contemptible, which was the
doctrine of the world that I lacked most, and shall follow it.  I
discoursed with him about my money that my Lord hath, and the L1000 that I
stand bound with him in, to my cozen Thomas Pepys, in both which I will
get myself at liberty as soon as I can; for I do not like his being angry
and in debt both together to me; and besides, I do not perceive he looks
after paying his debts, but runs farther and farther in.  He being gone,
my wife and I did walk an houre or two above in our chamber, seriously
talking of businesses.  I told her my Lord owed me L700, and shewed her
the bond, and how I intended to carry myself to my Lord.  She and I did
cast about how to get Captain Grove for my sister, in which we are mighty
earnest at present, and I think it would be a good match, and will
endeavour it.  So to my office a while, then home to supper and to bed.

10th.  Up, and by coach to my Lord Sandwich, to his new house, a fine
house, but deadly dear, in Lincoln's Inne Fields, where I found and spoke
a little to him.  He is high and strange still, but did ask me how my wife
did, and at parting remembered him to his cozen, which I thought was
pretty well, being willing to flatter myself that in time he will be well
again.  Thence home straight and busy all the forenoon, and at noon with
Mr. Bland to Mr. Povy's, but he being at dinner and full of company we
retreated and went into Fleet Street to a friend of his, and after a long
stay, he telling me the long and most perplexed story of Coronell and
Bushell's business of sugars, wherein Parke and Green and Mr. Bland and 40
more have been so concerned about the King of Portugal's duties, wherein
every party has laboured to cheat another, a most pleasant and profitable
story to hear, and in the close made me understand Mr. Maes' business
better than I did before.  By and by dinner came, and after dinner and
good discourse that and such as I was willing for improvement sake to
hear, I went away too to White Hall to a Committee of Tangier, where I
took occasion to demand of Creed whether he had received my letter, and he
told me yes, and that he would answer it, which makes me much wonder what
he means to do with me, but I will be even with him before I have done,
let him make as light of it as he will.  Thence to the Temple, where my
cozen Roger Pepys did show me a letter my Father wrote to him last Terme
to shew me, proposing such things about Sturtlow and a portion for Pall,
and I know not what, that vexes me to see him plotting how to put me to
trouble and charge, and not thinking to pay our debts and legacys, but I
will write him a letter will persuade him to be wiser.  So home, and
finding my wife abroad (after her coming home from being with my aunt
Wight to-day to buy Lent provisions) gone with Will to my brother's, I
followed them by coach, but found them not, for they were newly gone home
from thence, which troubled me.  I to Sir Robert Bernard's chamber, and
there did surrender my reversion in Brampton lands to the use of my will,
which I was glad to have done, my will being now good in all parts.
Thence homewards, calling a little at the Coffee-house, where a little
merry discourse, and so home, where I found my wife, who says she went to
her father's to be satisfied about her brother, who I found at my house
with her.  He is going this next tide with his wife into Holland to seek
his fortune.  He had taken his leave of us this morning.  I did give my
wife 10s. to give him, and a coat that I had by me, a close-bodied
light-coloured cloth coat, with a gold edgeing in each seam, that was the
lace of my wife's best pettycoat that she had when I married her.  I staid
not there, but to my office, where Stanes the glazier was with me till to
at night making up his contract, and, poor man, I made him almost mad
through a mistake of mine, but did afterwards reconcile all, for I would
not have the man that labours to serve the King so cheap above others
suffer too much.  He gone I did a little business more, and so home to
supper and to bed, being now pretty well again, the weather being warm.
My pain do leave me without coming to any great excesse, but my cold that
I had got I suppose was not very great, it being only the leaving of my
wastecoat unbuttoned one morning.

11th.  Up, after much pleasant discourse with my wife, and to the office,
where we sat all the morning, and did much business, and some much to my
content by prevailing against Sir W. Batten for the King's profit.  At
noon home to dinner, my wife and I hand to fist to a very fine pig.  This
noon Mr. Falconer came and visited my wife, and brought her a present, a
silver state-cup and cover, value about L3 or L4, for the courtesy I did
him the other day.  He did not stay dinner with me.  I am almost sorry for
this present, because I would have reserved him for a place to go in
summer a-visiting at Woolwich with my wife.

12th.  Up, and ready, did find below Mr. Creed's boy with a letter from
his master for me.  So I fell to reading it, and it is by way of stating
the case between S. Pepys and J. Creed most excellently writ, both showing
his stoutness and yet willingness to peace, reproaching me yet flattering
me again, and in a word in as good a manner as I think the world could
have wrote, and indeed put me to a greater stand than ever I thought I
could have been in this matter.  All the morning thinking how to behave
myself in the business, and at noon to the Coffee-house; thence by his
appointment met him upon the 'Change, and with him back to the
Coffee-house, where with great seriousness and strangeness on both sides
he said his part and I mine, he sometimes owning my favour and assistance,
yet endeavouring to lessen it, as that the success of his business was not
wholly or very much to be imputed to that assistance: I to alledge the
contrary, and plainly to tell him that from the beginning I never had it
in my mind to do him all that kindnesse for nothing, but he gaining 5 or
L600, I did expect a share of it, at least a real and not a complimentary
acknowledgment of it.  In fine I said nothing all the while that I need
fear he can do me more hurt with them than before I spoke them.  The most
I told him was after we were come to a peace, which he asked me whether he
should answer the Board's letter or no.  I told him he might forbear it a
while and no more.  Then he asked how the letter could be signed by them
without their much enquiry.  I told him it was as I worded it and nothing
at all else of any moment, whether my words be ever hereafter spoken of
again or no.  So that I have the same neither better nor worse force over
him that I had before, if he should not do his part.  And the peace
between us was this: Says he after all, well, says he, I know you will
expect, since there must be some condescension, that it do become me to
begin it, and therefore, says he, I do propose (just like the interstice
between the death of the old and the coming in of the present king, all
the time is swallowed up as if it had never been) so our breach of
friendship may be as if it had never been, that I should lay aside all
misapprehensions of him or his first letter, and that he would reckon
himself obliged to show the same ingenuous acknowledgment of my love and
service to him as at the beginning he ought to have done, before by my
first letter I did (as he well observed) put him out of a capacity of
doing it, without seeming to do it servilely, and so it rests, and I shall
expect how he will deal with me.  After that I began to be free, and both
of us to discourse of other things, and he went home with me and dined
with me and my wife and very pleasant, having a good dinner and the
opening of my lampry (cutting a notch on one side), which proved very
good.  After dinner he and I to Deptford, walking all the way, where we
met Sir W. Petty and I took him back, and I got him to go with me to his
vessel and discourse it over to me, which he did very well, and then
walked back together to the waterside at Redriffe, with good discourse all
the way.  So Creed and I by boat to my house, and thence to coach with my
wife and called at Alderman Backewell's and there changed Mr. Falconer's
state-cup, that he did give us the other day, for a fair tankard.  The cup
weighed with the fashion L5 16s., and another little cup that Joyce Norton
did give us 17s., both L6 13s.; for which we had the tankard, which came
to L6 10s., at 5s. 7d.  per oz., and 3s. in money, and with great content
away thence to my brother's, Creed going away there, and my brother
bringing me the old silk standard that I lodged there long ago, and then
back again home, and thence, hearing that my uncle Wight had been at my
house, I went to him to the Miter, and there with him and Maes, Norbury,
and Mr. Rawlinson till late eating some pot venison (where the Crowne
earthen pot pleased me mightily), and then homewards and met Mr. Barrow,
so back with him to the Miter and sat talking about his business of his
discontent in the yard, wherein sometimes he was very foolish and pettish,
till 12 at night, and so went away, and I home and up to my wife a-bed,
with my mind ill at ease whether I should think that I had by this made
myself a bad end by missing the certainty of L100 which I proposed to
myself so much, or a good one by easing myself of the uncertain good
effect but the certain trouble and reflection which must have fallen on me
if we had proceeded to a public dispute, ended besides embarking myself
against my Lord, who (which I had forgot) had given him his hand for the
value of the pieces of eight at his rates which were all false, which by
the way I shall take heed to the giving of my Lord notice of it hereafter
whenever he goes out again.

13th.  Up, and after I had told my wife in the morning in bed the passages
yesterday with Creed my head and heart was mightily lighter than they were
before, and so up and to the office, and thence, after sitting, at 11
o'clock with Mr. Coventry to the African House, and there with Sir W.
Ryder by agreement we looked over part of my Lord Peterborough's accounts,
these being by Creed and Vernaty.  Anon down to dinner to a table which
Mr. Coventry keeps here, out of his L300 per annum as one of the
Assistants to the Royall Company, a very pretty dinner, and good company,
and excellent discourse, and so up again to our work for an hour till the
Company came to having a meeting of their own, and so we broke up and
Creed and I took coach and to Reeves, the perspective glass maker, and
there did indeed see very excellent microscopes, which did discover a
louse or mite or sand most perfectly and largely.  Being sated with that
we went away (yet with a good will were it not for my obligation to have
bought one) and walked to the New Exchange, and after a turn or two and
talked I took coach and home, and so to my office, after I had been with
my wife and saw her day's work in ripping the silke standard, which we
brought home last night, and it will serve to line a bed, or for twenty
uses, to our great content.  And there wrote fair my angry letter to my
father upon that that he wrote to my cozen Roger Pepys, which I hope will
make him the more carefull to trust to my advice for the time to come
without so many needless complaints and jealousys, which are troublesome
to me because without reason.

14th (Lord's day).  Up and to church alone, where a lazy sermon of Mr.
Mills, upon a text to introduce catechizing in his parish, which I
perceive he intends to begin.  So home and very pleasant with my wife at
dinner.  All the afternoon at my office alone doing business, and then in
the evening after a walk with my wife in the garden, she and I to my uncle
Wight's to supper, where Mr. Norbury, but my uncle out of tune, and after
supper he seemed displeased mightily at my aunt's desiring [to] put off a
copper kettle, which it seems with great study he had provided to boil
meat in, and now she is put in the head that it is not wholesome, which
vexed him, but we were very merry about it, and by and by home, and after
prayers to bed.

15th.  Up, and carrying my wife to my Lord's lodgings left her, and I to
White Hall, to the Duke; where he first put on a periwigg to-day; but
methought his hair cut short in order thereto did look very prettily of
itself, before he put on his periwigg.

     [Charles II. followed his brother in the use of the periwig in the
     following April.]

Thence to his closet and there did our business, and thence Mr. Coventry
and I down to his chamber and spent a little time, and so parted, and I
took my wife homeward, I stopping at the Coffee-house, and thence a while
to the 'Change, where great newes of the arrivall of two rich ships, the
Greyhound and another, which they were mightily afeard of, and great
insurance given, and so home to dinner, and after an houre with my wife at
her globes, I to the office, where very busy till 11 at night, and so home
to supper and to bed.  This afternoon Sir Thomas Chamberlin came to the
office to me, and showed me several letters from the East Indys, showing
the height that the Dutch are come to there, showing scorn to all the
English, even in our only Factory there of Surat, beating several men, and
hanging the English Standard St. George under the Dutch flagg in scorn;
saying, that whatever their masters do or say at home, they will do what
they list, and will be masters of all the world there; and have so
proclaimed themselves Soveraigne of all the South Seas; which certainly
our King cannot endure, if the Parliament will give him money. But I doubt
and yet do hope they will not yet, till we are more ready for it.

16th.  Up and to the office, where very busy all the morning, and most
with Mr. Wood, I vexing him about his masts.  At noon to the 'Change a
little and thence brought Mr. Barrow to dinner with me, where I had a
haunch of venison roasted, given me yesterday, and so had a pretty dinner,
full of discourse of his business, wherein the poor man is mightily
troubled, and I pity him in it, but hope to get him some ease. He being
gone I to the office, where very busy till night, that my uncle Wight and
Mr. Maes came to me, and after discourse about Maes' business to supper
very merry, but my mind upon my business, and so they being gone I to my
Vyall a little, which I have not done some months, I think, before, and
then a little to my office, at 11 at night, and so home and to bed.

17th.  Up, and with my wife, setting her down by her father's in Long
Acre, in so ill looked a place, among all the whore houses, that I was
troubled at it, to see her go thither.  Thence I to White Hall and there
walked up and down talking with Mr. Pierce, who tells me of the King's
giving of my Lord Fitz-Harding two leases which belong indeed to the
Queene, worth L20,000 to him; and how people do talk of it, and other
things of that nature which I am sorry to hear.  He and I walked round the
Park with great pleasure, and back again, and finding no time to speak
with my Lord of Albemarle, I walked to the 'Change and there met my wife
at our pretty Doll's, and so took her home, and Creed also whom I met
there, and sent her hose, while Creed and I staid on the 'Change, and by
and by home and dined, where I found an excellent mastiffe, his name
Towser, sent me by a chyrurgeon.  After dinner I took my wife again by
coach (leaving Creed by the way going to Gresham College, of which he is
now become one of the virtuosos) and to White Hall, where I delivered a
paper about Tangier to my Lord Duke of Albemarle in the council chamber,
and so to Mrs. Hunt's to call my wife, and so by coach straight home, and
at my office till 3 o'clock in the morning, having spent much time this
evening in discourse with Mr. Cutler, who tells me how the Dutch deal with
us abroad and do not value us any where, and how he and Sir W. Rider have
found reason to lay aside Captain Cocke in their company, he having played
some indiscreet and unfair tricks with them, and has lost himself every
where by his imposing upon all the world with the conceit he has of his
own wit, and so has, he tells me, Sir R. Ford also, both of whom are very
witty men.  He being gone Sir W. Rider came and staid with me till about
12 at night, having found ourselves work till that time, about
understanding the measuring of Mr. Wood's masts, which though I did so
well before as to be thought to deal very hardly against Wood, yet I am
ashamed I understand it no better, and do hope yet, whatever be thought of
me, to save the King some more money, and out of an impatience to breake
up with my head full of confused confounded notions, but nothing brought
to a clear comprehension, I was resolved to sit up and did till now it is
ready to strike 4 o'clock, all alone, cold, and my candle not enough left
to light me to my owne house, and so, with my business however brought to
some good understanding, and set it down pretty clear, I went home to bed
with my mind at good quiet, and the girl sitting up for me (the rest all
a-bed).  I eat and drank a little, and to bed, weary, sleepy, cold, and my
head akeing.

18th.  Called up to the office and much against my will I rose, my head
aching mightily, and to the office, where I did argue to good purpose for
the King, which I have been fitting myself for the last night against Mr.
Wood about his masts, but brought it to no issue.  Very full of business
till noon, and then with Mr. Coventry to the African House, and there fell
to my Lord Peterborough's accounts, and by and by to dinner, where
excellent discourse, Sir G. Carteret and others of the African Company
with us, and then up to the accounts again, which were by and by done, and
then I straight home, my head in great pain, and drowsy, so after doing a
little business at the office I wrote to my father about sending him the
mastiff was given me yesterday.  I home and by daylight to bed about 6
o'clock and fell to sleep, wakened about 12 when my wife came to bed, and
then to sleep again and so till morning, and then:

19th.  Up in good order in my head again and shaved myself, and then to
the office, whither Mr. Cutler came, and walked and talked with me a great
while; and then to the 'Change together; and it being early, did tell me
several excellent examples of men raised upon the 'Change by their great
diligence and saving; as also his owne fortune, and how credit grew upon
him; that when he was not really worth L1100, he had credit for L100,000
of Sir W. Rider how he rose; and others.  By and by joyned with us Sir
John Bankes; who told us several passages of the East India Company; and
how in his very case, when there was due to him and Alderman Mico L64,000
from the Dutch for injury done to them in the East Indys, Oliver presently
after the peace, they delaying to pay them the money, sent them word, that
if they did not pay them by such a day, he would grant letters of mark to
those merchants against them; by which they were so fearful of him, they
did presently pay the money every farthing.  By and by, the 'Change
filling, I did many businesses, and about 2 o'clock went off with my uncle
Wight to his house, thence by appointment we took our wives (they by coach
with Mr. Mawes) and we on foot to Mr. Jaggard, a salter, in Thames Street,
for whom I did a courtesy among the poor victuallers, his wife, whom long
ago I had seen, being daughter to old Day, my uncle Wight's master, is a
very plain woman, but pretty children they have.  They live methought at
first in but a plain way, but afterward I saw their dinner, all fish,
brought in very neatly, but the company being but bad I had no great
pleasure in it. After dinner I to the office, where we should have met
upon business extraordinary, but business not coming we broke up, and I
thither again and took my wife; and taking a coach, went to visit my Ladys
Jemimah and Paulina Montagu, and Mrs. Elizabeth Dickering, whom we find at
their father's new house

     [The Earl of Sandwich had just moved to a house in Lincoln's Inn
     Fields.  Elizabeth Dickering, who afterwards married John Creed, was
     niece to Lord Sandwich.]

in Lincolne's Inn Fields; but the house all in dirt.  They received us
well enough; but I did not endeavour to carry myself over familiarly with
them; and so after a little stay, there coming in presently after us my
Lady Aberguenny and other ladies, we back again by coach, and visited, my
wife did, my she cozen Scott, who is very ill still, and thence to
Jaggard's again, where a very good supper and great store of plate; and
above all after supper Mrs. Jaggard did at my entreaty play on the Vyall,
but so well as I did not think any woman in England could and but few
Maisters, I must confess it did mightily surprise me, though I knew
heretofore that she could play, but little thought so well.  After her I
set Maes to singing, but he did it so like a coxcomb that I was sick of
him.  About 11 at night I carried my aunt home by coach, and then home
myself, having set my wife down at home by the way.  My aunt tells me they
are counted very rich people, worth at least 10 or L12,000, and their
country house all the yeare long and all things liveable, which mightily
surprises me to think for how poore a man I took him when I did him the
courtesy at our office.  So after prayers to bed, pleased at nothing all
the day but Mrs. Jaggard playing on the Vyall, and that was enough to make
me bear with all the rest that did not content me.

20th.  Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and at noon to
the 'Change with Mr. Coventry and thence home to dinner, after dinner by a
gaily down to Woolwich, where with Mr. Falconer, and then at the other
yard doing some business to my content, and so walked to Greenwich, it
being a very fine evening and brought right home with me by water, and so
to my office, where late doing business, and then home to supper and to
bed.

21st. (Lord's day).  Up, and having many businesses at the office to-day I
spent all the morning there drawing up a letter to Mr. Coventry about
preserving of masts, being collections of my own, and at noon home to
dinner, whither my brother Tom comes, and after dinner I took him up and
read my letter lately of discontent to my father, and he is seemingly
pleased at it, and cries out of my sister's ill nature and lazy life
there.  He being gone I to my office again, and there made an end of my
morning's work, and then, after reading my vows of course, home and back
again with Mr. Maes and walked with him talking of his business in the
garden, and he being gone my wife and I walked a turn or two also, and
then my uncle Wight fetching of us, she and I to his house to supper, and
by the way calling on Sir G. Carteret to desire his consent to my bringing
Maes to him, which he agreed to.  So I to my uncle's, but staid a great
while vexed both of us for Maes not coming in, and soon he came, and I
with him from supper to Sir G. Carteret, and there did largely discourse
of the business, and I believe he may expect as much favour as he can do
him, though I fear that will not be much.  So back, and after sitting
there a good while, we home, and going my wife told me how my uncle when
he had her alone did tell her that he did love her as well as ever he did,
though he did not find it convenient to show it publicly for reasons on
both sides, seeming to mean as well to prevent my jealousy as his wife's,
but I am apt to think that he do mean us well, and to give us something if
he should die without children.  So home to prayers and to bed.  My wife
called up the people to washing by four o'clock in the morning; and our
little girl Susan is a most admirable Slut and pleases us mightily, doing
more service than both the others and deserves wages better.

22nd.  Up and shaved myself, and then my wife and I by coach out, and I
set her down by her father's, being vexed in my mind and angry with her
for the ill-favoured place, among or near the whore houses, that she is
forced to come to him.  So left her there, and I to Sir Th. Warwick's but
did not speak with him.  Thence to take a turn in St. James's Park, and
meeting with Anth. Joyce walked with him a turn in the Pell Mell and so
parted, he St. James's ward and I out to Whitehall ward, and so to a
picture-sellers by the Half Moone in the street over against the Exchange,
and there looked over the maps of several cities and did buy two books of
cities stitched together cost me 9s. 6d., and when I came home thought of
my vowe, and paid 5s. into my poor box for it, hoping in God that I shall
forfeit no more in that kind.  Thence, meeting Mr. Moore, and to the
Exchange and there found my wife at pretty Doll's, and thence by coach set
her at my uncle Wight's, to go with my aunt to market once more against
Lent, and I to the Coffee-house, and thence to the 'Change, my chief
business being to enquire about the manner of other countries keeping of
their masts wet or dry, and got good advice about it, and so home, and
alone ate a bad, cold dinner, my people being at their washing all day,
and so to the office and all the afternoon upon my letter to Mr. Coventry
about keeping of masts, and ended it very well at night and wrote it fair
over.  This evening came Mr. Alsopp the King's brewer, with whom I spent
an houre talking and bewailing the posture of things at present; the King
led away by half-a-dozen men, that none of his serious servants and
friends can come at him.  These are Lauderdale, Buckingham, Hamilton,
Fitz-Harding (to whom he hath, it seems, given L2,000 per annum in the
best part of the King's estate); and that that the old Duke of Buckingham
could never get of the King.  Progers is another, and Sir H. Bennett.  He
loves not the Queen at all, but is rather sullen to her; and she, by all
reports, incapable of children. He is so fond of the Duke of Monmouth,
that every body admires it; and he says the Duke hath said, that he would
be the death of any man that says the King was not married to his mother:
though Alsopp says, it is well known that she was a common whore before
the King lay with her.  But it seems, he says, that the King is mighty
kind to these his bastard children; and at this day will go at midnight to
my Lady Castlemaine's nurses, and take the child and dance it in his arms:
that he is not likely to have his tables up again in his house,--[The
tables at which the king dined in public.-B.]--for the crew that are about
him will not have him come to common view again, but keep him obscurely
among themselves.  He hath this night, it seems, ordered that the Hall
(which there is a ball to be in to-night before the King) be guarded, as
the Queen-Mother's is, by his Horse Guards; whereas heretofore they were
by the Lord Chamberlain or Steward, and their people.  But it is feared
they will reduce all to the soldiery, and all other places taken away; and
what is worst of all, that he will alter the present militia, and bring
all to a flying army.  That my Lord Lauderdale, being Middleton's enemy,
and one that scorns the Chancellor even to open affronts before the King,
hath got the whole power of Scotland into his hand; whereas the other day
he was in a fair way to have had his whole estate, and honour, and life,
voted away from him.  That the King hath done himself all imaginable wrong
in the business of my Lord Antrim, in Ireland; who, though he was the head
of rebels, yet he by his letter owns to have acted by his father's and
mother's, and his commissions; but it seems the truth is, he hath obliged
himself, upon the clearing of his estate, to settle it upon a daughter of
the Queene-Mother's (by my Lord Germin, I suppose,) in marriage, be it to
whom the Queene pleases; which is a sad story.  It seems a daughter of the
Duke of Lenox's was, by force, going to be married the other day at
Somerset House, to Harry Germin; but she got away and run to the King, and
he says he will protect her. She is, it seems, very near akin to the King:
Such mad doings there are every day among them!  The rape upon a woman at
Turnstile the other day, her husband being bound in his shirt, they both
being in bed together, it being night, by two Frenchmen, who did not only
lye with her but abused her with a linke, is hushed up for L300, being the
Queen Mother's servants.  There was a French book in verse, the other day,
translated and presented to the Duke of Monmouth in such a high stile,
that the Duke of York, he tells me, was mightily offended at it.  The Duke
of Monmouth's mother's brother hath a place at Court; and being a Welchman
(I think he told me) will talk very broad of the King's being married to
his sister.  The King did the other day, at the Council, commit my Lord
Digby's' chaplin, and steward, and another servant, who went upon the
process begun there against their lord, to swear that they saw him at
church, end receive the Sacrament as a Protestant, (which, the judges
said, was sufficient to prove him such in the eye of the law); the King, I
say, did commit them all to the Gate-house, notwithstanding their pleading
their dependance upon him, and the faith they owed him as their lord,
whose bread they eat.  And that the King should say, that he would soon
see whether he was King, or Digby.  That the Queene-Mother hath outrun
herself in her expences, and is now come to pay very ill, or run in debt;
the money being spent that she received for leases.  He believes there is
not any money laid up in bank, as I told him some did hope; but he says,
from the best informers he can assure me there is no such thing, nor any
body that should look after such a thing; and that there is not now above
L80,000 of the Dunkirke money left in stock.  That Oliver in the year when
he spent L1,400,000 in the Navy, did spend in the whole expence of the
kingdom L2,600,000.  That all the Court are mad for a Dutch war; but both
he and I did concur, that it was a thing rather to be dreaded than hoped
for; unless by the French King's falling upon Flanders, they and the Dutch
should be divided.  That our Embassador had, it is true, an audience; but
in the most dishonourable way that could be; for the Princes of the Blood
(though invited by our Embassador, which was the greatest absurdity that
ever Embassador committed these 400 years) were not there; and so were not
said to give place to our King's Embassador.  And that our King did openly
say, the other day in the Privy Chamber, that he would not be hectored out
of his right and preeminencys by the King of France, as great as he was.
That the Pope is glad to yield to a peace with the French (as the
newes-book says), upon the basest terms that ever was.  That the talke
which these people about our King, that I named before, have, is to tell
him how neither privilege of Parliament nor City is any thing; but his
will is all, and ought to be so: and their discourse, it seems, when they
are alone, is so base and sordid, that it makes the eares of the very
gentlemen of the back-stairs (I think he called them) to tingle to hear it
spoke in the King's hearing; and that must be very bad indeed.  That my
Lord Digby did send to Lisbon a couple of priests, to search out what they
could against the Chancellor concerning the match, as to the point of his
knowing before-hand that the Queene was not capable of bearing children;
and that something was given her to make her so.  But as private as they
were, when they came thither they were clapped up prisoners.  That my Lord
Digby endeavours what he can to bring the business into the House of
Commons, hoping there to master the Chancellor, there being many enemies
of his there; but I hope the contrary.  That whereas the late King did
mortgage 'Clarendon' to somebody for L20,000, and this to have given it to
the Duke of Albemarle, and he sold it to my Lord Chancellor, whose title
of Earldome is fetched from thence; the King hath this day sent his order
to the Privy Seale for the payment of this L20,000 to my Lord Chancellor,
to clear the mortgage!  Ireland in a very distracted condition about the
hard usage which the Protestants meet with, and the too good which the
Catholiques.  And from altogether, God knows my heart, I expect nothing
but ruine can follow, unless things are better ordered in a little time.
He being gone my wife came and told me how kind my uncle Wight had been to
her to-day, and that though she says that all his kindness comes from
respect to her she discovers nothing but great civility from him, yet but
what she says he otherwise will tell me, but to-day he told her plainly
that had she a child it should be his heir, and that should I or she want
he would be a good friend to us, and did give my wife instructions to
consent to all his wife says at any time, she being a pettish woman, which
argues a design I think he has of keeping us in with his wife in order to
our good sure, and he declaring her jealous of him that so he dares not
come to see my wife as otherwise he would do and will endeavour to do.  It
looks strange putting all together, but yet I am in hopes he means well.
My aunt also is mighty open to my wife and tells her mighty plain how her
husband did intend to double her portion to her at his death as a
jointure.  That he will give presently L100 to her niece Mary and a good
legacy at his death, and it seems did as much to the other sister, which
vexed [me] to think that he should bestow so much upon his wife's friends
daily as he do, but it cannot be helped for the time past, and I will
endeavour to remedy it for the time to come.  After all this discourse
with my wife at my office alone, she home to see how the wash goes on and
I to make an end of my work, and so home to supper and to bed.

23rd.  Up, it being Shrove Tuesday, and at the office sat all the morning,
at noon to the 'Change and there met with Sir W. Rider, and of a sudden
knowing what I had at home, brought him and Mr. Cutler and Mr. Cooke,
clerk to Mr. Secretary Morrice, a sober and pleasant man, and one that I
knew heretofore, when he was my Lord 's secretary at Dunkirke.  I made
much of them and had a pretty dinner for a sudden.  We talked very
pleasantly, and they many good discourses of their travels abroad.  After
dinner they gone, I to my office, where doing many businesses very late,
but to my good content to see how I grow in estimation every day more and
more, and have things given more oftener than I used to have formerly, as
to have a case of very pretty knives with agate shafts by Mrs. Russell. So
home and to bed.  This day, by the blessing of God, I have lived
thirty-one years in the world; and, by the grace of God, I find myself not
only in good health in every thing, and particularly as to the stone, but
only pain upon taking cold, and also in a fair way of coming to a better
esteem and estate in the world, than ever I expected.  But I pray God give
me a heart to fear a fall, and to prepare for it!

24th (Ash-Wednesday).  Up and by water, it being a very fine morning, to
White Hall, and there to speak with Sir Ph. Warwicke, but he was gone out
to chappell, so I spent much of the morning walking in the Park, and going
to the Queene's chappell, where I staid and saw their masse, till a man
came and bid me go out or kneel down: so I did go out.  And thence to
Somerset House; and there into the chappell, where Monsieur d'Espagne used
to preach.  But now it is made very fine, and was ten times more crouded
than the Queene's chappell at St. James's; which I wonder at. Thence down
to the garden of Somerset House, and up and down the new building, which
in every respect will be mighty magnificent and costly. I staid a great
while talking with a man in the garden that was sawing of a piece of
marble, and did give him 6d. to drink.  He told me much of the nature and
labour of the worke, how he could not saw above 4 inches of the stone in a
day, and of a greater not above one or two, and after it is sawed, then it
is rubbed with coarse and then with finer and finer sand till they come to
putty, and so polish it as smooth as glass.  Their saws have no teeth, but
it is the sand only which the saw rubs up and down that do the thing.
Thence by water to the Coffee-house, and there sat with Alderman Barker
talking of hempe and the trade, and thence to the 'Change a little, and so
home and dined with my wife, and then to the office till the evening, and
then walked a while merrily with my wife in the garden, and so she gone, I
to work again till late, and so home to supper and to bed.

25th.  Up and to the office, where we sat, and thence with Mr. Coventry by
coach to the glasshouse and there dined, and both before and after did my
Lord Peterborough's accounts.  Thence home to the office, and there did
business till called by Creed, and with him by coach (setting my wife at
my brother's) to my Lord's, and saw the young ladies, and talked a little
with them, and thence to White Hall, a while talking but doing no
business, but resolved of going to meet my Lord tomorrow, having got a
horse of Mr. Coventry to-day.  So home, taking up my wife, and after doing
something at my office home, God forgive me, disturbed in my mind out of
my jealousy of my wife tomorrow when I am out of town, which is a hell to
my mind, and yet without all reason.  God forgive me for it, and mend
me.  So home, and getting my things ready for me, weary to bed.

26th.  Up, and after dressing myself handsomely for riding, I out, and by
water to Westminster, to Mr. Creed's chamber, and after drinking some
chocolate, and playing on the vyall, Mr. Mallard being there, upon Creed's
new vyall, which proves, methinks, much worse than mine, and, looking upon
his new contrivance of a desk and shelves for books, we set out from an
inne hard by, whither Mr. Coventry's horse was carried, and round about
the bush through bad ways to Highgate.  Good discourse in the way had
between us, and it being all day a most admirable pleasant day, we, upon
consultation, had stopped at the Cocke, a mile on this side Barnett, being
unwilling to put ourselves to the charge or doubtful acceptance of any
provision against my Lord's coming by, and there got something and dined,
setting a boy to look towards Barnett Hill, against their coming; and
after two or three false alarms, they come, and we met the coach very
gracefully, and I had a kind receipt from both Lord and Lady as I could
wish, and some kind discourse, and then rode by the coach a good way, and
so fell to discoursing with several of the people, there being a dozen
attending the coach, and another for the mayds and parson. Among others
talking with W. Howe, he told me how my Lord in his hearing the other day
did largely tell my Lord Peterborough and Povy (who went with them down to
Hinchinbrooke) how and when he discarded Creed, and took me to him, and
that since the Duke of York has several times thanked him for me, which
did not a little please me, and anon I desiring Mr. Howe to tell me upon
[what] occasion this discourse happened, he desired me to say nothing of
it now, for he would not have my Lord to take notice of our being
together, but he would tell me another time, which put me into some
trouble to think what he meant by it.  But when we came to my Lord's
house, I went in; and whether it was my Lord's neglect, or general
indifference, I know not, but he made me no kind of compliment there; and,
methinks, the young ladies look somewhat highly upon me.  So I went away
without bidding adieu to anybody, being desirous not to be thought too
servile.  But I do hope and believe that my Lord do yet value me as high
as ever, though he dare not admit me to the freedom he once did, and that
my Lady is still the same woman.  So rode home and there found my uncle
Wight.  'Tis an odd thing as my wife tells me his caressing her and coming
on purpose to give her visits, but I do not trouble myself for him at all,
but hope the best and very good effects of it.  He being gone I eat
something and my wife.  I told all this day's passages, and she to give me
very good and rational advice how to behave myself to my Lord and his
family, by slighting every body but my Lord and Lady, and not to seem to
have the least society or fellowship with them, which I am resolved to do,
knowing that it is my high carriage that must do me good there, and to
appear in good clothes and garbe.  To the office, and being weary, early
home to bed.

27th.  Up, but weary, and to the office, where we sat all the morning.
Before I went to the office there came Bagwell's wife to me to speak for
her husband.  I liked the woman very well and stroked her under the chin,
but could not find in my heart to offer anything uncivil to her, she
being, I believe, a very modest woman.  At noon with Mr. Coventry to the
African house, and to my Lord Peterborough's business again, and then to
dinner, where, before dinner, we had the best oysters I have seen this
year, and I think as good in all respects as ever I eat in my life.  I eat
a great many.  Great, good company at dinner, among others Sir Martin
Noell, who told us the dispute between him, as farmer of the Additional
Duty, and the East India Company, whether callicos be linnen or no; which
he says it is, having been ever esteemed so: they say it is made of cotton
woole, and grows upon trees, not like flax or hempe.  But it was carried
against the Company, though they stand out against the verdict. Thence
home and to the office, where late, and so home to supper and to bed, and
had a very pleasing and condescending answer from my poor father to-day in
answer to my angry discontentful letter to him the other day, which
pleases me mightily.

28th (Lord's day).  Up and walked to Paul's; and by chance it was an
extraordinary day for the Readers of the Inns of Court and all the
Students to come to church, it being an old ceremony not used these
twenty-five years, upon the first Sunday in Lent.  Abundance there was of
Students, more than there was room to seat but upon forms, and the Church
mighty full.  One Hawkins preached, an Oxford man.  A good sermon upon
these words: "But the wisdom from above is first pure, then peaceable."
Both before and after sermon I was most impatiently troubled at the Quire,
the worst that ever I heard.  But what was extraordinary, the Bishop of
London, who sat there in a pew, made a purpose for him by the pulpitt, do
give the last blessing to the congregation; which was, he being a comely
old man, a very decent thing, methought.  The Lieutenant of the Tower, Sir
J. Robinson, would needs have me by coach home with him, and sending word
home to my house I did go and dine with him, his ordinary table being very
good, and his lady a very high-carriaged but comely big woman; I was
mightily pleased with her.  His officers of his regiment dined with him.
No discourse at table to any purpose, only after dinner my Lady would
needs see a boy which was represented to her to be an innocent country boy
brought up to towne a day or two ago, and left here to the wide world, and
he losing his way fell into the Tower, which my Lady believes, and takes
pity on him, and will keep him; but though a little boy and but young, yet
he tells his tale so readily and answers all questions so wittily, that
for certain he is an arch rogue, and bred in this towne; but my Lady will
not believe it, but ordered victuals to be given him, and I think will
keep him as a footboy for their eldest son.  After dinner to chappell in
the Tower with the Lieutenant, with the keyes carried before us, and the
Warders and Gentleman-porter going before us.  And I sat with the
Lieutenant in his pew, in great state, but slept all the sermon.  None, it
seems, of the prisoners in the Tower that are there now, though they may,
will come to prayers there.  Church being done, I back to Sir John's house
and there left him and home, and by and by to Sir W. Pen, and staid a
while talking with him about Sir J. Minnes his folly in his office, of
which I am sicke and weary to speak of it, and how the King is abused in
it, though Pen, I know, offers the discourse only like a rogue to get it
out of me, but I am very free to tell my mind to him, in that case being
not unwilling he should tell him again if he will or any body else.
Thence home, and walked in the garden by brave moonshine with my wife
above two hours, till past 8 o'clock, then to supper, and after prayers to
bed.

29th.  Up and by coach with Sir W. Pen to Charing Cross, and there I
'light, and to Sir Phillip Warwick to visit him and discourse with him
about navy business, which I did at large and he most largely with me, not
only about the navy but about the general Revenue of England, above two
hours, I think, many staying all the while without, but he seemed to take
pains to let me either understand the affairs of the Revenue or else to be
a witness of his pains and care in stating it.  He showed me indeed many
excellent collections of the State of the Revenue in former Kings and the
late times, and the present.  He showed me how the very Assessments
between 1643 and 1659, which were taxes (besides Excise, Customes,
Sequestrations, Decimations, King and Queene's and Church Lands, or any
thing else but just the Assessments), come to above fifteen millions.  He
showed me a discourse of his concerning the Revenues of this and foreign
States.  How that of Spayne was great, but divided with his kingdoms, and
so came to little.  How that of France did, and do much exceed ours before
for quantity; and that it is at the will of the Prince to tax what he will
upon his people; which is not here.  That the Hollanders have the best
manner of tax, which is only upon the expence of provisions, by an excise;
and do conclude that no other tax is proper for England but a pound-rate,
or excise upon the expence of provisions.  He showed me every particular
sort of payment away of money, since the King's coming in, to this day;
and told me, from one to one, how little he hath received of profit from
most of them; and I believe him truly. That the L1,200,000 which the
Parliament with so much ado did first vote to give the King, and since
hath been reexamined by several committees of the present Parliament, is
yet above L300,000 short of making up really to the King the L1,200,000,
as by particulars he showed me.

     [A committee was appointed in September, 1660, to consider the
     subject of the King's revenue, and they "reported to the Commons that
     the average revenue of Charles I., from 1637 to 1641 inclusive, had
     been L895,819, and the average expenditure about L1,110,000.  At
     that time prices were lower and the country less burthened with navy
     and garrisons, among which latter Dunkirk alone now cost more than
     L100,000 a year.  It appeared, therefore, that the least sum to
     which the King could be expected to 'conform his expense' was
     L1,200,000."  Burnet writes, "It was believed that if two millions
     had been asked he could have carried it.  But he (Clarendon) had no
     mind to put the King out of the necessity of having recourse to his
     Parliament."--Lister's Life of Clarendon, vol. ii., pp.  22, 23.]

And in my Lord Treasurer's excellent letter to the King upon this subject,
he tells the King how it was the spending more than the revenue that did
give the first occasion of his father's ruine, and did since to the
rebels; who, he says, just like Henry the Eighth, had great and sudden
increase of wealth, but yet, by overspending, both died poor; and further
tells the King how much of this L1,200,000 depends upon the life of the
Prince, and so must be renewed by Parliament again to his successor; which
is seldom done without parting with some of the prerogatives of the
Crowne; or if denied and he persists to take it of the people, it gives
occasion to a civill war, which may, as it did in the late business of
tonnage and poundage, prove fatal to the Crowne. He showed me how many
ways the Lord Treasurer did take before he moved the King to farme the
Customes in the manner he do, and the reasons that moved him to do it.  He
showed the a very excellent argument to prove, that our importing lesse
than we export, do not impoverish the kingdom, according to the received
opinion: which, though it be a paradox, and that I do not remember the
argument, yet methought there was a great deale in what he said.  And upon
the whole I find him a most exact and methodicall man, and of great
industry: and very glad that he thought fit to show me all this; though I
cannot easily guess the reason why he should do it to me, unless from the
plainness that he sees I use to him in telling him how much the King may
suffer for our want of understanding the case of our Treasury.  Thence to
White Hall (where my Lord Sandwich was, and gave me a good countenance, I
thought), and before the Duke did our usual business, and so I about
several businesses in the house, and then out to the Mewes with Sir W.
Pen.  But in my way first did meet with W. Howe, who did of himself advise
me to appear more free with my Lord and to come to him, for my own
strangeness he tells me he thinks do make my Lord the worse.  At the Mewes
Sir W. Pen and Mr. Baxter did shew me several good horses, but Pen, which
Sir W. Pen did give the Duke of York, was given away by the Duke the other
day to a Frenchman, which Baxter is cruelly vexed at, saying that he was
the best horse that he expects a great while to have to do with.  Thence I
to the 'Change, and thence to a Coffee-house with Sir W. Warren, and did
talk much about his and Wood's business, and thence homewards, and in my
way did stay to look upon a fire in an Inneyard in Lumbard Streete.  But,
Lord! how the mercers and merchants who had warehouses there did carry
away their cloths and silks. But at last it was quenched, and I home to
dinner, and after dinner carried my wife and set her and her two mayds in
Fleete Streete to buy things, and I to White Hall to little purpose, and
so to Westminster Hall, and there talked with Mrs. Lane and Howlett, but
the match with Hawly I perceive will not take, and so I am resolved wholly
to avoid occasion of further ill with her.  Thence by water to Salsbury
Court, and found my wife, by agreement, at Mrs. Turner's, and after a
little stay and chat set her and young Armiger down in Cheapside, and so
my wife and I home.  Got home before our mayds, who by and by came with a
great cry and fright that they had like to have been killed by a coach;
but, Lord! to see how Jane did tell the story like a foole and a
dissembling fanatique, like her grandmother, but so like a changeling,
would make a man laugh to death almost, and yet be vexed to hear her.  By
and by to the office to make up my monthly accounts, which I make up
to-night, and to my great content find myself worth eight hundred and
ninety and odd pounds, the greatest sum I ever yet knew, and so with a
heart at great case to bed.

     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     A mad merry slut she is
     A real and not a complimentary acknowledgment
     At least 12 or 14,000 people in the street (to see the hanging)
     Bearing more sayle will go faster than any other ships (multihull)
     But the wench went, and I believe had her turn served
     Chatted with her, her husband out of the way
     Could not saw above 4 inches of the stone in a day
     Do look upon me as a remembrancer of his former vanity
     Fear of making her think me to be in a better condition
     Few in any age that do mind anything that is abstruse
     God forgive me! what thoughts and wishes I had
     Good writers are not admired by the present
     Hear something of the effects of our last meeting (pregnancy?)
     I do not like his being angry and in debt both together to me
     I will not by any over submission make myself cheap
     Ireland in a very distracted condition
     Jane going into the boat did fall down and show her arse
     King is mighty kind to these his bastard children
     King still do doat upon his women, even beyond all shame
     Mankind pleasing themselves in the easy delights of the world
     Play good, but spoiled with the ryme, which breaks the sense
     Pleased to look upon their pretty daughter
     Pray God give me a heart to fear a fall, and to prepare for it!
     Pretty sayings, which are generally like paradoxes
     Ryme, which breaks the sense
     Sent my wife to get a place to see Turner hanged
     Sheriffs did endeavour to get one jewell
     So home to prayers and to bed
     Such open flattery is beastly
     Talked with Mrs. Lane about persuading her to Hawly
     Their saws have no teeth, but it is the sand only
     There did see Mrs. Lane.  .  .  .  .
     Travels over the high hills in Asia above the clouds
     Wherein every party has laboured to cheat another
     Willing to receive a bribe if it were offered me
     Would make a dogg laugh





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Diary of Samuel Pepys,
January/February 1663/64, by Samuel Pepys

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***

***** This file should be named 4146.txt or 4146.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/4/1/4/4146/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
