Project Gutenberg's Diary of Samuel Pepys, March 1663/64, by Samuel Pepys

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Diary of Samuel Pepys, March 1663/64

Author: Samuel Pepys

Release Date: November 30, 2004 [EBook #4147]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, MARCH ***




Produced by David Widger





                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A. F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                 MARCH
                               1663-1664

March 1st.  Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and at
noon to the 'Change, and after much business and meeting my uncle Wight,
who told me how Mr. Maes had like to have been trapanned yesterday, but
was forced to run for it; so with Creed and Mr. Hunt home to dinner, and
after a good and pleasant dinner, Mr. Hunt parted, and I took Mr. Creed
and my wife and down to Deptford, it being most pleasant weather, and
there till night discoursing with the officers there about several things,
and so walked home by moonshine, it being mighty pleasant, and so home,
and I to my office, where late about getting myself a thorough
understanding in the business of masts, and so home to bed, my left eye
being mightily troubled with rheum.

2nd.  Up, my eye mightily out of order with the rheum that is fallen down
into it, however, I by coach endeavoured to have waited on my Lord
Sandwich, but meeting him in Chancery Lane going towards the City I
stopped and so fairly walked home again, calling at St. Paul's
Churchyarde, and there looked upon a pretty burlesque poem, called
"Scarronides, or Virgile Travesty;" extraordinary good.  At home to the
office till dinner, and after dinner my wife cut my hair short, which is
growne pretty long again, and then to the office, and there till 9 at
night doing business.  This afternoon we had a good present of tongues and
bacon from Mr. Shales, of Portsmouth.  So at night home to supper, and,
being troubled with my eye, to bed.  This morning Mr. Burgby, one of the
writing clerks belonging to the Council, was with me about business, a
knowing man, he complains how most of the Lords of the Council do look
after themselves and their own ends, and none the publique, unless Sir
Edward Nicholas.  Sir G. Carteret is diligent, but all for his own ends
and profit.  My Lord Privy Scale, a destroyer of every body's business,
and do no good at all to the publique.  The Archbishop of Canterbury
speaks very little, nor do much, being now come to the highest pitch that
he can expect.  He tells me, he believes that things will go very high
against the Chancellor by Digby, and that bad things will be proved. Talks
much of his neglecting the King; and making the King to trot every day to
him, when he is well enough to go to visit his cozen Chief-Justice Hide,
but not to the Council or King.  He commends my Lord of Ormond mightily in
Ireland; but cries out cruelly of Sir G. Lane for his corruption; and that
he hath done my Lord great dishonour by selling of places here, which are
now all taken away, and the poor wretches ready to starve.  That nobody
almost understands or judges of business better than the King, if he would
not be guilty of his father's fault to be doubtfull of himself, and easily
be removed from his own opinion.  That my Lord Lauderdale is never from
the King's care nor council, and that he is a most cunning fellow.  Upon
the whole, that he finds things go very bad every where; and even in the
Council nobody minds the publique.

3rd.  Up pretty early and so to the office, where we sat all the morning
making a very great contract with Sir W. Warren for provisions for the
yeare coming, and so home to dinner, and there was W. Howe come to dine
with me, and before dinner he and I walked in the garden, and we did
discourse together, he assuring me of what he told me the other day of my
Lord's speaking so highly in my commendation to my Lord Peterborough and
Povy, which speaks my Lord having yet a good opinion of me, and also how
well my Lord and Lady both are pleased with their children's being at my
father's, and when the bigger ladies were there a little while ago, at
which I am very glad.  After dinner he went away, I having discoursed with
him about his own proceedings in his studies, and I observe him to be very
considerate and to mind his book in order to preferring himself by my
Lord's favour to something, and I hope to the outing of Creed in his
Secretaryship.  For he tells me that he is confident my Lord do not love
him nor will trust him in any secret matter, he is so cunning and crafty
in all he do.  So my wife and I out of doors thinking to have gone to have
seen a play, but when we came to take coach, they tell us there are none
this week, being the first of Lent.  But, Lord! to see how impatient I
found myself within to see a play, I being at liberty once a month to see
one, and I think it is the best method I could have taken. But to my
office, did very much business with several people till night, and so
home, being unwilling to stay late because of my eye which is not yet well
of the rheum that is fallen down into it, but to supper and to bed.

4th.  Up, my eye being pretty well, and then by coach to my Lord Sandwich,
with whom I spoke, walking a good while with him in his garden, which and
the house is very fine, talking of my Lord Peterborough's accounts,
wherein he is concerned both for the foolery as also inconvenience which
may happen upon my Lord Peterborough's ill-stating of his matters, so as
to have his gaine discovered unnecessarily.  We did talk long and freely
that I hope the worst is past and all will be well. There were several
people by trying a new-fashion gun

     [Many attempts to produce a satisfactory revolver were made in
     former centuries, but it was not till the present one that Colt's
     revolver was invented.  On February 18th, 1661, Edward, Marquis of
     Worcester, obtained Letters Patent for "an invencon to make certeyne
     guns or pistolls which in the tenth parte of one minute of an houre
     may, with a flaske contrived to that purpose, be re-charged the
     fourth part of one turne of the barrell which remaines still fixt,
     fastening it as forceably and effectually as a dozen thrids of any
     scrue, which in the ordinary and usual way require as many turnes."
     On March 3rd, 1664, Abraham Hill obtained Letters Patent for a "gun
     or pistoll for small shott, carrying seaven or eight charges of the
     same in the stocke of the gun."]

brought my Lord this morning, to shoot off often, one after another,
without trouble or danger, very pretty.  Thence to the Temple, and there
taking White's boat down to Woolwich, taking Mr. Shish at Deptford in my
way, with whom I had some good discourse of the Navy business.  At
Woolwich discoursed with him and Mr. Pett about iron worke and other
businesses, and then walked home, and at Greenwich did observe the
foundation laying of a very great house for the King, which will cost a
great deale of money.

     [Building by John Webb; now a part of Greenwich Hospital.  Evelyn
     wrote in his Diary, October 19th, 1661: "I went to London to visite
     my Lord of Bristoll, having been with Sir John Denham (his Mates
     surveyor) to consult with him about the placing of his palace at
     Greenwich, which I would have had built between the river and the
     Queene's house, so as a large cutt should have let in ye Thames like
     a bay; but Sir John was for setting it in piles at the very brink of
     the water, which I did not assent to and so came away, knowing Sir
     John to be a better poet than architect, tho' he had Mr. Webb (Inigo
     Jones's man) to assist him."]

So home to dinner, and my uncle Wight coming in he along with my wife and
I by coach, and setting him down by the way going to Mr. Maes we two to my
Lord Sandwich's to visit my Lady, with whom I left my wife discoursing,
and I to White Hall, and there being met by the Duke of Yorke, he called
me to him and discoursed a pretty while with me about the new ship's
dispatch building at Woolwich, and talking of the charge did say that he
finds always the best the most cheape, instancing in French guns, which in
France you may buy for 4 pistoles, as good to look to as others of 16, but
not the service.  I never had so much discourse with the Duke before, and
till now did ever fear to meet him.  He found me and Mr. Prin together
talking of the Chest money, which we are to blame not to look after.
Thence to my Lord's, and took up my wife, whom my Lady hath received with
her old good nature and kindnesse, and so homewards, and she home, I
'lighting by the way, and upon the 'Change met my uncle Wight and told him
my discourse this afternoon with Sir G. Carteret in Maes' business, but
much to his discomfort, and after a dish of coffee home, and at my office
a good while with Sir W. Warren talking with great pleasure of many
businesses, and then home to supper, my wife and I had a good fowle to
supper, and then I to the office again and so home, my mind in great ease
to think of our coming to so good a respect with my Lord again, and my
Lady, and that my Lady do so much cry up my father's usage of her
children, and the goodness of the ayre there, found in the young ladies'
faces at their return thence, as she says, as also my being put into the
commission of the Fishery,

     [There had been recently established, under the Great Seal of
     England, a Corporation for the Royal Fishing, of which the Duke of
     York was Governor, Lord Craven Deputy-Governor, and the Lord Mayor
     and Chamberlain of London, for the time being, Treasurers, in which
     body was vested the sole power of licensing lotteries ("The Newes,"
     October 6th, 1664).  The original charter (dated April 8th, 1664),
     incorporating James, Duke of York, and thirty-six assistants as
     Governor and Company of the Royal Fishing of Great Britain and
     Ireland, is among the State Papers.  The duke was to be Governor
     till February 26th, 1665]

for which I must give my Lord thanks, and so home to bed, having a great
cold in my head and throat tonight from my late cutting my hair so close
to my head, but I hope it will be soon gone again.

5th.  Up and to the office, where, though I had a great cold, I was forced
to speak much upon a publique meeting of the East India Company, at our
office; where our own company was full, and there was also my Lord George
Barkeley, in behalfe of the company of merchants (I suppose he is on that
company), who, hearing my name, took notice of me, and condoled my cozen
Edward Pepys's death, not knowing whose son I was, nor did demand it of
me.  We broke up without coming to any conclusion, for want of my Lord
Marlborough.  We broke up and I to the 'Change, where with several people
and my uncle Wight to drink a dish of coffee, and so home to dinner, and
then to the office all the afternoon, my eye and my throat being very bad,
and my cold increasing so as I could not speak almost at all at night.  So
at night home to supper, that is a posset, and to bed.

6th (Lord's day).  Up, and my cold continuing in great extremity I could
not go out to church, but sat all day (a little time at dinner excepted)
in my closet at the office till night drawing up a second letter to Mr.
Coventry about the measure of masts to my great satisfaction, and so in
the evening home, and my uncle and aunt Wight came to us and supped with
us, where pretty merry, but that my cold put me out of humour.  At night
with my cold, and my eye also sore still, to bed.

7th.  Up betimes, and the Duke being gone abroad to-day, as we heard by a
messenger, I spent the morning at my office writing fair my yesterday's
work till almost 2 o'clock (only Sir G. Carteret coming I went down a
little way by water towards Deptford, but having more mind to have my
business done I pretended business at the 'Change, and so went into
another boat), and then, eating a bit, my wife and I by coach to the
Duke's house, where we saw "The Unfortunate Lovers;" but I know not
whether I am grown more curious than I was or no, but I was not much
pleased with it, though I know not where to lay the fault, unless it was
that the house was very empty, by reason of a new play at the other house.
Yet here was my Lady Castlemayne in a box, and it was pleasant to hear an
ordinary lady hard by us, that it seems did not know her before, say,
being told who she was, that "she was well enough."  Thence home, and I
ended and sent away my letter to Mr. Coventry (having first read it and
had the opinion of Sir W. Warren in the case), and so home to supper and
to bed, my cold being pretty well gone, but my eye remaining still snare
and rhumey, which I wonder at, my right eye ayling nothing.

8th.  Up with some little discontent with my wife upon her saying that she
had got and used some puppy-dog water, being put upon it by a desire of my
aunt Wight to get some for her, who hath a mind, unknown to her husband,
to get some for her ugly face.  I to the office, where we sat all the
morning, doing not much business through the multitude of counsellors, one
hindering another.  It was Mr. Coventry's own saying to me in his coach
going to the 'Change, but I wonder that he did give me no thanks for my
letter last night, but I believe he did only forget it. Thence home,
whither Luellin came and dined with me, but we made no long stay at
dinner; for "Heraclius"  being acted, which my wife and I have a mighty
mind to see, we do resolve, though not exactly agreeing with the letter of
my vowe, yet altogether with the sense, to see another this month, by
going hither instead of that at Court, there having been none conveniently
since I made my vowe for us to see there, nor like to be this Lent, and
besides we did walk home on purpose to make this going as cheap as that
would have been, to have seen one at Court, and my conscience knows that
it is only the saving of money and the time also that I intend by my
oaths, and this has cost no more of either, so that my conscience before
God do after good consultation and resolution of paying my forfeit, did my
conscience accuse me of breaking my vowe, I do not find myself in the
least apprehensive that I have done any violence to my oaths.  The play
hath one very good passage well managed in it, about two persons
pretending, and yet denying themselves, to be son to the tyrant Phocas,
and yet heire of Mauritius to the crowne.  The garments like Romans very
well.  The little girle is come to act very prettily, and spoke the
epilogue most admirably.  But at the beginning, at the drawing up of the
curtaine, there was the finest scene of the Emperor and his people about
him, standing in their fixed and different pastures in their Roman
habitts, above all that ever I yet saw at any of the theatres.  Walked
home, calling to see my brother Tom, who is in bed, and I doubt very ill
of a consumption.  To the office awhile, and so home to supper and to bed.

9th.  Up pretty betimes to my office, where all day long, but a little at
home at dinner, at my office finishing all things about Mr. Wood's
contract for masts, wherein I am sure I shall save the King L400 before I
have done.  At night home to supper and to bed.

10th.  Up and to the office, where all the morning doing business, and at
noon to the 'Change and there very busy, and so home to dinner with my
wife, to a good hog's harslet,

     [Harslet or haslet, the entrails of an animal, especially of a hog,
     as the heart, liver, &c.]

a piece of meat I love, but have not eat of I think these seven years, and
after dinner abroad by coach set her at Mrs. Hunt's and I to White Hall,
and at the Privy Seale I enquired, and found the Bill come for the
Corporation of the Royall Fishery; whereof the Duke of Yorke is made
present Governor, and several other very great persons, to the number of
thirty-two, made his assistants for their lives: whereof, by my Lord
Sandwich's favour, I am one; and take it not only as a matter of honour,
but that, that may come to be of profit to me, and so with great content
went and called my wife, and so home and to the office, where busy late,
and so home to supper and to bed.

11th.  Up and by coach to my Lord Sandwich's, who not being up I staid
talking with Mr. Moore till my Lord was ready and come down, and went
directly out without calling for me or seeing any body.  I know not
whether he knew I was there, but I am apt to think not, because if he
would have given me that slighting yet he would not have done it to others
that were there.  So I went back again doing nothing but discoursing with
Mr. Moore, who I find by discourse to be grown rich, and indeed not to use
me at all with the respect he used to do, but as his equal.  He made me
known to their Chaplin, who is a worthy, able man. Thence home, and by and
by to the Coffee-house, and thence to the 'Change, and so home to dinner,
and after a little chat with my wife to the office, where all the
afternoon till very late at the office busy, and so home to supper and to
bed, hoping in God that my diligence, as it is really very useful for the
King, so it will end in profit to myself. In the meantime I have good
content in mind to see myself improve every day in knowledge and being
known.

12th.  Lay long pleasantly entertaining myself with my wife, and then up
and to the office, where busy till noon, vexed to see how Sir J. Minnes
deserves rather to be pitied for his dotage and folly than employed at a
great salary to ruin the King's business.  At noon to the 'Change, and
thence home to dinner, and then down to Deptford, where busy a while, and
then walking home it fell hard a raining.  So at Halfway house put in, and
there meeting Mr. Stacy with some company of pretty women, I took him
aside to a room by ourselves, and there talked with him about the several
sorts of tarrs, and so by and by parted, and I walked home and there late
at the office, and so home to supper and to bed.

13th (Lord's day).  Lay long in bed talking with my wife, and then up in
great doubt whether I should not go see Mr. Coventry or no, who hath not
been well these two or three days, but it being foul weather I staid
within, and so to my office, and there all the morning reading some Common
Law, to which I will allot a little time now and then, for I much want it.
At noon home to dinner, and then after some discourse with my wife, to the
office again, and by and by Sir W. Pen came to me after sermon and walked
with me in the garden and then one comes to tell me that Anthony and Will
Joyce were come to see me, so I in to them and made mighty much of them,
and very pleasant we were, and most of their business I find to be to
advise about getting some woman to attend my brother Tom, whom they say is
very ill and seems much to want one.  To which I agreed, and desired them
to get their wives to enquire out one. By and by they bid me good night,
but immediately as they were gone out of doors comes Mrs. Turner's boy
with a note to me to tell me that my brother Tom was so ill as they feared
he would not long live, and that it would be fit I should come and see
him.  So I sent for them back, and they came, and Will Joyce desiring to
speak with me alone I took him up, and there he did plainly tell me to my
great astonishment that my brother is deadly ill, and that their chief
business of coming was to tell me so, and what is worst that his disease
is the pox, which he hath heretofore got, and hath not been cured, but is
come to this, and that this is certain, though a secret told his father
Fenner by the Doctor which he helped my brother to.  This troubled me
mightily, but however I thought fit to go see him for speech of people's
sake, and so walked along with them, and in our way called on my uncle
Fenner (where I have not been these 12 months and more) and advised with
him, and then to my brother, who lies in bed talking idle.  He could only
say that he knew me, and then fell to other discourse, and his face like a
dying man, which Mrs. Turner, who was here, and others conclude he is.
The company being gone, I took the mayde, which seems a very grave and
serious woman, and in W. Joyce's company' did inquire how things are with
her master.  She told me many things very discreetly, and said she had all
his papers and books, and key of his cutting house, and showed me a bag
which I and Wm. Joyce told, coming to L5 14s. 0d., which we left with her
again, after giving her good counsel, and the boys, and seeing a nurse
there of Mrs. Holden's choosing, I left them, and so walked home greatly
troubled to think of my brother's condition, and the trouble that would
arise to me by his death or continuing sick.  So at home, my mind
troubled, to bed.

14th.  Up, and walked to my brother's, where I find he hath continued
talking idly all night, and now knows me not; which troubles me mightily.
So I walked down and discoursed a great while alone with the mayde, who
tells me many passages of her master's practices, and how she concludes
that he has run behind hand a great while and owes money, and has been
dunned by several people, among others by one Cave, both husband and wife,
but whether it was for--[See April 6th]--money or something worse she
knows not, but there is one Cranburne, I think she called him, in Fleete
Lane with whom he hath many times been mighty private, but what their
dealings have been she knows not, but believes these were naught, and then
his sitting up two Saturday nights one after another when all were abed
doing something to himself, which she now suspects what it was, but did
not before, but tells me that he hath been a very bad husband as to
spending his time, and hath often told him of it, so that upon the whole I
do find he is, whether he lives or dies, a ruined man, and what trouble
will befall me by it I know not.  Thence to White Hall; and in the Duke's
chamber, while he was dressing, two persons of quality that were there did
tell his Royal Highness how the other night, in Holborne, about midnight,
being at cards, a link-boy come by and run into the house, and told the
people the house was a-falling.  Upon this the whole family was frighted,
concluding that the boy had said that the house was a-fire: so they deft
their cards above, and one would have got out of the balcone, but it was
not open; the other went up to fetch down his children, that were in bed;
so all got clear out of the house.  And no sooner so, but the house fell
down indeed, from top to bottom.  It seems my Lord Southampton's
canaille--[sewer]--did come too near their foundation, and so weakened the
house, and down it came; which, in every respect, is a most extraordinary
passage.  By and by into his closet and did our business with him.  But I
did not speed as I expected in a business about the manner of buying hemp
for this year, which troubled me, but it proceeds only from my pride, that
I must needs expect every thing to be ordered just as I apprehend, though
it was not I think from my errour, but their not being willing to hear and
consider all that I had to propose.  Being broke up I followed my Lord
Sandwich and thanked him for his putting me into the Fishery, which I
perceive he expected, and cried "Oh!" says he, "in the Fishery you mean.
I told you I would remember you in it," but offered no other discourse.
But demanding whether he had any commands for me, methought he cried "No!"
as if he had no more mind to discourse with me, which still troubles me
and hath done all the day, though I think I am a fool for it, in not
pursuing my resolution of going handsome in clothes and looking high, for
that must do it when all is done with my Lord.  Thence by coach with Sir
W. Batten to the city, and his son Castle, who talks mighty highly against
Captain Tayler, calling him knave, and I find that the old Boating father
is led and talks just as the son do, or the son as the father would have
him. 'Light and to Mr. Moxon's, and there saw our office globes in doing,
which will be very handsome but cost money.  So to the Coffee-house, and
there very fine discourse with Mr. Hill the merchant, a pretty, gentile,
young, and sober man.  So to the 'Change, and thence home, where my wife
and I fell out about my not being willing to have her have her gowne
laced, but would lay out the same money and more on a plain new one.  At
this she flounced away in a manner I never saw her, nor which I could ever
endure.  So I away to the office, though she had dressed herself to go see
my Lady Sandwich.  She by and by in a rage follows me, and coming to me
tells me in spitefull manner like a vixen and with a look full of rancour
that she would go buy a new one and lace it and make me pay for it, and
then let me burn it if I would after she had done it, and so went away in
a fury.  This vexed me cruelly, but being very busy I had, not hand to
give myself up to consult what to do in it, but anon, I suppose after she
saw that I did not follow her, she came again to the office, where I made
her stay, being busy with another, half an houre, and her stomach coming
down we were presently friends, and so after my business being over at the
office we out and by coach to my Lady Sandwich's, with whom I left my
wife, and I to White Hall, where I met Mr. Delsety, and after an hour's
discourse with him met with nobody to do other business with, but back
again to my Lady, and after half an hour's discourse with her to my
brother's, who I find in the same or worse condition.  The doctors give
him over and so do all that see him. He talks no sense two, words together
now; and I confess it made me weepe to see that he should not be able,
when I asked him, to say who I was. I went to Mrs. Turner's, and by her
discourse with my brother's Doctor, Mr. Powell, I find that she is full
now of the disease which my brother is troubled with, and talks of it
mightily, which I am sorry for, there being other company,  but methinks
it should be for her honour to forbear talking of it, the shame of this
very thing I confess troubles me as much as anything.  Back to my
brother's and took my wife, and carried her to my uncle Fenner's and there
had much private discourse with him.  He tells me of the Doctor's thoughts
of my brother's little hopes of recovery, and from that to tell me his
thoughts long of my brother's bad husbandry, and from that to say that he
believes he owes a great deal of money, as to my cozen Scott I know not
how much, and Dr. Thos. Pepys L30, but that the Doctor confesses that he
is paid L20 of it, and what with that and what he owes my father and me I
doubt he is in a very sad condition, that if he lives he will not be able
to show his head, which will be a very great shame to me.  After this I
went in to my aunt and my wife and Anthony Joyce and his wife, who were by
chance there, and drank and so home, my mind and head troubled, but I hope
it will [be] over in a little time one way or other.  After doing a little
at my office of business I home to supper and to bed.  From notice that my
uncle Fenner did give my father the last week of my brother's condition,
my mother is coming up to towne, which also do trouble me.  The business
between my Lords Chancellor and Bristoll, they say, is hushed up; and the
latter gone or going, by the King's licence, to France.

15th.  Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and at noon
comes Madam Turner and her daughter The., her chief errand to tell me that
she had got Dr. Wiverly, her Doctor, to search my brother's mouth, where
Mr. Powell says there is an ulcer, from thence he concludes that he hath
had the pox.  But the Doctor swears that there is not, nor ever was any,
and my brother being very sensible, which I was glad to hear, he did talk
with him about it, and he did wholly disclaim that ever he had the
disease, or that ever he said to Powell that he had it.  All which did put
me into great comfort as to the reproach which was spread against him.  So
I sent for a barrel of oysters, and they dined, and we were very merry, I
being willing to be so upon this news.  After dinner we took coach and to
my brother's, where contrary to my expectation he continues as bad or
worse, talking idle, and now not at all knowing any of us as before.  Here
we staid a great while, I going up and down the house looking after
things.  In the evening Dr. Wiverley came again, and I sent for Mr. Powell
(the Doctor and I having first by ourselves searched my brother again at
his privities, where he was as clear as ever he was born, and in the
Doctor's opinion had been ever so), and we three alone discoursed the
business, where the coxcomb did give us his simple reasons for what he had
said, which the Doctor fully confuted, and left the fellow only saying
that he should cease to report any such thing, and that what he had said
was the best of his judgment from my brother's words and a ulcer, as he
supposed, in his mouth.  I threatened him that I would have satisfaction
if I heard any more such discourse, and so good night to them two, giving
the Doctor a piece for his fee, but the other nothing.  I to my brother
again, where Madam Turner and her company, and Mrs. Croxton, my wife, and
Mrs. Holding.  About 8 o'clock my brother began to fetch his spittle with
more pain, and to speak as much but not so distinctly, till at last the
phlegm getting the mastery of him, and he beginning as we thought to
rattle, I had no mind to see him die, as we thought he presently would,
and so withdrew and led Mrs. Turner home, but before I came back, which
was in half a quarter of an hour, my brother was dead.  I went up and
found the nurse holding his eyes shut, and he poor wretch lying with his
chops fallen, a most sad sight, and that which put me into a present very
great transport of grief and cries, and indeed it was a most sad sight to
see the poor wretch lie now still and dead, and pale like a stone.  I
staid till he was almost cold, while Mrs. Croxton, Holden, and the rest
did strip and lay him out, they observing his corpse, as they told me
afterwards, to be as clear as any they ever saw, and so this was the end
of my poor brother, continuing talking idle and his lips working even to
his last that his phlegm hindered his breathing, and at last his breath
broke out bringing a flood of phlegm and stuff out with it, and so he
died.  This evening he talked among other talk a great deal of French very
plain and good, as, among others: 'quand un homme boit quand il n'a poynt
d'inclination a boire il ne luy fait jamais de bien.'  I once begun to
tell him something of his condition, and asked him whither he thought he
should go.  He in distracted manner answered me--"Why, whither should I
go? there are but two ways: If I go, to the bad way I must give God thanks
for it, and if I go the other way I must give God the more thanks for it;
and I hope I have not been so undutifull and unthankfull in my life but I
hope I shall go that way."  This was all the sense, good or bad, that I
could get of him this day.  I left my wife to see him laid out, and I by
coach home carrying my brother's papers, all I could find, with me, and
having wrote a letter to, my father telling him what hath been said I
returned by coach, it being very late, and dark, to my brother's, but all
being gone, the corpse laid out, and my wife at Mrs. Turner's, I thither,
and there after an hour's talk, we up to bed, my wife and I in the little
blue chamber, and I lay close to my wife, being full of disorder and grief
for my brother that I could not sleep nor wake with satisfaction, at last
I slept till 5 or 6 o'clock.

16th.  And then I rose and up, leaving my wife in bed, and to my
brother's, where I set them on cleaning the house, and my wife coming anon
to look after things, I up and down to my cozen Stradwicke's and uncle
Fenner's about discoursing for the funeral, which I am resolved to put off
till Friday next.  Thence home and trimmed myself, and then to the
'Change, and told my uncle Wight of my brother's death, and so by coach to
my cozen Turner's and there dined very well, but my wife .  .  . .  in
great pain we were forced to rise in some disorder, and in Mrs. Turner's
coach carried her home and put her to bed.  Then back again with my cozen
Norton to Mrs. Turner's, and there staid a while talking with Dr. Pepys,
the puppy, whom I had no patience to hear.  So I left them and to my
brother's to look after things, and saw the coffin brought; and by and by
Mrs. Holden came and saw him nailed up.  Then came W. Joyce to me half
drunk, and much ado I had to tell him the story of my brother's being
found clear of what was said, but he would interrupt me by some idle
discourse or other, of his crying what a good man, and a good speaker my
brother was, and God knows what.  At last weary of him I got him away, and
I to Mrs. Turner's, and there, though my heart is still heavy to think of
my poor brother, yet I could give way to my fancy to hear Mrs. The. play
upon the Harpsicon, though the musique did not please me neither.  Thence
to my brother's and found them with my mayd Elizabeth taking an inventory
of the goods of the house, which I was well pleased at, and am much
beholden to Mr. Honeywood's man in doing of it.  His name is Herbert, one
that says he knew me when he lived with Sir Samuel Morland, but I have
forgot him.  So I left them at it, and by coach home and to my office,
there to do a little business, but God knows my heart and head is so full
of my brother's death, and the consequences of it, that I can do very
little or understand it.  So home to supper, and after looking over some
business in my chamber I to bed to my wife, who continues in bed in some
pain still.  This day I have a great barrel of oysters given me by Mr.
Barrow, as big as 16 of others, and I took it in the coach with me to Mrs.
Turner's, and give them to her.  This day the Parliament met again, after
a long prorogation, but what they have done I have not been in the way to
hear.

17th.  Up and to my brother's, where all the morning doing business
against to-morrow, and so to my cozen Stradwicke's about the same
business, and to the 'Change, and thence home to dinner, where my wife in
bed sick still, but not so bad as yesterday.  I dined by her, and so to
the office, where we sat this afternoon, having changed this day our
sittings from morning to afternoons, because of the Parliament which
returned yesterday; but was adjourned till Monday next; upon pretence that
many of the members were said to be upon the road; and also the King had
other affairs, and so desired them to adjourn till then.  But the truth
is, the King is offended at my Lord of Bristol, as they say, whom he hath
found to have been all this while (pretending a desire of leave to go into
France, and to have all the difference between him and the Chancellor made
up,) endeavouring to make factions in both Houses to the Chancellor.  So
the King did this to keep the Houses from meeting; and in the meanwhile
sent a guard and a herald last night to have taken him at Wimbleton, where
he was in the morning, but could not find him: at which the King was and
is still mightily concerned, and runs up and down to and from the
Chancellor's like a boy: and it seems would make Digby's articles against
the Chancellor to be treasonable reflections against his Majesty.  So that
the King is very high, as they say; and God knows what will follow upon
it!  After office I to my brother's again, and thence to Madam Turner's,
in both places preparing things against to-morrow; and this night I have
altered my resolution of burying him in the church yarde among my young
brothers and sisters, and bury him in the church, in the middle isle, as
near as I can to my mother's pew.  This costs me 20s. more.  This being
all, home by coach, bringing my brother's silver tankard for safety along
with me, and so to supper, after writing to my father, and so to bed.

18th.  Up betimes, and walked to my brother's, where a great while putting
things in order against anon; then to Madam Turner's and eat a breakfast
there, and so to Wotton, my shoemaker, and there got a pair of shoes
blacked on the soles against anon for me; so to my brother's and to
church, and with the grave-maker chose a place for my brother to lie in,
just under my mother's pew.  But to see how a man's tombes are at the
mercy of such a fellow, that for sixpence he would, (as his owne words
were,) "I will justle them together but I will make room for him;"
speaking of the fulness of the middle isle, where he was to lie; and that
he would, for my father's sake, do my brother that is dead all the
civility he can; which was to disturb other corps that are not quite
rotten, to make room for him; and methought his manner of speaking it was
very remarkable; as of a thing that now was in his power to do a man a
courtesy or not.  At noon my wife, though in pain, comes, but I being
forced to go home, she went back with me, where I dressed myself, and so
did Besse; and so to my brother's again: whither, though invited, as the
custom is, at one or two o'clock, they came not till four or five.  But at
last one after another they come, many more than I bid: and my reckoning
that I bid was one hundred and twenty; but I believe there was nearer one
hundred and fifty.  Their service was six biscuits apiece, and what they
pleased of burnt claret.  My cosen Joyce Norton kept the wine and cakes
above; and did give out to them that served, who had white gloves given
them.  But above all, I am beholden to Mrs. Holden, who was most kind, and
did take mighty pains not only in getting the house and every thing else
ready, but this day in going up and down to see, the house filled and
served, in order to mine, and their great content, I think; the men
sitting by themselves in some rooms, and women by themselves in others,
very close, but yet room enough.  Anon to church, walking out into the
streete to the Conduit, and so across the streete, and had a very good
company along with the corps.  And being come to the grave as above, Dr.
Pierson, the minister of the parish, did read the service for buriall: and
so I saw my poor brother laid into the grave; and so all broke up; and I
and my wife and Madam Turner and her family to my brother's, and by and by
fell to a barrell of oysters, cake, and cheese, of Mr. Honiwood's, with
him, in his chamber and below, being too merry for so late a sad work.
But, Lord! to see how the world makes nothing of the memory of a man, an
houre after he is dead!  And, indeed, I must blame myself; for though at
the sight of him dead and dying, I had real grief for a while, while he
was in my sight, yet presently after, and ever since, I have had very
little grief indeed for him.  By and by, it beginning to be late, I put
things in some order in the house, and so took my wife and Besse (who hath
done me very good service in cleaning and getting ready every thing and
serving the wine and things to-day, and is indeed a most excellent
good-natured and faithful wench, and I love her mightily), by coach home,
and so after being at the office to set down the day's work home to supper
and to bed.

19th.  Up and to the office, where all the morning, and at noon my wife
and I alone, having a good hen, with eggs, to dinner, with great content.
Then by coach to my brother's, where I spent the afternoon in paying some
of the charges of the buriall, and in looking over his papers, among which
I find several letters of my brother John's to him speaking very foale
words of me and my deportment to him here, and very crafty designs about
Sturtlow land and God knows what, which I am very glad to know, and shall
make him repent them.  Anon my father and my brother John came to towne by
coach.  I sat till night with him, giving him an account of things.  He,
poor man, very sad and sickly.  I in great pain by a simple compressing of
my cods to-day by putting one leg over another as I have formerly done,
which made me hasten home, and after a little at the office in great
disorder home to bed.

20th (Lord's day).  Kept my bed all the morning, having laid a poultice to
my cods last night to take down the tumour there which I got yesterday,
which it did do, being applied pretty warm, and soon after the beginning
of the swelling, and the pain was gone also.  We lay talking all the
while, among other things of religion, wherein I am sorry so often to hear
my wife talk of her being and resolving to die a Catholique,

     [Mrs. Pepys's leaning towards Roman Catholicism was a constant
     trouble to her husband; but, in spite of his fears, she died a
     Protestant (Dr. Milles's certificate.)]

and indeed a small matter, I believe, would absolutely turn her, which I
am sorry for.  Up at noon to dinner, and then to my chamber with a fire
till late at night looking over my brother Thomas's papers, sorting of
them, among which I find many base letters of my brother John's to him
against me, and carrying on plots against me to promote Tom's having of
his Banbury' Mistress, in base slighting terms, and in worse of my sister
Pall, such as I shall take a convenient time to make my father know, and
him also to his sorrow.  So after supper to bed, our people rising to wash
to-morrow.

21st.  Up, and it snowing this morning a little, which from the mildness
of the winter and the weather beginning to be hot and the summer to come
on apace, is a little strange to us.  I did not go abroad for fear of my
tumour, for fear it shall rise again, but staid within, and by and by my,
father came, poor man, to me, and my brother John.  After much talke and
taking them up to my chamber, I did there after some discourse bring in
any business of anger--with John, and did before my father read all his
roguish letters, which troubled my father mightily, especially to hear me
say what I did, against my allowing any thing for the time to come to him
out of my owne purse, and other words very severe, while he, like a simple
rogue, made very silly and churlish answers to me, not like a man of any
goodness or witt, at which I was as much disturbed as the other, and will
be as good as my word in making him to his cost know that I will remember
his carriage to me in this particular the longest day I live. It troubled
me to see my poor father so troubled, whose good nature did make him, poor
wretch, to yield, I believe, to comply with my brother Tom and him in part
of their designs, but without any ill intent to me, or doubt of me or my
good intentions to him or them, though it do trouble me a little that he
should in any manner do it.  They dined with me, and after dinner abroad
with my wife to buy some things for her, and I to the office, where we sat
till night, and then, after doing some business at my closet, I home and
to supper and to bed.  This day the Houses of Parliament met; and the King
met them, with the Queene with him.  And he made a speech to them:

     [March 16th, 1663-64.  This day both Houses met, and on the gist the
     king opened the session with a speech from the throne, in which
     occurs this Passage: "I pray, Mr. Speaker, and you, gentlemen of the
     House of Commons, give that Triennial Bill once a reading in your
     house, and then, in God's name, do what you think fit for me and
     yourselves and the whole kingdom.  I need not tell you how much I
     love parliaments.  Never king was so much beholden to parliaments as
     I have been, nor do I think the crown can ever be happy without
     frequent parliaments" (Cobbett's "Parliamentary History," vol. iv.,
     cc. 290, 291).]

among other things, discoursing largely of the plots abroad against him
and the peace of the kingdom; and, among other things, that the
dissatisfied party had great hopes upon the effect of the Act for a
Triennial Parliament granted by his father, which he desired them to
peruse, and, I think, repeal.  So the Houses did retire to their own
House, and did order the Act to be read to-morrow before them; and I
suppose it will be repealed, though I believe much against the will of a
good many that sit there.

22nd.  Up, and spent the whole morning and afternoon at my office, only in
the evening, my wife being at my aunt Wight's, I went thither, calling at
my own house, going out found the parlour curtains drawn, and inquiring
the reason of it, they told me that their mistress had got Mrs. Buggin's
fine little dog and our little bitch, which is proud at this time, and I
am apt to think that she was helping him to line her, for going afterwards
to my uncle Wight's, and supping there with her, where very merry with Mr.
Woolly's drollery, and going home I found the little dog so little that of
himself he could not reach our bitch, which I am sorry for, for it is the
finest dog that ever I saw in my life, as if he were painted the colours
are so finely mixed and shaded.  God forgive me, it went against me to
have my wife and servants look upon them while they endeavoured to do
something .  .  .  .

23rd.  Up, and going out saw Mrs. Buggin's dog, which proves as I thought
last night so pretty that I took him and the bitch into my closet below,
and by holding down the bitch helped him to line her, which he did very
stoutly, so as I hope it will take, for it is the prettiest dog that ever
I saw.  So to the office, where very busy all the morning, and so to the
'Change, and off hence with Sir W. Rider to the Trinity House, and there
dined very well: and good discourse among the old men of Islands now and
then rising and falling again in the Sea, and that there is many dangers
of grounds and rocks that come just up to the edge almost of the sea, that
is never discovered and ships perish without the world's knowing the
reason of it.  Among other things, they observed, that there are but two
seamen in the Parliament house, viz., Sir W. Batten and Sir W. Pen, and
not above twenty or thirty merchants; which is a strange thing in an
island, and no wonder that things of trade go no better nor are better
understood.  Thence home, and all the afternoon at the office, only for an
hour in the evening my Lady Jemimah, Paulina, and Madam Pickering come to
see us, but my wife would not be seen, being unready.  Very merry with
them; they mightily talking of their thrifty living for a fortnight before
their mother came to town, and other such simple talk, and of their merry
life at Brampton, at my father's, this winter.  So they being gone, to the
office again till late, and so home and to supper and to bed.

24th.  Called up by my father, poor man, coming to advise with me about
Tom's house and other matters, and he being gone I down by water to
Greenwich, it being very-foggy, and I walked very finely to Woolwich, and
there did very much business at both yards, and thence walked back,
Captain Grove with me talking, and so to Deptford and did the like-there,
and then walked to Redriffe (calling and eating a bit of collops and eggs
at Half-way house), and so home to the office, where we sat late, and home
weary to supper and to bed.

25th (Lady-day).  Up and by water to White Hall, and there to chappell;
where it was most infinite full to hear Dr. Critton.  Being not knowne,
some great persons in the pew I pretended to, and went in, did question my
coming in.  I told them my pretence; so they turned to the orders of the
chappell, which hung behind upon the wall, and read it; and were
satisfied; but they did not demand whether I was in waiting or no; and so
I was in some fear lest he that was in waiting might come and betray me.
The Doctor preached upon the thirty-first of Jeremy, and the twenty-first
and twenty-second verses, about a woman compassing a man; meaning the
Virgin conceiving and bearing our Saviour.  It was the worst sermon I ever
heard him make, I must confess; and yet it was good, and in two places
very bitter, advising the King to do as the Emperor Severus did, to hang
up a Presbyter John (a short coat and a long gowne interchangeably) in all
the Courts of England.  But the story of Severus was pretty, that he
hanged up forty senators before the Senate house, and then made a speech
presently to the Senate in praise of his owne lenity; and then decreed
that never any senator after that time should suffer in the same manner
without consent of the Senate: which he compared to the proceeding of the
Long Parliament against my Lord Strafford.  He said the greatest part of
the lay magistrates in England were Puritans, and would not do justice;
and the Bishopps, their powers were so taken away and lessened, that they
could not exercise the power they ought.  He told the King and the ladies
plainly, speaking of death and of the skulls and bones of dead men and
women,

     [The preacher appears to have had the grave scene in "Hamlet" in
     his mind, as he gives the same illustration of Alexander as Hamlet
     does.]

how there is no difference; that nobody could tell that of the great
Marius or Alexander from a pyoneer; nor, for all the pains the ladies take
with their faces, he that should look in a charnels-house could not
distinguish which was Cleopatra's, or fair Rosamond's, or Jane Shoare's.
Thence by water home.  After dinner to the office, thence with my wife to
see my father and discourse how he finds Tom's matters, which he do very
ill, and that he finds him to have been so negligent, that he used to
trust his servants with cutting out of clothes, never hardly cutting out
anything himself; and, by the abstract of his accounts, we find him to owe
above L290, and to be coming to him under L200.  Thence home with my wife,
it being very dirty on foot, and bought some fowl in Gracious. Streets and
some oysters against our feast to-morrow.  So home, and after at the
office a while, home to supper and to bed.

26th.  Up very betimes and to my office, and there read over some papers
against a meeting by and by at this office of Mr. Povy, Sir W. Rider,
Creed, and Vernaty, and Mr. Gauden about my Lord Peterborough's accounts
for Tangier, wherein we proceeded a good way; but, Lord! to see how
ridiculous Mr. Povy is in all he says or do; like a man not more fit for
to be in such employments as he is, and particularly that of Treasurer
(paying many and very great sums without the least written order) as he is
to be King of England, and seems but this day, after much discourse of
mine, to be sensible of that part of his folly, besides a great deal more
in other things.  This morning in discourse Sir W. Rider [said], that he
hath kept a journals of his life for almost these forty years, even to
this day and still do, which pleases me mightily.  That being done Sir J.
Minnes and I sat all the morning, and then I to the 'Change, and there got
away by pretence of business with my uncle Wight to put off Creed, whom I
had invited to dinner, and so home, and there found Madam Turner, her
daughter The., Joyce Norton, my father and Mr. Honywood, and by and by
come my uncle Wight and aunt.  This being my solemn feast for my cutting
of the stone, it being now, blessed be God! this day six years since the
time; and I bless God I do in all respects find myself free from that
disease or any signs of it, more than that upon the least cold I continue
to have pain in making water, by gathering of wind and growing costive,
till which be removed I am at no ease, but without that I am very well.
One evil more I have, which is that upon the least squeeze almost my cods
begin to swell and come to great pain, which is very strange and
troublesome to me, though upon the speedy applying of a poultice it goes
down again, and in two days I am well again.  Dinner not being presently
ready I spent some time myself and shewed them a map of Tangier left this
morning at my house by Creed, cut by our order, the Commissioners, and
drawn by Jonas Moore, which is very pleasant, and I purpose to have it
finely set out and hung up.  Mrs. Hunt coming to see my wife by chance
dined here with us.  After dinner Sir W. Batten sent to speak with me, and
told me that he had proffered our bill today in the House, and that it was
read without any dissenters, and he fears not but will pass very well,
which I shall be glad of.  He told me also how Sir [Richard] Temple hath
spoke very discontentfull words in the House about the Tryennial Bill; but
it hath been read the second time to-day, and committed; and, he believes,
will go on without more ado, though there are many in the House are
displeased at it, though they dare not say much.  But above all
expectation, Mr. Prin is the man against it, comparing it to the idoll
whose head was of gold, and his body and legs and feet of different metal.
So this Bill had several degrees of calling of Parliaments, in case the
King, and then the Council, and then the Lord Chancellor, and then the
Sheriffes, should fail to do it.  He tells me also, how, upon occasion of
some 'prentices being put in the pillory to-day for beating of their
masters, or some such like thing, in Cheapside, a company of 'prentices
came and rescued them, and pulled down the pillory; and they being set up
again, did the like again.  So that the Lord Mayor and Major Generall
Browne was fain to come and stay there, to keep the peace; and drums, all
up and down the city, was beat to raise the trained bands, for to quiett
the towne, and by and by, going out with my uncle and aunt Wight by coach
with my wife through Cheapside (the rest of the company after much content
and mirth being broke up), we saw a trained band stand in Cheapside upon
their guard.  We went, much against my uncle's will, as far almost as Hyde
Park, he and my aunt falling out all the way about it, which vexed me, but
by this I understand my uncle more than ever I did, for he was mighty soon
angry, and wished a pox take her, which I was sorry to hear.  The weather
I confess turning on a sudden to rain did make it very unpleasant, but yet
there was no occasion in the world for his being so angry, but she bore
herself very discreetly, and I must confess she proves to me much another
woman than I thought her, but all was peace again presently, and so it
raining very fast, we met many brave coaches coming from the Parke and so
we turned and set them down at home, and so we home ourselves, and ended
the day with great content to think how it hath pleased the Lord in six
years time to raise me from a condition of constant and dangerous and most
painfull sicknesse and low condition and poverty to a state of constant
health almost, great honour and plenty, for which the Lord God of heaven
make me truly thankfull.  My wife found her gowne come home laced, which
is indeed very handsome, but will cost me a great deal of money, more than
ever I intended, but it is but for once.  So to the office and did
business, and then home and to bed.

27th (Lord's day).  Lay long in bed wrangling with my wife about the
charge she puts me to at this time for clothes more than I intended, and
very angry we were, but quickly friends again.  And so rising and ready I
to my office, and there fell upon business, and then to dinner, and then
to my office again to my business, and by and by in the afternoon walked
forth towards my father's, but it being church time, walked to St.
James's, to try if I could see the belle Butler, but could not; only saw
her sister, who indeed is pretty, with a fine Roman nose.  Thence walked
through the ducking-pond fields; but they are so altered since my father
used to carry us to Islington, to the old man's, at the King's Head, to
eat cakes and ale (his name was Pitts) that I did not know which was the
ducking-pond nor where I was.  So through F[l]ee[t] lane to my father's,
and there met Mr. Moore, and discoursed with him and my father about who
should administer for my brother Tom, and I find we shall have trouble in
it, but I will clear my hands of it, and what vexed me, my father seemed
troubled that I should seem to rely so wholly upon the advice of Mr.
Moore, and take nobody else, but I satisfied him, and so home; and in
Cheapside, both coming and going, it was full of apprentices, who have
been here all this day, and have done violence, I think, to the master of
the boys that were put in the pillory yesterday. But, Lord! to see how the
train-bands are raised upon this: the drums beating every where as if an
enemy were upon them; so much is this city subject to be put into a
disarray upon very small occasions.  But it was pleasant to hear the boys,
and particularly one little one, that I demanded the business.  He told me
that that had never been done in the city since it was a city, two
prentices put in the pillory, and that it ought not to be so. So I walked
home, and then it being fine moonshine with my wife an houre in the
garden, talking of her clothes against Easter and about her mayds, Jane
being to be gone, and the great dispute whether Besse, whom we both love,
should be raised to be chamber-mayde or no.  We have both a mind to it,
but know not whether we should venture the making her proud and so make a
bad chamber-mayde of a very good natured and sufficient cook-mayde.  So to
my office a little, and then to supper, prayers and to bed.

28th.  This is the first morning that I have begun, and I hope shall
continue to rise betimes in the morning, and so up and to my office, and
thence about 7 o'clock to T. Trice, and advised with him about our
administering to my brother Tom, and I went to my father and told him what
to do; which was to administer and to let my cozen Scott have a letter of
Atturny to follow the business here in his absence for him, who by that
means will have the power of paying himself (which we cannot however
hinder) and do us a kindness we think too.  But, Lord! what a shame,
methinks, to me, that, in this condition, and at this age, I should know
no better the laws of my owne country!  Thence to Westminster Hall, and
spent till noon, it being Parliament time, and at noon walked with Creed
into St. James's Parke, talking of many things, particularly of the poor
parts and great unfitness for business of Mr. Povy, and yet what a show he
makes in the world.  Mr. Coventry not being come to his chamber, I walked
through the house with him for an hour in St. James's fields' talking of
the same subject, and then parted, and back and with great impatience,
sometimes reading, sometimes walking, sometimes thinking that Mr.
Coventry, though he invited us to dinner with him, was gone with the rest
of the office without a dinner.  At last, at past 4 o'clock I heard that
the Parliament was not up yet, and so walked to Westminster Hall, and
there found it so, and meeting with Sir J. Minnes, and being very hungry,
went over with him to the Leg, and before we had cut a bit, the House
rises, however we eat a bit and away to St. James's and there eat a second
part of our dinner with Mr. Coventry and his brother Harry, Sir W. Batten
and Sir W. Pen.  The great matter today in the House hath been, that Mr.
Vaughan, the great speaker, is this day come to towne, and hath declared
himself in a speech of an houre and a half, with great reason and
eloquence, against the repealing of the Bill for Triennial Parliaments;
but with no successe: but the House have carried it that there shall be
such Parliaments, but without any coercive power upon the King, if he will
bring this Act.  But, Lord! to see how the best things are not done
without some design; for I perceive all these gentlemen that I was with
to-day were against it (though there was reason enough on their side); yet
purely, I could perceive, because it was the King's mind to have it; and
should he demand any thing else, I believe they would give it him.  But
this the discontented Presbyters, and the faction of the House will be
highly displeased with; but it was carried clearly against them in the
House.  We had excellent good table-talke, some of which I have entered in
my book of stories.  So with them by coach home, and there find (bye my
wife), that Father Fogourdy hath been with her to-day, and she is mightily
for our going to hear a famous Reule preach at the French Embassador's
house: I pray God he do not tempt her in any matters of religion, which
troubles me; and also, she had messages from her mother to-day, who sent
for her old morning-gown, which was almost past wearing; and I used to
call it her kingdom, from the ease and content she used to have in the
wearing of it.  I am glad I do not hear of her begging any thing of more
value, but I do not like that these messages should now come all upon
Monday morning, when my wife expects of course I should be abroad at the
Duke's.  To the office, where Mr. Norman came and showed me a design of
his for the storekeeper's books, for the keeping of them regular in order
to a balance, which I am mightily satisfied to see, and shall love the
fellow the better, as he is in all things sober, so particularly for his
endeavour to do something in this thing so much wanted.  So late home to
supper and to bed, weary-with walking so long to no purpose in the Park
to-day.

29th.  Was called up this morning by a messenger from Sir G. Carteret to
come to him to Sir W. Batten's, and so I rose and thither to him, and with
him and Sir J. Minnes to, Sir G. Carteret's to examine his accounts, and
there we sat at it all the morning.  About noon Sir W. Batten came from
the House of Parliament and told us our Bill for our office was read the
second time to-day, with great applause, and is committed.  By and by to
dinner, where good cheere, and Sir G. Carteret in his humour a very good
man, and the most kind father and pleased father in his children that ever
I saw.  Here is now hung up a picture of my Lady Carteret, drawn by Lilly,
a very fine picture, but yet not so good as I have seen of his doing.
After dinner to the business again without any intermission till almost
night, and then home, and took coach to my father to see and discourse
with him, and so home again and to my office, where late, and then home to
bed.

30th.  Up very betimes to my office, and thence at 7 o'clock to Sir G.
Carteret, and there with Sir J. Minnes made an end of his accounts, but
staid not dinner, my Lady having made us drink our morning draft there of
several wines, but I drank: nothing but some of her coffee, which was
poorly made, with a little sugar in it.  Thence to the 'Change a great
while, and had good discourse with Captain Cocke at the Coffee-house about
a Dutch warr, and it seems the King's design is by getting underhand the
merchants to bring in their complaints to the Parliament, to make them in
honour begin a warr, which he cannot in honour declare first, for fear
they should not second him with money.  Thence homewards, staying a pretty
while with my little she milliner at the end of Birchin Lane, talking and
buying gloves of her, and then home to dinner, and in the afternoon had a
meeting upon the Chest business, but I fear unless I have time to look
after it nothing will be done,, and that I fear I shall not.  In the
evening comes Sir W. Batten, who tells us that the Committee have approved
of our bill with very few amendments in words, not in matter.  So to my
office, where late with Sir W. Warren, and so home to supper and to bed.

31st.  Up betimes, and to my office, where by and by comes Povy, Sir W.
Rider, Mr. Bland, Creed, and Vernatty, about my Lord Peterborough's
accounts, which we now went through, but with great difficulty, and many
high words between Mr. Povy and I; for I could not endure to see so many
things extraordinary put in, against truthe and reason.  He was very
angry, but I endeavoured all I could to profess my satisfaction in my
Lord's part of the accounts, but not in those foolish idle things, they
say I said, that others had put in.  Anon we rose and parted, both of us
angry, but I contented, because I knew all of them must know I was in the
right.  Then with Creed to Deptford, where I did a great deal of business
enquiring into the business of canvas and other things with great content,
and so walked back again, good discourse between Creed and I by the way,
but most upon the folly of Povy, and at home found Luellin, and so we to
dinner, and thence I to the office, where we sat all the afternoon late,
and being up and my head mightily crowded with business, I took my wife by
coach to see my father.  I left her at his house and went to him to an
alehouse hard by, where my cozen Scott was, and my father's new tenant,
Langford, a tailor, to whom I have promised my custom, and he seems a very
modest, carefull young man.  Thence my wife coming with the coach to the
alley end I home, and after supper to the making up my monthly accounts,
and to my great content find myself worth above L900, the greatest sum I
ever yet had.  Having done my accounts, late to bed.  My head of late
mighty full of business, and with good content to myself in it, though
sometimes it troubles me that nobody else but I should bend themselves to
serve the King with that diligence, whereby much of my pains proves
ineffectual.




     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     Doubtfull of himself, and easily be removed from his own opinion
     Drink a dish of coffee
     Ill from my late cutting my hair so close to my head
     Nothing of the memory of a man, an houre after he is dead!
     She had got and used some puppy-dog water
     Subject to be put into a disarray upon very small occasions
     Very angry we were, but quickly friends again
     Went against me to have my wife and servants look upon them





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Diary of Samuel Pepys, March 1663/64
by Samuel Pepys

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, MARCH ***

***** This file should be named 4147.txt or 4147.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/4/1/4/4147/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
