Project Gutenberg's Diary of Samuel Pepys, April/May 1664, by Samuel Pepys

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Diary of Samuel Pepys, April/May 1664

Author: Samuel Pepys

Release Date: November 30, 2004 [EBook #4148]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***




Produced by David Widger





                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A. F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                             APRIL & MAY
                                 1664

April 1st.  Up and to my office, where busy till noon, and then to the
'Change, where I found all the merchants concerned with the presenting
their complaints to the Committee of Parliament appointed to receive them
this afternoon against the Dutch.  So home to dinner, and thence by coach,
setting my wife down at the New Exchange, I to White Hall; and coming too
soon for the Tangier Committee walked to Mr. Blagrave for a song.  I left
long ago there, and here I spoke with his kinswoman, he not being within,
but did not hear her sing, being not enough acquainted with her, but would
be glad to have her, to come and be at my house a week now and then.  Back
to White Hall, and in the Gallery met the Duke of Yorke (I also saw the
Queene going to the Parke, and her Mayds of Honour: she herself looks ill,
and methinks Mrs. Stewart is grown fatter, and not so fair as she was);
and he called me to him, and discoursed a good while with me; and after he
was gone, twice or thrice staid and called me again to him, the whole
length of the house: and at last talked of the Dutch; and I perceive do
much wish that the Parliament will find reason to fall out with them.  He
gone, I by and by found that the Committee of Tangier met at the Duke of
Albemarle's, and so I have lost my labour.  So with Creed to the 'Change,
and there took up my wife and left him, and we two home, and I to walk in
the garden with W. Howe, whom we took up, he having been to see us, he
tells me how Creed has been questioned before the Council about a letter
that has been met with, wherein he is mentioned by some fanatiques as a
serviceable friend to them, but he says he acquitted himself well in it,
but, however, something sticks against him, he says, with my Lord, at
which I am not very sorry, for I believe he is a false fellow.  I walked
with him to Paul's, he telling me how my Lord is little at home, minds his
carding and little else, takes little notice of any body; but that he do
not think he is displeased, as I fear, with me, but is strange to all,
which makes me the less troubled.  So walked back home, and late at the
office.  So home and to bed.  This day Mrs. Turner did lend me, as a
rarity, a manuscript of one Mr. Wells, writ long ago, teaching the method
of building a ship, which pleases me mightily.  I was at it to-night, but
durst not stay long at it, I being come to have a great pain and water in
my eyes after candle-light.

2nd.  Up and to my office, and afterwards sat, where great contest with
Sir W. Batten and Mr. Wood, and that doating fool Sir J. Minnes, that says
whatever Sir W. Batten says, though never minding whether to the King's
profit or not.  At noon to the Coffee-house, where excellent discourse
with Sir W. Petty, who proposed it as a thing that is truly questionable,
whether there really be any difference between waking and dreaming, that
it is hard not only to tell how we know when we do a thing really or in a
dream, but also to know what the difference [is] between one and the
other.  Thence to the 'Change, but having at this discourse long
afterwards with Sir Thomas Chamberlin, who tells me what I heard from
others, that the complaints of most Companies were yesterday presented to
the Committee of Parliament against the Dutch, excepting that of the East
India, which he tells me was because they would not be said to be the
first and only cause of a warr with Holland, and that it is very probable,
as well as most necessary, that we fall out with that people.  I went to
the 'Change, and there found most people gone, and so home to dinner, and
thence to Sir W. Warren's, and with him past the whole afternoon, first
looking over two ships' of Captain Taylor's and Phin. Pett's now in
building, and am resolved to learn something of the art, for I find it is
not hard and very usefull, and thence to Woolwich, and after seeing Mr.
Falconer, who is very ill, I to the yard, and there heard Mr. Pett tell me
several things of Sir W. Batten's ill managements, and so with Sir W.
Warren walked to Greenwich, having good discourse, and thence by water, it
being now moonshine and 9 or 10 o'clock at night, and landed at Wapping,
and by him and his man safely brought to my door, and so he home, having
spent the day with him very well.  So home and eat something, and then to
my office a while, and so home to prayers and to bed.

3rd (Lord's day).  Being weary last night lay long, and called up by W.
Joyce.  So I rose, and his business was to ask advice of me, he being
summonsed to the House of Lords to-morrow, for endeavouring to arrest my
Lady Peters

     [Elizabeth, daughter of John Savage, second Earl Rivers, and first
     wife to William, fourth Lord Petre, who was, in 1678, impeached by
     the Commons of high treason, and died under confinement in the
     Tower, January 5th, 1683, s. p.--B.]

for a debt.  I did give him advice, and will assist him.  He staid all the
morning, but would not dine with me.  So to my office and did business.
At noon home to dinner, and being set with my wife in the kitchen my
father comes and sat down there and dined with us.  After dinner gives me
an account of what he had done in his business of his house and goods,
which is almost finished, and he the next week expects to be going down to
Brampton again, which I am glad of because I fear the children of my Lord
that are there for fear of any discontent.  He being gone I to my office,
and there very busy setting papers in order till late at night, only in
the afternoon my wife sent for me home, to see her new laced gowne, that
is her gown that is new laced; and indeed it becomes her very nobly, and
is well made.  I am much pleased with it.  At night to supper, prayers,
and to bed.

4th.  Up, and walked to my Lord Sandwich's; and there spoke with him about
W. Joyce, who told me he would do what was fit in so tender a point.  I
can yet discern a coldness in him to admit me to any discourse with him.
Thence to Westminster, to the Painted Chamber, and there met the two
Joyces.  Will in a very melancholy taking.  After a little discourse I to
the Lords' House before they sat; and stood within it a good while, while
the Duke of York came to me and spoke to me a good while about the new
ship' at Woolwich.  Afterwards I spoke with my Lord Barkeley and my Lord
Peterborough about it.  And so staid without a good while, and saw my Lady
Peters, an impudent jade, soliciting all the Lords on her behalf.  And at
last W. Joyce was called in; and by the consequences, and what my Lord
Peterborough told me, I find that he did speak all he said to his
disadvantage, and so was committed to the Black Rod: which is very hard,
he doing what he did by the advice of my Lord Peters' own steward.  But
the Sergeant of the Black Rod did direct one of his messengers to take him
in custody, and so he was peaceably conducted to the Swan with two Necks,
in Tuttle Street, to a handsome dining-room; and there was most civilly
used, my uncle Fenner, and his brother Anthony, and some other friends
being with him.  But who would have thought that the fellow that I should
have sworn could have spoken before all the world should in this be so
daunted, as not to know what he said, and now to cry like a child.  I
protest, it is very strange to observe. I left them providing for his stay
there to-night and getting a petition against tomorrow, and so away to
Westminster Hall, and meeting Mr. Coventry, he took me to his chamber,
with Sir William Hickeman, a member of their House, and a very civill
gentleman.  Here we dined very plentifully, and thence to White Hall to
the Duke's, where we all met, and after some discourse of the condition of
the Fleete, in order to a Dutch warr, for that, I perceive, the Duke hath
a mind it should come to, we away to the office, where we sat, and I took
care to rise betimes, and so by water to Halfway House, talking all the
way good discourse with Mr. Wayth, and there found my wife, who was gone
with her mayd Besse to have a walk.  But, Lord!  how my jealous mind did
make me suspect that she might have some appointment to meet somebody.
But I found the poor souls coming away thence, so I took them back, and
eat and drank, and then home, and after at the office a while, I home to
supper and to bed.  It was a sad sight, me thought, to-day to see my Lord
Peters coming out of the House fall out with his lady (from whom he is
parted) about this business; saying that she disgraced him.  But she hath
been a handsome woman, and is, it seems, not only a lewd woman, but very
high-spirited.

5th.  Up very betimes, and walked to my cozen Anthony Joyce's, and thence
with him to his brother Will, in Tuttle Street, where I find him pretty
cheery over [what] he was yesterday (like a coxcomb), his wife being come
to him, and having had his boy with him last night.  Here I staid an hour
or two and wrote over a fresh petition, that which was drawn by their
solicitor not pleasing me, and thence to the Painted chamber, and by and
by away by coach to my Lord Peterborough's, and there delivered the
petition into his hand, which he promised most readily to deliver to the
House today.  Thence back, and there spoke to several Lords, and so did
his solicitor (one that W. Joyce hath promised L5 to if he be released).
Lord Peterborough presented a petition to the House from W. Joyce: and a
great dispute, we hear, there was in the House for and against it.  At
last it was carried that he should be bayled till the House meets again
after Easter, he giving bond for his appearance.  This was not so good as
we hoped, but as good as we could well expect.  Anon comes the King and
passed the Bill for repealing the Triennial Act, and another about Writs
of Errour.  I crowded in and heard the King's speech to them; but he
speaks the worst that ever I heard man in my life worse than if he read it
all, and he had it in writing in his hand.  Thence, after the House was
up, and I inquired what the order of the House was, I to W. Joyce,' with
his brother, and told them all.  Here was Kate come, and is a comely fat
woman.  I would not stay dinner, thinking to go home to dinner, and did go
by water as far as the bridge, but thinking that they would take it kindly
my being there, to be bayled for him if there was need, I returned, but
finding them gone out to look after it, only Will and his wife and sister
left and some friends that came to visit him, I to Westminster Hall, and
by and by by agreement to Mrs. Lane's lodging, whither I sent for a
lobster, and with Mr. Swayne and his wife eat it, and argued before them
mightily for Hawly, but all would not do, although I made her angry by
calling her old, and making her know what herself is. Her body was out of
temper for any dalliance, and so after staying there 3 or 4 hours, but yet
taking care to have my oath safe of not staying a quarter of an hour
together with her, I went to W. Joyce, where I find the order come, and
bayle (his father and brother) given; and he paying his fees, which come
to above L2, besides L5 he is to give one man, and his charges of eating
and drinking here, and 10s. a-day as many days as he stands under bayle:
which, I hope, will teach him hereafter to hold his tongue better than he
used to do.  Thence with Anth. Joyce's wife alone home talking of Will's
folly, and having set her down, home myself, where I find my wife dressed
as if she had been abroad, but I think she was not, but she answering me
some way that I did not like I pulled her by the nose, indeed to offend
her, though afterwards to appease her I denied it, but only it was done in
haste.  The poor wretch took it mighty ill, and I believe besides wringing
her nose she did feel pain, and so cried a great while, but by and by I
made her friends, and so after supper to my office a while, and then home
to bed.  This day great numbers of merchants came to a Grand Committee of
the House to bring in their claims against the Dutch.  I pray God guide
the issue to our good!

6th.  Up and to my office, whither by and by came John Noble, my father's
old servant, to speake with me.  I smelling the business, took him home;
and there, all alone, he told me how he had been serviceable to my brother
Tom, in the business of his getting his servant, an ugly jade, Margaret,
with child.  She was brought to bed in St. Sepulchre's parish of two
children; one is dead, the other is alive; her name Elizabeth, and goes by
the name of Taylor, daughter to John Taylor.  It seems Tom did a great
while trust one Crawly with the business, who daily got money of him; and
at last, finding himself abused, he broke the matter to J. Noble, upon a
vowe of secresy.  Tom's first plott was to go on the other side the water
and give a beggar woman something to take the child.  They did once go,
but did nothing, J. Noble saying that seven years hence the mother might
come to demand the child and force him to produce it, or to be suspected
of murder.  Then I think it was that they consulted, and got one Cave, a
poor pensioner in St. Bride's parish to take it, giving him L5, he thereby
promising to keepe it for ever without more charge to them.  The parish
hereupon indite the man Cave for bringing this child upon the parish, and
by Sir Richard Browne he is sent to the Counter. Cave thence writes to Tom
to get him out.  Tom answers him in a letter of his owne hand, which J.
Noble shewed me, but not signed by him, wherein he speaks of freeing him
and getting security for him, but nothing as to the business of the child,
or anything like it: so that forasmuch as I could guess, there is nothing
therein to my brother's prejudice as to the main point, and therefore I
did not labour to tear or take away the paper.  Cave being released,
demands L5 more to secure my brother for ever against the child; and he
was forced to give it him and took bond of Cave in L100, made at a
scrivener's, one Hudson, I think, in the Old Bayly, to secure John Taylor,
and his assigns, &c.  (in consideration of L10 paid him), from all
trouble, or charge of meat, drink, clothes, and breeding of Elizabeth
Taylor; and it seems, in the doing of it, J. Noble was looked upon as the
assignee of this John Taylor.  Noble says that he furnished Tom with this
money, and is also bound by another bond to pay him 20s. more this next
Easter Monday; but nothing for either sum appears under Tom's hand.  I
told him how I am like to lose a great sum by his death, and would not pay
any more myself, but I would speake to my father about it against the
afternoon.  So away he went, and I all the morning in my office busy, and
at noon home to dinner mightily oppressed with wind, and after dinner took
coach and to Paternoster Row, and there bought a pretty silke for a
petticoate for my wife, and thence set her down at the New Exchange, and I
leaving the coat at Unthanke's, went to White Hall, but the Councell
meeting at Worcester House I went thither, and there delivered to the Duke
of Albemarle a paper touching some Tangier business, and thence to the
'Change for my wife, and walked to my father's, who was packing up some
things for the country.  I took him up and told him this business of Tom,
at which the poor wretch was much troubled, and desired me that I would
speak with J. Noble, and do what I could and thought fit in it without
concerning him in it.  So I went to Noble, and saw the bond that Cave did
give and also Tom's letter that I mentioned above, and upon the whole I
think some shame may come, but that it will be hard from any thing I see
there to prove the child to be his. Thence to my father and told what I
had done, and how I had quieted Noble by telling him that, though we are
resolved to part with no more money out of our own purses, yet if he can
make it appear a true debt that it may be justifiable for us to pay it, we
will do our part to get it paid, and said that I would have it paid before
my own debt.  So my father and I both a little satisfied, though vexed to
think what a rogue my brother was in all respects.  I took my wife by
coach home, and to my office, where late with Sir W. Warren, and so home
to supper and to bed.  I heard to-day that the Dutch have begun with us by
granting letters of marke against us; but I believe it not.

7th.  Up and to my office, where busy, and by and by comes Sir W. Warren
and old Mr. Bond in order to the resolving me some questions about masts
and their proportions, but he could say little to me to my satisfaction,
and so I held him not long but parted.  So to my office busy till noon and
then to the 'Change, where high talke of the Dutch's protest against our
Royall Company in Guinny, and their granting letters of marke against us
there, and every body expects a warr, but I hope it will not yet be so,
nor that this is true.  Thence to dinner, where my wife got me a pleasant
French fricassee of veal for dinner, and thence to the office, where vexed
to see how Sir W. Batten ordered things this afternoon (vide my office
book, for about this time I have begun, my notions and informations
encreasing now greatly every day, to enter all occurrences extraordinary
in my office in a book by themselves), and so in the evening after long
discourse and eased my mind by discourse with Sir W. Warren, I to my
business late, and so home to supper and to bed.

8th.  Up betimes and to the office, and anon, it begunn to be fair after a
great shower this morning, Sir W. Batten and I by water (calling his son
Castle by the way, between whom and I no notice at all of his letter the
other day to me) to Deptford, and after a turn in the yard, I went with
him to the Almes'-house to see the new building which he, with some
ambition, is building of there, during his being Master of Trinity House;
and a good worke it is, but to see how simply he answered somebody
concerning setting up the arms of the corporation upon the door, that and
any thing else he did not deny it, but said he would leave that to the
master that comes after him.  There I left him and to the King's yard
again, and there made good inquiry into the business of the poop lanterns,
wherein I found occasion to correct myself mightily for what I have done
in the contract with the platerer, and am resolved, though I know not how,
to make them to alter it, though they signed it last night, and so I took
Stanes

     [Among the State Papers is a petition of Thomas Staine to the Navy
     Commissioners "for employment as plateworker in one or two
     dockyards.  Has incurred ill-will by discovering abuses in the great
     rates given by the king for several things in the said trade.  Begs
     the appointment, whereby it will be seen who does the work best and
     cheapest, otherwise he and all others will be discouraged from
     discovering abuses in future, with order thereon for a share of the
     work to be given to him"  ("Calendar," Domestic, 1663-64, p. 395)]

home with me by boat and discoursed it, and he will come to reason when I
can make him to understand it.  No sooner landed but it fell a mighty
storm of rain and hail, so I put into a cane shop and bought one to walk
with, cost me 4s. 6d., all of one joint.  So home to dinner, and had an
excellent Good Friday dinner of peas porridge and apple pye.  So to the
office all the afternoon preparing a new book for my contracts, and this
afternoon come home the office globes done to my great content.  In the
evening a little to visit Sir W. Pen, who hath a feeling this day or two
of his old pain.  Then to walk in the garden with my wife, and so to my
office a while, and then home to the only Lenten supper I have had of
wiggs--[Buns or teacakes.]--and ale, and so to bed.  This morning betimes
came to my office to me boatswain Smith of Woolwich, telling me a notable
piece of knavery of the officers of the yard and Mr. Gold in behalf of a
contract made for some old ropes by Mr. Wood, and I believe I shall find
Sir W. Batten of the plot (vide my office daybook).

     [These note-books referred to in the Diary are not known to exist
     now.]

9th.  The last night, whether it was from cold I got to-day upon the water
I know not, or whether it was from my mind being over concerned with
Stanes's business of the platery of the navy, for my minds was mighty
troubled with the business all night long, I did wake about one o'clock in
the morning, a thing I most rarely do, and pissed a little with great
pain, continued sleepy, but in a high fever all night, fiery hot, and in
some pain.  Towards morning I slept a little and waking found myself
better, but .  .  .  . with some pain, and rose I confess with my clothes
sweating, and it was somewhat cold too, which I believe might do me more
hurt, for I continued cold and apt to shake all the morning, but that some
trouble with Sir J. Minnes and Sir W. Batten kept me warm.  At noon home
to dinner upon tripes, and so though not well abroad with my wife by coach
to her Tailor's and the New Exchange, and thence to my father's and spoke
one word with him, and thence home, where I found myself sick in my
stomach and vomited, which I do not use to do. Then I drank a glass or two
of Hypocras, and to the office to dispatch some business, necessary, and
so home and to bed, and by the help of Mithrydate slept very well.

10th (Lord's day).  Lay long in bed, and then up and my wife dressed
herself, it being Easter day, but I not being so well as to go out, she,
though much against her will, staid at home with me; for she had put on
her new best gowns, which indeed is very fine now with the lace; and this
morning her taylor brought home her other new laced silks gowns with a
smaller lace, and new petticoats, I bought the other day both very pretty.
We spent the day in pleasant talks and company one with another, reading
in Dr. Fuller's book what he says of the family of the Cliffords and
Kingsmills, and at night being myself better than I was by taking a
glyster, which did carry away a great deal of wind, I after supper at
night went to bed and slept well.

11th.  Lay long talking with my wife, then up and to my chamber preparing
papers against my father comes to lie here for discourse about country
business.  Dined well with my wife at home, being myself not yet thorough
well, making water with some pain, but better than I was, and all my fear
of an ague gone away.  In the afternoon my father came to see us, and he
gone I up to my morning's work again, and so in the evening a little to
the office and to see Sir W. Batten, who is ill again, and so home to
supper and to bed.

12th.  Up, and after my wife had dressed herself very fine in her new
laced gown, and very handsome indeed, W. Howe also coming to see us, I
carried her by coach to my uncle Wight's and set her down there, and W.
Howe and I to the Coffee-house, where we sat talking about getting of him
some place under my Lord of advantage if he should go to sea, and I would
be glad to get him secretary and to out Creed if I can, for he is a crafty
and false rogue.  Thence a little to the 'Change, and thence took him to
my uncle Wight's, where dined my father, poor melancholy man, that used to
be as full of life as anybody, and also my aunt's brother, Mr. Sutton, a
merchant in Flanders, a very sober, fine man, and Mr. Cole and his lady;
but, Lord! how I used to adore that man's talke, and now methinks he is
but an ordinary man, his son a pretty boy indeed, but his nose unhappily
awry.  Other good company and an indifferent, and but indifferent dinner
for so much company, and after dinner got a coach, very dear, it being
Easter time and very foul weather, to my Lord's, and there visited my
Lady, and leaving my wife there I and W. Howe to Mr. Pagett's, and there
heard some musique not very good, but only one Dr. Walgrave, an Englishman
bred at Rome, who plays the best upon the lute that I ever heard man.
Here I also met Mr. Hill

     [Thomas Hill, a man whose taste for music caused him to be a very
     acceptable companion to Pepys.  In January, 1664-65, he became
     assistant to the secretary of the Prize Office.]

the little merchant, and after all was done we sung.  I did well enough a
Psalm or two of Lawes; he I perceive has good skill and sings well, and a
friend of his sings a good base.  Thence late walked with them two as far
as my Lord's, thinking to take up my wife and carry them home, but there
being no coach to be got away they went, and I staid a great while, it
being very late, about 10 o'clock, before a coach could be got.  I found
my Lord and ladies and my wife at supper.  My Lord seems very kind.  But I
am apt to think still the worst, and that it is only in show, my wife and
Lady being there.  So home, and find my father come to lie at our house;
and so supped, and saw him, poor man, to bed, my heart never being fuller
of love to him, nor admiration of his prudence and pains heretofore in the
world than now, to see how Tom hath carried himself in his trade; and how
the poor man hath his thoughts going to provide for his younger children
and my mother.  But I hope they shall never want. So myself and wife to
bed.

13th.  Though late, past 12, before we went to bed, yet I heard my poor
father up, and so I rang up my people, and I rose and got something to eat
and drink for him, and so abroad, it being a mighty foul day, by coach,
setting my father down in Fleet Streete and I to St. James's, where I
found Mr. Coventry (the Duke being now come thither for the summer) with a
goldsmith, sorting out his old plate to change for new; but, Lord! what a
deale he hath!  I staid and had two or three hours discourse with him,
talking about the disorders of our office, and I largely to tell him how
things are carried by Sir W. Batten and Sir J. Minnes to my great grief.
He seems much concerned also, and for all the King's matters that are done
after the same rate every where else, and even the Duke's household
matters too, generally with corruption, but most indeed with neglect and
indifferency.  I spoke very loud and clear to him my thoughts of Sir J.
Minnes and the other, and trust him with the using of them.  Then to talk
of our business with the Dutch; he tells me fully that he believes it will
not come to a warr; for first, he showed me a letter from Sir George
Downing, his own hand, where he assures him that the Dutch themselves do
not desire, but above all things fear it, and that they neither have given
letters of marke against our shipps in Guinny, nor do De Ruyter

     [Michael De Ruyter, the Dutch admiral, was born 1607.  He served
     under Tromp in the war against England in 1653, and was Lieutenant
     Admiral General of Holland in 1665.  He died April 26th, 1676, of
     wounds received in a battle with the French off Syracuse.  Among the
     State Papers is a news letter (dated July 14th, 1664) containing
     information as to the views of the Dutch respecting a war with
     England.  "They are preparing many ships, and raising 6,000 men, and
     have no doubt of conquering by sea."  "A wise man says the States
     know how to master England by sending moneys into Scotland for them
     to rebel, and also to the discontented in England, so as to place
     the King in the same straits as his father was, and bring him to
     agree with Holland" ("Calendar," 1663-64, p. 642).]

stay at home with his fleet with an eye to any such thing, but for want of
a wind, and is now come out and is going to the Streights.  He tells me
also that the most he expects is that upon the merchants' complaints, the
Parliament will represent them to the King, desiring his securing of his
subjects against them, and though perhaps they may not directly see fit,
yet even this will be enough to let the Dutch know that the Parliament do
not oppose the King, and by that means take away their hopes, which was
that the King of England could not get money or do anything towards a warr
with them, and so thought themselves free from making any restitution,
which by this they will be deceived in.  He tells me also that the Dutch
states are in no good condition themselves, differing one with another,
and that for certain none but the states of Holland and Zealand will
contribute towards a warr, the others reckoning themselves, being inland,
not concerned in the profits of warr or peace. But it is pretty to see
what he says, that those here that are forward for a warr at Court, they
are reported in the world to be only designers of getting money into the
King's hands, they that elsewhere are for it have a design to trouble the
kingdom and to give the Fanatiques an opportunity of doing hurt, and
lastly those that are against it (as he himself for one is very cold
therein) are said to be bribed by the Dutch. After all this discourse he
carried me in his coach, it raining still, to, Charing Cross, and there
put me into another, and I calling my father and brother carried them to
my house to dinner, my wife keeping bed all day .  .  .  .  .  All the
afternoon at the office with W. Boddam looking over his particulars about
the Chest of Chatham, which shows enough what a knave Commissioner Pett
hath been all along, and how Sir W. Batten hath gone on in getting good
allowance to himself and others out of the poors' money.  Time will show
all.  So in the evening to see Sir W. Pen, and then home to my father to
keep him company, he being to go out of town, and up late with him and my
brother John till past 12 at night to make up papers of Tom's accounts fit
to leave with my cozen Scott.  At last we did make an end of them, and so
after supper all to bed.

14th.  Up betimes, and after my father's eating something, I walked out
with him as far as Milk Streete, he turning down to Cripplegate to take
coach; and at the end of the streete I took leave, being much afeard I
shall not see him here any more, he do decay so much every day, and so I
walked on, there being never a coach to be had till I came to Charing
Cross, and there Col. Froud took me up and carried me to St. James's,
where with Mr. Coventry and Povy, &c., about my Lord Peterborough's
accounts, but, Lord!  to see still what a puppy that Povy is with all his
show is very strange.  Thence to Whitehall and W. C[oventry] and I and Sir
W. Rider resolved upon a day to meet and make an end of all the business.
Thence walked with Creed to the Coffee-house in Covent Garden, where no
company, but he told me many fine experiments at Gresham College; and some
demonstration that the heat and cold of the weather do rarify and condense
the very body of glasse, as in a bolt head' with cold water in it put into
hot water, shall first by rarifying the glasse make the water sink, and
then when the heat comes to the water makes that rise again, and then put
into cold water makes the water by condensing the glass to rise, and then
when the cold comes to the water makes it sink, which is very pretty and
true, he saw it tried.  Thence by coach home, and dined above with my wife
by her bedside, she keeping her bed .  .  . .  .  So to the office, where
a great conflict with Wood and Castle about their New England masts?  So
in the evening my mind a little vexed, but yet without reason, for I shall
prevail, I hope, for the King's profit, and so home to supper and to bed.

15th.  Up and all the morning with Captain Taylor at my house talking
about things of the Navy, and among other things I showed him my letters
to Mr. Coventry, wherein he acknowledges that nobody to this day did ever
understand so much as I have done, and I believe him, for I perceive he
did very much listen to every article as things new to him, and is
contented to abide by my opinion therein in his great contest with us
about his and Mr. Wood's masts.  At noon to the 'Change, where I met with
Mr. Hill, the little merchant, with whom, I perceive, I shall contract a
musical acquaintance; but I will make it as little troublesome as I can.
Home and dined, and then with my wife by coach to the Duke's house, and
there saw "The German Princess" acted, by the woman herself; but never was
any thing so well done in earnest, worse performed in jest upon the stage;
and indeed the whole play, abating the drollery of him that acts her
husband, is very simple, unless here and there a witty sprinkle or two. We
met and sat by Dr. Clerke.  Thence homewards, calling at Madam Turner's,
and thence set my wife down at my aunt Wight's and I to my office till
late, and then at to at night fetched her home, and so again to my office
a little, and then to supper and to bed.

16th.  Up and to the office, where all the morning upon the dispute of Mr.
Wood's masts, and at noon with Mr. Coventry to the African House; and
after a good and pleasant dinner, up with him, Sir W. Rider, the simple
Povy, of all the most ridiculous foole that ever I knew to attend to
business, and Creed and Vernatty, about my Lord Peterborough's accounts;
but the more we look into them, the more we see of them that makes
dispute, which made us break off, and so I home, and there found my wife
and Besse gone over the water to Half-way house, and after them, thinking
to have gone to Woolwich, but it was too late, so eat a cake and home, and
thence by coach to have spoke with Tom Trice about a letter I met with
this afternoon from my cozen Scott, wherein he seems to deny proceeding as
my father's attorney in administering for him in my brother Tom's estate,
but I find him gone out of town, and so returned vexed home and to the
office, where late writing a letter to him, and so home and to bed.

17th (Lord's day).  Up, and I put on my best cloth black suit and my
velvet cloake, and with my wife in her best laced suit to church, where we
have not been these nine or ten weeks.  The truth is, my jealousy hath
hindered it, for fear she should see Pembleton.  He was here to-day, but I
think sat so as he could not see her, which did please me, God help me!
mightily, though I know well enough that in reason this is nothing but my
ridiculous folly.  Home to dinner, and in the afternoon, after long
consulting whether to go to Woolwich or no to see Mr. Falconer, but indeed
to prevent my wife going to church, I did however go to church with her,
where a young simple fellow did preach: I slept soundly all the sermon,
and thence to Sir W. Pen's, my wife and I, there she talking with him and
his daughter, and thence with my wife walked to my uncle Wight's and there
supped, where very merry, but I vexed to see what charges the vanity of my
aunt puts her husband to among her friends and nothing at all among ours.
Home and to bed.  Our parson, Mr. Mills, his owne mistake in reading of
the service was very remarkable, that instead of saying, "We beseech thee
to preserve to our use the kindly fruits of the earth," he cries,
"Preserve to our use our gracious Queen Katherine."

18th.  Up and by coach to Westminster, and there solicited W. Joyce's
business again; and did speake to the Duke of Yorke about it, who did
understand it very well.  I afterwards did without the House fall in
company with my Lady Peters, and endeavoured to mollify her; but she told
me she would not, to redeem her from hell, do any thing to release him;
but would be revenged while she lived, if she lived the age of Methusalem.
I made many friends, and so did others.  At last it was ordered by the
Lords that it should be referred to the Committee of Privileges to
consider.  So I, after discoursing with the Joyces, away by coach to the
'Change; and there, among other things, do hear that a Jew hath put in a
policy of four per cent. to any man, to insure him against a Dutch warr
for four months; I could find in my heart to take him at this offer, but
however will advise first, and to that end took coach to St. James's, but
Mr. Coventry was gone forth, and I thence to Westminster Hall, where Mrs.
Lane was gone forth, and so I missed of my intent to be with her this
afternoon, and therefore meeting Mr. Blagrave, went home with him, and
there he and his kinswoman sang, but I was not pleased with it, they
singing methought very ill, or else I am grown worse to please than
heretofore.  Thence to the Hall again, and after meeting with several
persons, and talking there, I to Mrs. Hunt's (where I knew my wife and my
aunt Wight were about business), and they being gone to walk in the parke
I went after them with Mrs. Hunt, who staid at home for me, and finding
them did by coach, which I had agreed to wait for me, go with them all and
Mrs. Hunt and a kinswoman of theirs, Mrs. Steward, to Hide Parke, where I
have not been since last year; where I saw the King with his periwigg, but
not altered at all; and my Lady Castlemayne in a coach by herself, in
yellow satin and a pinner on; and many brave persons.  And myself being in
a hackney and full of people, was ashamed to be seen by the world, many of
them knowing me.  Thence in the evening home, setting my aunt at home, and
thence we sent for a joynt of meat to supper, and thence to the office at
11 o'clock at night, and so home to bed.

19th.  Up and to St. James's, where long with Mr. Coventry, Povy, &c., in
their Tangier accounts, but such the folly of that coxcomb Povy that we
could do little in it, and so parted for the time, and I to walk with
Creed and Vernaty in the Physique Garden in St. James's Parke; where I
first saw orange-trees, and other fine trees.  So to Westminster Hall, and
thence by water to the Temple, and so walked to the 'Change, and there
find the 'Change full of news from Guinny, some say the Dutch have sunk
our ships and taken our fort, and others say we have done the same to
them.  But I find by our merchants that something is done, but is yet a
secret among them.  So home to dinner, and then to the office, and at
night with Captain Tayler consulting how to get a little money by letting
him the Elias to fetch masts from New England.  So home to supper and to
bed.

20th.  Up and by coach to Westminster, and there solicited W. Joyce's
business all the morning, and meeting in the Hall with Mr. Coventry, he
told me how the Committee for Trade have received now all the complaints
of the merchants against the Dutch, and were resolved to report very
highly the wrongs they have done us (when, God knows! it is only our owne
negligence and laziness that hath done us the wrong) and this to be made
to the House to-morrow.  I went also out of the Hall with Mrs. Lane to the
Swan at Mrs. Herbert's in the Palace Yard to try a couple of bands, and
did (though I had a mind to be playing the fool with her) purposely stay
but a little while, and kept the door open, and called the master and
mistress of the house one after another to drink and talk with me, and
showed them both my old and new bands.  So that as I did nothing so they
are able to bear witness that I had no opportunity there to do anything.
Thence by coach with Sir W. Pen home, calling at the Temple for Lawes's
Psalms, which I did not so much (by being against my oath) buy as only lay
down money till others be bound better for me, and by that time I hope to
get money of the Treasurer of the Navy by bills, which, according to my
oath, shall make me able to do it.  At home dined, and all the afternoon
at a Committee of the Chest, and at night comes my aunt and uncle Wight
and Nan Ferrers and supped merrily with me, my uncle coming in an hour
after them almost foxed.  Great pleasure by discourse with them, and so,
they gone, late to bed.

21st.  Up pretty betimes and to my office, and thither came by and by Mr.
Vernaty and staid two hours with me, but Mr. Gauden did not come, and so
he went away to meet again anon.  Then comes Mr. Creed, and, after some
discourse, he and I and my wife by coach to Westminster (leaving her at
Unthanke's, her tailor's) Hall, and there at the Lords' House heard that
it is ordered, that, upon submission upon the knee both to the House and
my Lady Peters, W. Joyce shall be released.  I forthwith made him submit,
and aske pardon upon his knees; which he did before several Lords.  But my
Lady would not hear it; but swore she would post the Lords, that the world
might know what pitifull Lords the King hath; and that revenge was sweeter
to her than milk; and that she would never be satisfied unless he stood in
a pillory, and demand pardon there.  But I perceive the Lords are ashamed
of her, and so I away calling with my wife at a place or two to inquire
after a couple of mayds recommended to us, but we found both of them bad.
So set my wife at my uncle Wight's and I home, and presently to the
'Change, where I did some business, and thence to my uncle's and there
dined very well, and so to the office, we sat all the afternoon, but no
sooner sat but news comes my Lady Sandwich was come to see us, so I went
out, and running up (her friend however before me) I perceive by my dear
Lady blushing that in my dining-room she was doing something upon the
pott, which I also was ashamed of, and so fell to some discourse, but
without pleasure through very pity to my Lady.  She tells me, and I find
true since, that the House this day have voted that the King be desired to
demand right for the wrong done us by the Dutch, and that they will stand
by him with their lives fortunes: which is a very high vote, and more than
I expected.  What the issue will be, God knows! My Lady, my wife not being
at home, did not stay, but, poor, good woman, went away, I being mightily
taken with her dear visitt, and so to the office, where all the afternoon
till late, and so to my office, and then to supper and to bed, thinking to
rise betimes tomorrow.

22nd.  Having directed it last night, I was called up this morning before
four o'clock.  It was full light enough to dress myself, and so by water
against tide, it being a little coole, to Greenwich; and thence, only that
it was somewhat foggy till the sun got to some height, walked with great
pleasure to Woolwich, in my way staying several times to listen to the
nightingales.  I did much business both at the Ropeyarde and the other,
and on floate I discovered a plain cheat which in time I shall publish of
Mr. Ackworth's.  Thence, having visited Mr. Falconer also, who lies still
sick, but hopes to be better, I walked to Greenwich, Mr. Deane with me.
Much good discourse, and I think him a very just man, only a little
conceited, but yet very able in his way, and so he by water also with me
also to towne.  I home, and immediately dressing myself, by coach with my
wife to my Lord Sandwich's, but they having dined we would not 'light but
went to Mrs. Turner's, and there got something to eat, and thence after
reading part of a good play, Mrs. The., my wife and I, in their coach to
Hide Parke, where great plenty of gallants, and pleasant it was, only for
the dust.  Here I saw Mrs. Bendy, my Lady Spillman's faire daughter that
was, who continues yet very handsome.  Many others I saw with great
content, and so back again to Mrs. Turner's, and then took a coach and
home.  I did also carry them into St. James's Park and shewed them the
garden.  To my office awhile while supper was making ready, and so home to
supper and to bed.

23rd (Coronation day).  Up, and after doing something at my office, and,
it being a holiday, no sitting likely to be, I down by water to Sir W.
Warren's, who hath been ill, and there talked long with him good
discourse, especially about Sir W. Batten's knavery and his son Castle's
ill language of me behind my back, saying that I favour my fellow
traytours, but I shall be even with him.  So home and to the 'Change,
where I met with Mr. Coventry, who himself is now full of talke of a Dutch
warr; for it seems the Lords have concurred in the Commons' vote about it;
and so the next week it will be presented to the King, insomuch that he do
desire we would look about to see what stores we lack, and buy what we
can.  Home to dinner, where I and my wife much troubled about my money
that is in my Lord Sandwich's hand, for fear of his going to sea and be
killed; but I will get what of it out I can.  All the afternoon, not being
well, at my office, and there doing much business, my thoughts still
running upon a warr and my money.  At night home to supper and to bed.

24th (Lord's day).  Up, and all the morning in my chamber setting some of
my private papers in order, for I perceive that now publique business
takes up so much of my time that I must get time a-Sundays or a-nights to
look after my owne matters.  Dined and spent all the afternoon talking
with my wife, at night a little to the office, and so home to supper and
to bed.

25th.  Up, and with Sir W. Pen by coach to St. James's and there up to the
Duke, and after he was ready to his closet, where most of our talke about
a Dutch warr, and discoursing of things indeed now for it.  The Duke,
which gives me great good hopes, do talk of setting up a good discipline
in the fleete.  In the Duke's chamber there is a bird, given him by Mr.
Pierce, the surgeon, comes from the East Indys, black the greatest part,
with the finest collar of white about the neck; but talks many things and
neyes like the horse, and other things, the best almost that ever I heard
bird in my life.  Thence down with Mr. Coventry and Sir W. Rider, who was
there (going along with us from the East Indya house to-day) to discourse
of my Lord Peterborough's accounts, and then walked over the Parke, and in
Mr. Cutler's coach with him and Rider as far as the Strand, and thence I
walked to my Lord Sandwich's, where by agreement I met my wife, and there
dined with the young ladies; my Lady, being not well, kept her chamber.
Much simple discourse at table among the young ladies.  After dinner
walked in the garden, talking, with Mr. Moore about my Lord's business.
He told me my Lord runs in debt every day more and more, and takes little
care how to come out of it.  He counted to me how my Lord pays use now for
above L9000, which is a sad thing, especially considering the probability
of his going to sea, in great danger of his life, and his children, many
of them, to provide for.  Thence, the young ladies going out to visit, I
took my wife by coach out through the city, discoursing how to spend the
afternoon; and conquered, with much ado, a desire of going to a play; but
took her out at White Chapel, and to Bednal Green; so to Hackney, where I
have not been many a year, since a little child I boarded there.  Thence
to Kingsland, by my nurse's house, Goody Lawrence, where my brother Tom
and I was kept when young.  Then to Newington Green, and saw the outside
of Mrs. Herbert's house, where she lived, and my Aunt Ellen with her; but,
Lord!  how in every point I find myself to over-value things when a child.
Thence to Islington, and so to St. John's to the Red Bull, and there: saw
the latter part of a rude prize fought, but with good pleasure enough; and
thence back to Islington, and at the King's Head, where Pitts lived, we
'light and eat and drunk for remembrance of the old house sake, and so
through Kingsland again, and so to Bishopsgate, and so home with great
pleasure.  The country mighty pleasant, and we with great content home,
and after supper to bed, only a little troubled at the young ladies
leaving my wife so to-day, and from some passages fearing my Lady might be
offended.  But I hope the best.

26th.  Up, and to my Lord Sandwich's, and coming a little too early, I
went and saw W. Joyce, and by and by comes in Anthony, they both owning a
great deal of kindness received from me in their late business, and indeed
I did what I could, and yet less I could not do.  It has cost the poor man
above L40; besides, he is likely to lose his debt.  Thence to my Lord's,
and by and by he comes down, and with him (Creed with us) I rode in his
coach to St. James's, talking about W. Joyce's business mighty merry, and
my Lady Peters, he says, is a drunken jade, he himself having seen her
drunk in the lobby of their House.  I went up with him to the Duke, where
methought the Duke did not shew him any so great fondness as he was wont;
and methought my Lord was not pleased that I should see the Duke made no
more of him, not that I know any thing of any unkindnesse, but I think
verily he is not as he was with him in his esteem.  By and by the Duke
went out and we with him through the Parke, and there I left him going
into White Hall, and Creed and I walked round the Parke, a pleasant walk,
observing the birds, which is very pleasant; and so walked to the New
Exchange, and there had a most delicate dish of curds and creame, and
discourse with the good woman of the house, a discreet well-bred woman,
and a place with great delight I shall make it now and then to go thither.
Thence up, and after a turn or two in the 'Change, home to the Old
Exchange by coach, where great newes and true, I saw by written letters,
of strange fires seen at Amsterdam in the ayre, and not only there, but in
other places thereabout.  The talke of a Dutch warr is not so hot, but yet
I fear it will come to it at last.  So home and to the office, where we
sat late.  My wife gone this afternoon to the buriall of my she-cozen
Scott, a good woman; and it is a sad consideration how the Pepys's decay,
and nobody almost that I know in a present way of encreasing them.  At
night late at my office, and so home to my wife to supper and to bed.

27th.  Up, and all the morning very busy with multitude of clients, till
my head began to be overloaded.  Towards noon I took coach and to the
Parliament house door, and there staid the rising of the House, and with
Sir G. Carteret and Mr. Coventry discoursed of some tarr that I have been
endeavouring to buy, for the market begins apace to rise upon us, and I
would be glad first to serve the King well, and next if I could I find
myself now begin to cast how to get a penny myself.  Home by coach with
Alderman Backewell in his coach, whose opinion is that the Dutch will not
give over the business without putting us to some trouble to set out a
fleete; and then, if they see we go on well, will seek to salve up the
matter.  Upon the 'Change busy.  Thence home to dinner, and thence to the
office till my head was ready to burst with business, and so with my wife
by coach, I sent her to my Lady Sandwich and myself to my cozen Roger
Pepys's chamber, and there he did advise me about our Exchequer business,
and also about my brother John, he is put by my father upon interceding
for him, but I will not yet seem the least to pardon him nor can I in my
heart.  However, he and I did talk how to get him a mandamus for a
fellowship, which I will endeavour.  Thence to my Lady's, and in my way
met Mr. Sanchy, of Cambridge, whom I have not met a great while.  He seems
a simple fellow, and tells me their master, Dr. Rainbow, is newly made
Bishop of Carlisle.  To my Lady's, and she not being well did not see her,
but straight home with my wife, and late to my office, concluding in the
business of Wood's masts, which I have now done and I believe taken more
pains in it than ever any Principall officer in this world ever did in any
thing to no profit to this day.  So, weary, sleepy, and hungry, home and
to bed.  This day the Houses attended the King, and delivered their votes
to him: upon the business of the Dutch; and he thanks them, and promises
an answer in writing.

28th.  Up and close at my office all the morning.  To the 'Change busy at
noon, and so home to dinner, and then in the afternoon at the office till
night, and so late home quite tired with business, and without joy in
myself otherwise than that I am by God's grace enabled to go through it
and one day, hope to have benefit by it.  So home to supper and to bed.

29th.  Up betimes, and with Sir W. Rider and Cutler to White Hall.  Rider
and I to St. James's, and there with Mr. Coventry did proceed strictly
upon some fooleries of Mr. Povy's in my Lord Peterborough's accounts,
which will touch him home, and I am glad of it, for he is the most
troublesome impertinent man that ever I met with.  Thence to the 'Change,
and there, after some business, home to dinner, where Luellin and Mount
came to me and dined, and after dinner my wife and I by coach to see my
Lady Sandwich, where we find all the children and my Lord removed, and the
house so melancholy that I thought my Lady had been dead, knowing that she
was not well; but it seems she hath the meazles, and I fear the small pox,
poor lady.  It grieves me mightily; for it will be a sad houre to the
family should she miscarry.  Thence straight home and to the office, and
in the evening comes Mr. Hill the merchant and another with him that sings
well, and we sung some things, and good musique it seemed to me, only my
mind too full of business to have much pleasure in it. But I will have
more of it.  They gone, and I having paid Mr. Moxon for the work he has
done for the office upon the King's globes, I to my office, where very
late busy upon Captain Tayler's bills for his masts, which I think will
never off my hand.  Home to supper and to bed.

30th.  Up and all the morning at the office.  At noon to the 'Change,
where, after business done, Sir W. Rider and Cutler took me to the Old
James and there did give me a good dish of mackerell, the first I have
seen this year, very good, and good discourse.  After dinner we fell to
business about their contract for tarr, in which and in another business
of Sir W. Rider's, canvas, wherein I got him to contract with me, I held
them to some terms against their wills, to the King's advantage, which I
believe they will take notice of to my credit.  Thence home, and by water
by a gally down to Woolwich, and there a good while with Mr. Pett upon the
new ship discoursing and learning of him.  Thence with Mr. Deane to see
Mr: Falconer, and there find him in a way to be well.  So to the water
(after much discourse with great content with Mr. Deane) and home late,
and so to the office, wrote to, my father among other things my continued
displeasure against my brother John, so that I will give him nothing more
out of my own purse, which will trouble the poor man, but however it is
fit that I should take notice of my brother's ill carriage to me.  Then
home and till 12 at night about my month's accounts, wherein I have just
kept within compass, this having been a spending month. So my people being
all abed I put myself to bed very sleepy.  All the newes now is what will
become of the Dutch business, whether warr or peace.  We all seem to
desire it, as thinking ourselves to have advantages at present over them;
for my part I dread it.  The Parliament promises to assist the King with
lives and fortunes, and he receives it with thanks and promises to demand
satisfaction of the Dutch.  My poor Lady Sandwich is fallen sick three
days since of the meazles.  My Lord Digby's business is hushed up, and
nothing made of it; he is gone, and the discourse quite ended.  Never more
quiet in my family all the days of my life than now, there being only my
wife and I and Besse and the little girl Susan, the best wenches to our
content that we can ever expect.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                  MAY
                                  1664

May 1st (Lord's day).  Lay long in bed.  Went not to church, but staid at
home to examine my last night's accounts, which I find right, and that I
am L908 creditor in the world, the same I was last month.  Dined, and
after dinner down by water with my wife and Besse with great pleasure as
low as Greenwich and so back, playing as it were leisurely upon the water
to Deptford, where I landed and sent my wife up higher to land below
Half-way house.  I to the King's yard and there spoke about several
businesses with the officers, and so with Mr. Wayth consulting about
canvas, to Half-way house where my wife was, and after eating there we
broke and walked home before quite dark.  So to supper, prayers, and to
bed.

2nd.  Lay pretty long in bed.  So up and by water to St. James's, and
there attended the Duke with Sir W. Batten and Sir J. Minnes, and having
done our work with him walked to Westminster Hall, and after walking there
and talking of business met Mr. Rawlinson and by coach to the 'Change,
where I did some business, and home to dinner, and presently by coach to
the King's Play-house to see "The Labyrinth," but, coming too soon, walked
to my Lord's to hear how my Lady do, who is pretty well; at least past all
fear.  There by Captain Ferrers meeting with an opportunity of my Lord's
coach, to carry us to the Parke anon, we directed it to come to the
play-house door; and so we walked, my wife and I and Madamoiselle.  I paid
for her going in, and there saw "The Labyrinth," the poorest play,
methinks, that ever I saw, there being nothing in it but the odd accidents
that fell out, by a lady's being bred up in man's apparel, and a man in a
woman's.  Here was Mrs. Stewart, who is indeed very pretty, but not like
my Lady Castlemayne, for all that. Thence in the coach to the Parke, where
no pleasure; there being much dust, little company, and one of our horses
almost spoiled by falling down, and getting his leg over the pole; but all
mended presently, and after riding up and down, home.  Set Madamoiselle at
home; and we home, and to my office, whither comes Mr. Bland, and pays me
the debt he acknowledged he owed me for my service in his business of the
Tangier Merchant, twenty pieces of new gold, a pleasant sight.  It cheered
my heart; and he being gone, I home to supper, and shewed them my wife;
and she, poor wretch, would fain have kept them to look on, without any
other design but a simple love to them; but I thought it not convenient,
and so took them into my own hand.  So, after supper, to bed.

3rd.  Up, and being ready, went by agreement to Mr. Bland's and there
drank my morning draft in good chocollatte, and slabbering my band sent
home for another, and so he and I by water to White Hall, and walked to
St. James's, where met Creed and Vernatty, and by and by Sir W. Rider, and
so to Mr. Coventry's chamber, and there upon my Lord Peterborough's
accounts, where I endeavoured to shew the folly and punish it as much as I
could of Mr. Povy; for, of all the men in the world, I never knew any man
of his degree so great a coxcomb in such imployments.  I see I have lost
him forever, but I value it not; for he is a coxcomb, and, I doubt, not
over honest, by some things which I see; and yet, for all his folly, he
hath the good lucke, now and then, to speak his follies in as good words,
and with as good a show, as if it were reason, and to the purpose, which
is really one of the wonders of my life.  Thence walked to Westminster
Hall; and there, in the Lords' House, did in a great crowd, from ten
o'clock till almost three, hear the cause of Mr. Roberts, my Lord Privy
Seal's son, against Win, who by false ways did get the father of Mr.
Roberts's wife (Mr. Bodvill) to give him the estate and disinherit his
daughter.  The cause was managed for my Lord Privy Seal by Finch the
Solicitor [General]; but I do really think that he is truly a man of as
great eloquence as ever I heard, or ever hope to hear in all my life.
Thence, after long staying to speak with my Lord Sandwich, at last he
coming out to me and speaking with me about business of my Lord
Peterborough, I by coach home to the office, where all the afternoon, only
stept home to eat one bit and to the office again, having eaten nothing
before to-day.  My wife abroad with my aunt Wight and Norbury. I in the
evening to my uncle Wight's, and not finding them come home, they being
gone to the Parke and the Mulberry garden, I went to the 'Change, and
there meeting with Mr. Hempson, whom Sir W. Batten has lately turned out
of his place, merely because of his coming to me when he came to town
before he went to him, and there he told me many rogueries of Sir W.
Batten, how he knows and is able to prove that Captain Cox of Chatham did
give him L10 in gold to get him to certify for him at the King's coming
in, and that Tom Newborne did make [the] poor men give him L3 to get Sir
W. Batten to cause them to be entered in the yard, and that Sir W. Batten
had oftentimes said: "by God, Tom, you shall get something and I will have
some on't."  His present clerk that is come in Norman's' room has given
him something for his place; that they live high and (as Sir Francis
Clerk's lady told his wife) do lack money as well as other people, and
have bribes of a piece of sattin and cabinetts and other things from
people that deal with him, and that hardly any body goes to see or hath
anything done by Sir W. Batten but it comes with a bribe, and that this is
publickly true that his wife was a whore, and that he had libells flung
within his doors for a cuckold as soon as he was married; that he received
L100 in money and in other things to the value of L50 more of Hempson, and
that he intends to give him back but L50; that he hath abused the Chest
and hath now some L1000 by him of it. I met also upon the 'Change with Mr.
Cutler, and he told me how for certain Lawson hath proclaimed warr again
with Argier, though they had at his first coming given back the ships
which they had taken, and all their men; though they refused afterwards to
make him restitution for the goods which they had taken out of them.
Thence to my uncle Wight's, and he not being at home I went with Mr.
Norbury near hand to the Fleece, a mum house in Leadenhall, and there
drunk mum and by and by broke up, it being about 11 o'clock at night, and
so leaving them also at home, went home myself and to bed.

4th.  Up, and my new Taylor, Langford, comes and takes measure of me for a
new black cloth suit and cloake, and I think he will prove a very carefull
fellow and will please me well.  Thence to attend my Lord Peterborough in
bed and give him an account of yesterday's proceeding with Povy.  I
perceive I labour in a business will bring me little pleasure; but no
matter, I shall do the King some service.  To my Lord's lodgings, where
during my Lady's sickness he is, there spoke with him about the same
business.  Back and by water to my cozen Scott's.  There condoled with him
the loss of my cozen, his wife, and talked about his matters, as atturney
to my father, in his administering to my brother Tom.  He tells me we are
like to receive some shame about the business of his bastarde with Jack
Noble; but no matter, so it cost us no money. Thence to the Coffee-house
and to the 'Change a while.  News uncertain how the Dutch proceed.  Some
say for, some against a war.  The plague increases at Amsterdam.  So home
to dinner, and after dinner to my office, where very late, till my eyes
(which begin to fail me nowadays by candlelight) begin to trouble me.
Only in the afternoon comes Mr. Peter Honiwood to see me and gives me
20s., his and his friends' pence for my brother John, which, God forgive
my pride, methinks I think myself too high to take of him; but it is an
ungratefull pitch of pride in me, which God forgive.  Home at night to
supper and to bed.

5th.  Up betimes to my office, busy, and so abroad to change some plate
for my father to send to-day by the carrier to Brampton, but I observe and
do fear it may be to my wrong that I change spoons of my uncle Robert's
into new and set a P upon them that thereby I cannot claim them hereafter,
as it was my brother Tom's practice.  However, the matter of this is not
great, and so I did it.  So to the 'Change, and meeting Sir W. Warren,
with him to a taverne, and there talked, as we used to do, of the evils
the King suffers in our ordering of business in the Navy, as Sir W. Batten
now forces us by his knavery.  So home to dinner, and to the office, where
all the afternoon, and thence betimes home, my eyes beginning every day to
grow less and less able to bear with long reading or writing, though it be
by daylight; which I never observed till now. So home to my wife, and
after supper to bed.

6th.  This morning up and to my office, where Sympson my joyner came to
work upon altering my closet, which I alter by setting the door in another
place, and several other things to my great content.  Busy at it all day,
only in the afternoon home, and there, my books at the office being out of
order, wrote letters and other businesses.  So at night with my head full
of the business of my closet home to bed, and strange it is to think how
building do fill my mind and put out all other things out of my thoughts.

7th.  Betimes at my office with the joyners, and giving order for other
things about it.  By and by we sat all the morning.  At noon to dinner,
and after dinner comes Deane of Woolwich, and I spent, as I had appointed,
all the afternoon with him about instructions which he gives me to
understand the building of a ship, and I think I shall soon understand it.
In the evening a little to my office to see how the work goes forward
there, and then home and spent the evening also with Mr. Deane, and had a
good supper, and then to bed, he lying at my house.

8th (Lord's day).  This day my new tailor, Mr. Langford, brought me home a
new black cloth suit and cloake lined with silk moyre, and he being gone,
who pleases me very well with his work and I hope will use me pretty well,
then Deane and I to my chamber, and there we repeated my yesterday's
lesson about ships all the morning, and I hope I shall soon understand it.
At noon to dinner, and strange how in discourse he cries up chymistry from
some talk he has had with an acquaintance of his, a chymist, when, poor
man, he understands not one word of it.  But I discern very well that it
is only his good nature, but in this of building ships he hath taken great
pains, more than most builders I believe have.   After dinner he went
away, and my wife and I to church, and after church to Sir W. Pen, and
there sat and talked with him, and the perfidious rogue seems, as he do
always, mightily civil to us, though I know he hates and envies us.  So
home to supper, prayers, and to bed.

9th.  Up and to my office all the morning, and there saw several things
done in my work to my great content, and at noon home to dinner, and after
dinner in Sir W. Pen's coach he set my wife and I down at the New
Exchange, and after buying some things we walked to my Lady Sandwich's,
who, good lady, is now, thanks be to God!  so well as to sit up, and sent
to us, if we were not afeard, to come up to her.  So we did; but she was
mightily against my wife's coming so near her; though, poor wretch! she is
as well as ever she was, as to the meazles, and nothing can I see upon her
face.  There we sat talking with her above three hours, till six o'clock,
of several things with great pleasure and so away, and home by coach,
buying several things for my wife in our way, and so after looking what
had been done in my office to-day, with good content home to supper and to
bed.  But, strange, how I cannot get any thing to take place in my mind
while my work lasts at my office.  This day my wife and I in our way to
Paternoster Row to buy things called upon Mr. Hollyard to advise upon her
drying up her issue in her leg, which inclines of itself to dry up, and he
admits of it that it should be dried up.

10th.  Up and at my office looking after my workmen all the morning, and
after the office was done did the same at night, and so home to supper and
to bed.

11th.  Up and all day, both forenoon and afternoon, at my office to see it
finished by the joyners and washed and every thing in order, and indeed
now my closet is very convenient and pleasant for me.  My uncle Wight came
to me to my office this afternoon to speak with me about Mr. Maes's
business again, and from me went to my house to see my wife, and strange
to think that my wife should by and by send for me after he was gone to
tell me that he should begin discourse of her want of children and his
also, and how he thought it would be best for him and her to have one
between them, and he would give her L500 either in money or jewells
beforehand, and make the child his heir.  He commended her body, and
discoursed that for all he knew the thing was lawful.  She says she did
give him a very warm answer, such as he did not excuse himself by saying
that he said this in jest, but told her that since he saw what her mind
was he would say no more to her of it, and desired her to make no words of
it.  It seemed he did say all this in a kind of counterfeit laugh, but by
all words that passed, which I cannot now so well set down, it is plain to
me that he was in good earnest, and that I fear all his kindness is but
only his lust to her.  What to think of it of a sudden I know not, but I
think not to take notice yet of it to him till I have thought better of
it.  So with my mind and head a little troubled I received a letter from
Mr. Coventry about a mast for the Duke's yacht, which with other business
makes me resolve to go betimes to Woolwich to-morrow.  So to supper and to
bed.

12th.  Up by 4 o'clock and by water to Woolwich, where did some business
and walked to Greenwich, good discourse with Mr. Deane best part of the
way; there met by appointment Commissioner Pett, and with him to Deptford,
where did also some business, and so home to my office, and at noon Mrs.
Hunt and her cozens child and mayd came and dined with me.  My wife sick
.  .  .  in bed.  I was troubled with it, but, however, could not help it,
but attended them till after dinner, and then to the office and there sat
all the afternoon, and by a letter to me this afternoon from Mr. Coventry
I saw the first appearance of a warr with Holland.  So home; and betimes
to bed because of rising to-morrow.

13th.  Up before three o'clock, and a little after upon the water, it
being very light as at noon, and a bright sunrising; but by and by a
rainbow appeared, the first that ever in a morning I saw, and then it fell
a-raining a little, but held up again, and I to Woolwich, where before all
the men came to work I with Mr. Deane spent two hours upon the new ship,
informing myself in the names and natures of many parts of her to my great
content, and so back again, without doing any thing else, and after
shifting myself away to Westminster, looking after Mr. Maes's business and
others.  In the Painted Chamber I heard a fine conference between some of
the two Houses upon the Bill for Conventicles.  The Lords would be freed
from having their houses searched by any but the Lord Lieutenant of the
County; and upon being found guilty, to be tried only by their peers; and
thirdly, would have it added, that whereas the Bill says, "That that,
among other things, shall be a conventicle wherein any such meeting is
found doing any thing contrary to the Liturgy of the Church of England,"
they would have it added, "or practice."  The Commons to the Lords said,
that they knew not what might hereafter be found out which might be called
the practice of the Church of England; for there are many things may be
said to be the practice of the Church, which were never established by any
law, either common, statute, or canon; as singing of psalms, binding up
prayers at the end of the Bible, and praying extempore before and after
sermon: and though these are things indifferent, yet things for aught they
at present know may be started, which may be said to be the practice of
the Church which would not be fit to allow.  For the Lords' priviledges,
Mr. Walter told them how tender their predecessors had been of the
priviledges of the Lords; but, however, where the peace of the kingdom
stands in competition with them, they apprehend those priviledges must
give place.  He told them that he thought, if they should owne all to be
the priviledges of the Lords which might be demanded, they should be led
like the man (who granted leave to his neighbour to pull off his horse's
tail, meaning that he could not do it at once) that hair by hair had his
horse's tail pulled off indeed: so the Commons, by granting one thing
after another, might be so served by the Lords.  Mr. Vaughan, whom I could
not to my grief perfectly hear, did say, if that they should be obliged in
this manner to, exempt the Lords from every thing, it would in time come
to pass that whatever (be [it] never so great) should be voted by the
Commons as a thing penall for a commoner, the contrary should be thought a
priviledge to the Lords: that also in this business, the work of a
conventicle being but the work of an hour, the cause of a search would be
over before a Lord Lieutenant, who may be many miles off, can be sent for;
and that all this dispute is but about L100; for it is said in the Act,
that it shall be banishment or payment of L100.  I thereupon heard the
Duke of Lenox say, that there might be Lords who could not always be ready
to lose L100, or some such thing: They broke up without coming to any end
in it.  There was also in the Commons' House a great quarrel about Mr.
Prin, and it was believed that he should have been sent to the Towre, for
adding something to a Bill (after it was ordered to be engrossed) of his
own head--a Bill for measures for wine and other things of that sort, and
a Bill of his owne bringing in; but it appeared he could not mean any hurt
in it.  But, however, the King was fain to write in his behalf, and all
was passed over.  But it is worth my remembrance, that I saw old Ryly the
Herald, and his son; and spoke to his son, who told me in very bad words
concerning Mr. Prin, that the King had given him an office of keeping the
Records; but that he never comes thither, nor had been there these six
months: so that I perceive they expect to get his imployment from him.
Thus every body is liable to be envied and supplanted.  At noon over to
the Leg, where Sir G. Ascue, Sir Robt. Parkhurst and Sir W. Pen dined. A
good dinner and merry.  Thence to White Hall walking up and down a great
while, but the Council not meeting soon enough I went homeward, calling
upon my cozen Roger Pepys, with whom I talked and heard so much from him
of his desire that I would see my brother's debts paid, and things still
of that nature tending to my parting with what I get with pain to serve
others' expenses that I was cruelly vexed.  Thence to Sir R. Bernard, and
there heard something of Pigott's delay of paying our money, that that
also vexed me mightily.  So home and there met with a letter from my cozen
Scott, which tells me that he is resolved to meddle no more with our
business, of administering for my father, which altogether makes me almost
distracted to think of the trouble that I am like to meet with by other
folks' business more than ever I hope to have by my owne.  So with great
trouble of mind to bed.

14th.  Up, full of pain, I believe by cold got yesterday.  So to the
office, where we sat, and after office home to dinner, being in
extraordinary pain.  After dinner my pain increasing I was forced to go to
bed, and by and by my pain rose to be as great for an hour or two as ever
I remember it was in any fit of the stone, both in the lower part of my
belly and in my back also.  No wind could I break.  I took a glyster, but
it brought away but a little, and my height of pain followed it.  At last
after two hours lying thus in most extraordinary anguish, crying and
roaring, I know not what, whether it was my great sweating that may do it,
but upon getting by chance, among my other tumblings, upon my knees, in
bed, my pain began to grow less and less, till in an hour after I was in
very little pain, but could break no wind, nor make any water, and so
continued, and slept well all night.

15th (Lord's day).  Rose, and as I had intended without reference to this
pain, took physique, and it wrought well with me, my wife lying from me
to-night, the first time she did in the same house ever since we were
married, I think (unless while my father was in town, that he lay with
me).  She took physique also to-day, and both of our physiques wrought
well, so we passed our time to-day, our physique having done working, with
some pleasure talking, but I was not well, for I could make no water yet,
but a drop or two with great pain, nor break any wind.  In the evening
came Mr. Vernatty to see me and discourse about my Lord Peterborough's
business, and also my uncle Wight and Norbury, but I took no notice nor
showed any different countenance to my uncle Wight, or he to me, for all
that he carried himself so basely to my wife the last week, but will take
time to make my use of it.  So, being exceeding hot, to bed, and slept
well.

16th.  Forced to rise because of going to the Duke to St. James's, where
we did our usual business, and thence by invitation to Mr. Pierces the
chyrurgeon, where I saw his wife, whom I had not seen in many months
before.  She holds her complexion still, but in everything else, even in
this her new house and the best rooms in it, and her closet which her
husband with some vainglory took me to show me, she continues the eeriest
slattern that ever I knew in my life.  By and by we to see an experiment
of killing a dogg by letting opium into his hind leg.  He and Dr. Clerke
did fail mightily in hitting the vein, and in effect did not do the
business after many trials; but with the little they got in, the dogg did
presently fall asleep, and so lay till we cut him up, and a little dogg
also, which they put it down his throate; he also staggered first, and
then fell asleep, and so continued.  Whether he recovered or no, after I
was gone, I know not, but it is a strange and sudden effect.  Thence
walked to Westminster Hall, where the King was expected to come to
prorogue the House, but it seems, afterwards I hear, he did not come. I
promised to go again to Mr. Pierce's, but my pain grew so great, besides a
bruise I got to-day in my right testicle, which now vexes me as much as
the other, that I was mighty melancholy, and so by coach home and there
took another glyster, but find little good by it, but by sitting still my
pain of my bruise went away, and so after supper to bed, my wife and I
having talked and concluded upon sending my father an offer of having Pall
come to us to be with us for her preferment, if by any means I can get her
a husband here, which, though it be some trouble to us, yet it will be
better than to have her stay there till nobody will have her and then be
flung upon my hands.

17th.  Slept well all night and lay long, then rose and wrote my letter to
my father about Pall, as we had resolved last night.  So to dinner and
then to the office, finding myself better than I was, and making a little
water, but not yet breaking any great store of wind, which I wonder at,
for I cannot be well till I do do it.  After office home and to supper and
with good ease to bed, and endeavoured to tie my hands that I might not
lay them out of bed, by which I believe I have got cold, but I could not
endure it.

18th.  Up and within all the morning, being willing to keep as much as I
could within doors, but receiving a very wakening letter from Mr. Coventry
about fitting of ships, which speaks something like to be done, I went
forth to the office, there to take order in things, and after dinner to
White Hall to a Committee of Tangier, but did little.  So home again and
to Sir W. Pen, who, among other things of haste in this new order for
ships, is ordered to be gone presently to Portsmouth to look after the
work there.  I staid to discourse with him, and so home to supper, where
upon a fine couple of pigeons, a good supper; and here I met a pretty
cabinet sent me by Mr. Shales, which I give my wife, the first of that
sort of goods I ever had yet, and very conveniently it comes for her
closett.  I staid up late finding out the private boxes, but could not do
some of them, and so to bed, afraid that I have been too bold to-day in
venturing in the cold.  This day I begun to drink butter-milke and whey,
and I hope to find great good by it.

19th.  Up, and it being very rayny weather, which makes it cooler than it
was, by coach to Charing Cross with Sir W. Pen, who is going to Portsmouth
this day, and left him going to St. James's to take leave of the Duke, and
I to White Hall to a Committee of Tangier; where God forgive how our
Report of my Lord Peterborough's accounts was read over and agreed to by
the Lords, without one of them understanding it!  And had it been what it
would, it had gone: and, besides, not one thing touching the King's profit
in it minded or hit upon.  Thence by coach home again, and all the morning
at the office, sat, and all the afternoon till 9 at night, being fallen
again to business, and I hope my health will give me leave to follow it.
So home to supper and to bed, finding myself pretty well.  A pretty good
stool, which I impute to my whey to-day, and broke wind also.

20th.  Up and to my office, whither by and by comes Mr. Cholmely, and
staying till the rest of the company come he told me how Mr. Edward
Montagu is turned out of the Court, not [to] return again.  His fault, I
perceive, was his pride, and most of all his affecting to seem great with
the Queene and it seems indeed had more of her eare than any body else,
and would be with her talking alone two or three hours together; insomuch
that the Lords about the King, when he would be jesting with them about
their wives, would tell the King that he must have a care of his wife too,
for she hath now the gallant: and they say the King himself did once ask
Montagu how his mistress (meaning the Queene) did.  He grew so proud, and
despised every body, besides suffering nobody, he or she, to get or do any
thing about the Queene, that they all laboured to do him a good turn.
They also say that he did give some affront to the Duke of Monmouth, which
the King himself did speak to him of.  But strange it is that this man
should, from the greatest negligence in the world, come to be the miracle
of attendance, so as to take all offices from everybody, either men or
women, about the Queene.  Insomuch that he was observed as a miracle, but
that which is the worst, that which in a wise manner performed [would]
turn to his greatest advantage, was by being so observed employed to his
greatest wrong, the world concluding that there must be something more
than ordinary to cause him to do this.  So he is gone, nobody pitying but
laughing at him; and he pretends only that he is gone to his father, that
is sick in the country.  By and by comes Povy, Creed, and Vernatty, and so
to their accounts, wherein more trouble and vexation with Povy.  That
being done, I sent them going and myself fell to business till dinner.  So
home to dinner very pleasant.  In the afternoon to my office, where busy
again, and by and by came a letter from my father so full of trouble for
discontents there between my mother and servants, and such troubles to my
father from hence from Cave that hath my brother's bastard that I know not
what in the world to do, but with great trouble, it growing night, spent
some time walking, and putting care as much as I could out of my head,
with my wife in the garden, and so home to supper and to bed.

21st.  Up, called by Mr. Cholmely, and walked with him in the garden till
others came to another Committee of Tangier, as we did meet as we did use
to do, to see more of Povy's folly, and so broke up, and at the office sat
all the morning, Mr. Coventry with us, and very hot we are getting out
some ships.  At noon to the 'Change, and there did some business, and
thence home to dinner, and so abroad with my wife by coach to the New
Exchange, and there laid out almost 40s. upon her, and so called to see my
Lady Sandwich, whom we found in her dining-room, which joyed us mightily;
but she looks very thin, poor woman, being mightily broke. She told us
that Mr. Montagu is to return to Court, as she hears, which I wonder at,
and do hardly believe.  So home and to my office, where late, and so home
to supper and to bed.

22nd (Lord's day).  Up and by water to White Hall to my Lord's lodgings,
and with him walked to White Hall without any great discourse, nor do I
find that he do mind business at all.  Here the Duke of Yorke called me to
him, to ask me whether I did intend to go with him to Chatham or no. I
told him if he commanded, but I did believe there would be business here
for me, and so he told me then it would be better to stay, which I suppose
he will take better than if I had been forward to go.  Thence, after
staying and seeing the throng of people to attend the King to Chappell
(but, Lord! what a company of sad, idle people they are) I walked to St.
James's with Colonell Remes, where staid a good while and then walked to
White Hall with Mr. Coventry, talking about business. So meeting Creed,
took him with me home and to dinner, a good dinner, and thence by water to
Woolwich, where mighty kindly received by Mrs. Falconer and her husband,
who is now pretty well again, this being the first time I ever carried my
wife thither.  I walked to the Docke, where I met Mrs. Ackworth alone at
home, and God forgive me! what thoughts I had, but I had not the courage
to stay, but went to Mr. Pett's and walked up and down the yard with him
and Deane talking about the dispatch of the ships now in haste, and by and
by Creed and my wife and a friend of Mr. Falconer's came with the boat and
called me, and so by water to Deptford, where I landed, and after talking
with others walked to Half-way house with Mr. Wayth talking about the
business of his supplying us with canvas, and he told me in discourse
several instances of Sir W. Batten's cheats.  So to Half-way house,
whither my wife and them were gone before, and after drinking there we
walked, and by water home, sending Creed and the other with the boat home.
Then wrote a letter to Mr. Coventry, and so a good supper of pease, the
first I eat this year, and so to bed.

23rd.  Up and to the office, where Sir J. Minnes, Sir W. Batten, and
myself met and did business, we being in a mighty hurry.  The King is gone
down with the Duke and a great crew this morning by break of day to
Chatham.  Towards noon I and my wife by water to Woolwich, leaving my wife
at Mr. Falconer's, and Mr. Hater and I with some officers of the yard on
board to see several ships how ready they are.  Then to Mr. Falconer's to
a good dinner, having myself carried them a vessel of sturgeon and a
Lamprey pie, and then to the Yarde again, and among other things did at
Mr. Ackworth's obtain a demonstration of his being a knave; but I did not
discover it, till it be a little more seasonable.  So back to the Ropeyard
and took my wife and Mr. Hater back, it raining mighty hard of a sudden,
but we with the tilt

     [Tilt (A.S. teld) represents a tent or awning.  It was used for a
     cloth covering for a cart or waggon, or for a canopy or awning over
     a portion of a boat.]

kept ourselves dry.  So to Deptford, did some business there; but, Lord!
to see how in both places the King's business, if ever it should come to a
warr, is likely to be done, there not being a man that looks or speaks
like a man that will take pains, or use any forecast to serve the King, at
which I am heartily troubled.  So home, it raining terribly, but we still
dry, and at the office late discoursing with Sir J. Minnes and Sir W.
Batten, who like a couple of sots receive all I say but to little purpose.
So late home to supper and to bed.

24th.  Up and to the office, where Sir J. Minnes and I sat all the
morning, and after dinner thither again, and all the afternoon hard at the
office till night, and so tired home to supper and to bed.  This day I
heard that my uncle Fenner is dead, which makes me a little sad, to see
with what speed a great many of my friends are gone, and more, I fear, for
my father's sake, are going.

25th.  Took physique betimes and to sleep, then up, it working all the
morning.  At noon dined, and in the afternoon in my chamber spending two
or three hours to look over some unpleasant letters and things of trouble
to answer my father in, about Tom's business and others, that vexed me,
but I did go through it and by that means eased my mind very much.  This
afternoon also came Tom and Charles Pepys by my sending for, and received
of me L40 in part towards their L70 legacy of my uncle's.  Spent the
evening talking with my wife, and so to bed.

26th.  Up to the office, where we sat, and I had some high words with Sir
W. Batten about canvas, wherein I opposed him and all his experience,
about seams in the middle, and the profit of having many breadths and
narrow, which I opposed to good purpose, to the rejecting of the whole
business.  At noon home to dinner, and thence took my wife by coach, and
she to my Lady Sandwich to see her.  I to Tom Trice, to discourse about my
father's giving over his administration to my brother, and thence to Sir
R. Bernard, and there received L19 in money, and took up my father's bond
of L21, that is L40, in part of Piggot's L209 due to us, which L40 he pays
for 7 roods of meadow in Portholme.  Thence to my wife, and carried her to
the Old Bayly, and there we were led to the Quest House, by the church,
where all the kindred were by themselves at the buriall of my uncle
Fenner; but, Lord! what a pitiful rout of people there was of them, but
very good service and great company the whole was.  And so anon to church,
and a good sermon, and so home, having for ease put my L19 into W. Joyce's
hand, where I left it.  So to supper and to bed, being in a little pain
from some cold got last night lying without anything upon my feet.

27th.  Up, not without some pain by cold, which makes me mighty
melancholy, to think of the ill state of my health.  To the office, where
busy till my brains ready to drop with variety of business, and vexed for
all that to see the service like to suffer by other people's neglect.
Vexed also at a letter from my father with two troublesome ones enclosed
from Cave and Noble, so that I know not what to do therein.  At home to
dinner at noon.  But to comfort my heart, Captain Taylor this day brought
me L20 he promised me for my assistance to him about his masts.  After
dinner to the office again, and thence with Mr. Wayth to St. Catherine's
to see some variety of canvas's, which indeed was worth my seeing, but
only I was in some pain, and so took not the delight I should otherwise
have done.  So home to the office, and there busy till late at night, and
so home to supper and to bed.  This morning my taylor brought me a very
tall mayde to be my cook-mayde; she asked L5, but my wife offered her but
L3 10s.--whether she will take it or no I know not till to-morrow, but I
am afeard she will be over high for us, she having last been a chamber
mayde, and holds up her head, as my little girle Su observed.

28th.  Up pretty well as to pain and wind, and to the office, where we sat
close and did much business.  At noon I to the 'Change, and thence to Mr.
Cutler's, where I heard Sir W. Rider was, where I found them at dinner and
dined with them, he having yesterday and to-day a fit of a pain like the
gout, the first time he ever had it.  A good dinner.  Good discourse, Sir
W. Rider especially much fearing the issue of a Dutch warr, wherein I very
highly commend him.  Thence home, and at the office a while, and then with
Mr. Deane to a second lesson upon my Shipwrightry, wherein I go on with
great pleasure.  He being gone I to the office late, and so home to supper
and to bed.  But, Lord! to see how my very going to the 'Change, and being
without my gowne, presently brought me wind and pain, till I came home and
was well again; but I am come to such a pass that I shall not know what to
do with myself, but I am apt to think that it is only my legs that I take
cold in from my having so long worn a gowne constantly.

29th (Whitsunday.  King's Birth and Restauration day).  Up, and having
received a letter last night desiring it from Mr. Coventry, I walked to
St. James's, and there he and I did long discourse together of the
business of the office, and the warr with the Dutch; and he seemed to
argue mightily with the little reason that there is for all this.  For
first, as to the wrong we pretend they have done us: that of the East
Indys, for their not delivering of Poleron, it is not yet known whether
they have failed or no; that of their hindering the Leopard cannot amount
to above L3,000 if true; that of the Guinny Company, all they had done us
did not amount to above L200 or L300 he told me truly; and that now, from
what Holmes, without any commission, hath done in taking an island and two
forts, hath set us much in debt to them; and he believes that Holmes will
have been so puffed up with this, that he by this time hath been enforced
with more strength than he had then, hath, I say, done a great deale more
wrong to them.  He do, as to the effect of the warr, tell me clearly that
it is not any skill of the Dutch that can hinder our trade if we will, we
having so many advantages over them, of winds, good ports, and men; but it
is our pride, and the laziness of the merchant.  He seems to think that
there may be some negotiation which may hinder a warr this year, but that
he speaks doubtfully as unwilling I perceive to be thought to discourse
any such thing.  The main thing he desired to speake with me about was, to
know whether I do understand my Lord Sandwich's intentions as to going to
sea with this fleete; saying, that the Duke, if he desires it, is most
willing to it; but thinking that twelve ships is not a fleete fit for my
Lord to be troubled to go out with, he is not willing to offer it to him
till he hath some intimations of his mind to go, or not.  He spoke this
with very great respect as to my Lord, though methinks it is strange they
should not understand one another better at this time than to need
another's mediation.  Thence walked over the Parke to White Hall, Mr. Povy
with me, and was taken in a very great showre in the middle of the Parke
that we were very wet.  So up into, the house and with him to the King's
closett, whither by and by the King came, my Lord Sandwich carrying the
sword.  A Bishopp preached, but he speaking too low for me to hear behind
the King's closett, I went forth and walked and discoursed with Colonell
Reames, who seems a very willing man to be informed in his business of
canvas, which he is undertaking to strike in with us to serve the Navy.
By and by my Lord Sandwich came forth, and called me to him: and we fell
into discourse a great while about his business, wherein he seems to be
very open with me, and to receive my opinion as he used to do; and I hope
I shall become necessary to him again.  He desired me to think of the
fitness, or not, for him to offer himself to go to sea; and to give him my
thoughts in a day or two.  Thence after sermon among the ladies on the
Queene's side; where I saw Mrs. Stewart, very fine and pretty, but far
beneath my Lady Castlemayne.  Thence with Mr. Povy home to dinner; where
extraordinary cheer.  And after dinner up and down to see his house.  And
in a word, methinks, for his perspective upon his wall in his garden, and
the springs rising up with the perspective in the little closett; his room
floored above with woods of several colours, like but above the best
cabinet-work I ever saw; his grotto and vault, with his bottles of wine,
and a well therein to keep them cool; his furniture of all sorts; his bath
at the top of his house, good pictures, and his manner of eating and
drinking; do surpass all that ever I did see of one man in all my life.
Thence walked home and found my uncle Wight and Mr. Rawlinson, who supped
with me.  They being gone, I to bed, being in some pain from my being so
much abroad to-day, which is a most strange thing that in such warm
weather the least ayre should get cold and wind in me.  I confess it makes
me mighty sad and out of all content in the world.

30th.  Lay long, the bells ringing, it being holiday, and then up and all
the day long in my study at home studying of shipmaking with great content
till the evening, and then came Mr. Howe and sat and then supped with me.
He is a little conceited, but will make a discreet man.  He being gone, a
little to my office, and then home to bed, being in much pain from
yesterday's being abroad, which is a consideration of mighty sorrow to me.

31st.  Up, and called upon Mr. Hollyard, with whom I advised and shall
fall upon some course of doing something for my disease of the wind, which
grows upon me every day more and more.  Thence to my Lord Sandwich's, and
while he was dressing I below discoursed with Captain Cooke, and I think
if I do find it fit to keep a boy at all I had as good be supplied from
him with one as any body.  By and by up to my Lord, and to discourse about
his going to sea, and the message I had from Mr. Coventry to him.  He
wonders, as he well may, that this course should be taken, and he every
day with the Duke, who, nevertheless, seems most friendly to him, who hath
not yet spoke one word to my Lord of his desire to have him go to sea.  My
Lord do tell me clearly that were it not that he, as all other men that
were of the Parliament side, are obnoxious to reproach, and so is forced
to bear what otherwise he would not, he would never suffer every thing to
be done in the Navy, and he never be consulted; and it seems, in the
naming of all these commanders for this fleete, he hath never been asked
one question.  But we concluded it wholly inconsistent with his honour not
to go with this fleete, nor with the reputation which the world hath of
his interest at Court; and so he did give me commission to tell Mr.
Coventry that he is most willing to receive any commands from the Duke in
this fleete, were it less than it is, and that particularly in this
service.  With this message I parted, and by coach to the office, where I
found Mr. Coventry, and told him this.  Methinks, I confess, he did not
seem so pleased with it as I expected, or at least could have wished, and
asked me whether I had told my Lord that the Duke do not expect his going,
which I told him I had. But now whether he means really that the Duke, as
he told me the other day, do think the Fleete too small for him to take or
that he would not have him go, I swear I cannot tell.  But methinks other
ways might have been used to put him by without going in this manner about
it, and so I hope it is out of kindness indeed.  Dined at home, and so to
the office, where a great while alone in my office, nobody near, with
Bagwell's wife of Deptford, but the woman seems so modest that I durst not
offer any courtship to her, though I had it in my mind when I brought her
in to me. But I am resolved to do her husband a courtesy, for I think he
is a man that deserves very well.  So abroad with my wife by coach to St.
James's, to one Lady Poultny's, where I found my Lord, I doubt, at some
vain pleasure or other.  I did give him a short account of what I had done
with Mr. Coventry, and so left him, and to my wife again in the coach, and
with her to the Parke, but the Queene being gone by the Parke to
Kensington, we staid not but straight home and to supper (the first time I
have done so this summer), and so to my office doing business, and then to
my monthly accounts, where to my great comfort I find myself better than I
was still the last month, and now come to L930.  I was told to-day, that
upon Sunday night last, being the King's birth-day, the King was at my
Lady Castlemayne's lodgings (over the hither-gates at Lambert's lodgings)
dancing with fiddlers all night almost; and all the world coming by taking
notice of it, which I am sorry to hear.  The discourse of the town is only
whether a warr with Holland or no, and we are preparing for it all we can,
which is but little.  Myself subject more than ordinary to pain by winde,
which makes me very sad, together with the trouble which at present lies
upon me in my father's behalf, rising from the death of my brother, which
are many and great.  Would to God they were over!




     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     Bath at the top of his house
     Fear all his kindness is but only his lust to her
     Fetch masts from New England
     Find myself to over-value things when a child
     Generally with corruption, but most indeed with neglect
     I slept soundly all the sermon
     In a hackney and full of people, was ashamed to be seen
     In my dining-room she was doing something upon the pott
     Methought very ill, or else I am grown worse to please
     Mrs. Lane was gone forth, and so I missed of my intent
     Saw "The German Princess" acted, by the woman herself
     Slabbering my band sent home for another
     That hair by hair had his horse's tail pulled off indeed





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Diary of Samuel Pepys, April/May 1664
by Samuel Pepys

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***

***** This file should be named 4148.txt or 4148.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/4/1/4/4148/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
