Project Gutenberg's Diary of Samuel Pepys, June/July 1664, by Samuel Pepys

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Diary of Samuel Pepys, June/July 1664

Author: Samuel Pepys

Release Date: November 30, 2004 [EBook #4149]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***




Produced by David Widger





                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A. F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                              JUNE & JULY
                                 1664

June 1st.  Up, having lain long, going to bed very late after the ending
of my accounts.  Being up Mr. Hollyard came to me, and to my great sorrow,
after his great assuring me that I could not possibly have the stone
again, he tells me that he do verily fear that I have it again, and has
brought me something to dissolve it, which do make me very much troubled,
and pray to God to ease me.  He gone, I down by water to Woolwich and
Deptford to look after the dispatch of the ships, all the way reading Mr.
Spencer's Book of Prodigys, which is most ingeniously writ, both for
matter and style.  Home at noon, and my little girl got me my dinner, and
I presently out by water and landed at Somerset stairs, and thence through
Covent Garden, where I met with Mr. Southwell (Sir W. Pen's friend), who
tells me the very sad newes of my Lord Tiviott's and nineteen more
commission officers being killed at Tangier by the Moores, by an ambush of
the enemy upon them, while they were surveying their lines; which is very
sad, and, he says, afflicts the King much.  Thence to W. Joyce's, where by
appointment I met my wife (but neither of them at home), and she and I to
the King's house, and saw "The Silent Woman;" but methought not so well
done or so good a play as I formerly thought it to be, or else I am
nowadays out of humour.  Before the play was done, it fell such a storm of
hayle, that we in the middle of the pit were fain to rise;

     [The stage was covered in by a tiled roof, but the pit was open to
     the sky.  "The pit lay open to the weather for sake of light, but
     was subsequently covered in with a glazed cupola, which, however,
     only imperfectly protected the audience, so that in stormy weather
     the house was thrown into disorder, and the people in the pit were
     fain to rise" (Cunningham's "Story of Nell Gwyn," ed. 1893, p. 33).]

and all the house in a disorder, and so my wife and I out and got into a
little alehouse, and staid there an hour after the play was done before we
could get a coach, which at last we did (and by chance took up Joyce
Norton and Mrs. Bowles.  and set them at home), and so home ourselves, and
I, after a little to my office, so home to supper and to bed.

2nd.  Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and then to the
'Change, where after some stay by coach with Sir J. Minnes and Mr.
Coventry to St. James's, and there dined with Mr. Coventry very finely,
and so over the Parke to White Hall to a Committee of Tangier about
providing provisions, money, and men for Tangier.  At it all the
afternoon, but it is strange to see how poorly and brokenly things are
done of the greatest consequence, and how soon the memory of this great
man is gone, or, at least, out of mind by the thoughts of who goes next,
which is not yet knowne.  My Lord of Oxford, Muskerry, and several others
are discoursed of.  It seems my Lord Tiviott's design was to go a mile and
half out of the towne, to cut down a wood in which the enemy did use to
lie in ambush.  He had sent several spyes; but all brought word that the
way was clear, and so might be for any body's discovery of an enemy before
you are upon them.  There they were all snapt, he and all his officers,
and about 200 men, as they say; there being left now in the garrison but
four captains.  This happened the 3d of May last, being not before that
day twelvemonth of his entering into his government there: but at his
going out in the morning he said to some of his officers, "Gentlemen, let
us look to ourselves, for it was this day three years that so many brave
Englishmen were knocked on the head by the Moores, when Fines made his
sally out."  Here till almost night, and then home with Sir J. Minnes by
coach, and so to my office a while, and home to supper and bed, being now
in constant pain in my back, but whether it be only wind or what it is the
Lord knows, but I fear the worst.

3rd.  Up, still in a constant pain in my back, which much afflicts me with
fear of the consequence of it.  All the morning at the office, we sat at
the office extraordinary upon the business of our stores, but, Lord!  what
a pitiful account the Surveyor makes of it grieves my heart. This morning
before I came out I made a bargain with Captain Taylor for a ship for the
Commissioners for Tangier, wherein I hope to get L40 or L50. To the
'Change, and thence home and dined, and then by coach to White Hall,
sending my wife to Mrs. Hunt's.  At the Committee for Tangier all the
afternoon, where a sad consideration to see things of so great weight
managed in so confused a manner as it is, so as I would not have the
buying of an acre of land bought by the Duke of York and Mr. Coventry, for
ought I see, being the only two that do anything like men; Prince Rupert
do nothing but swear and laugh a little, with an oathe or two, and that's
all he do.  Thence called my wife and home, and I late at my office, and
so home to supper and to bed, pleased at my hopes of gains by to-day's
work, but very sad to think of the state of my health.

4th.  Up and to St. James's by coach, after a good deal of talk before I
went forth with J. Noble, who tells me that he will secure us against
Cave, that though he knows, and can prove it, yet nobody else can prove
it, to be Tom's child; that the bond was made by one Hudson, a scrivener,
next to the Fountaine taverne, in the Old Bayly; that the children were
born, and christened, and entered in the parish-book of St. Sepulchre's,
by the name of Anne and Elizabeth Taylor and he will give us security
against Cave if we pay him the money.  And then up to the Duke, and was
with him giving him an account how matters go, and of the necessity there
is of a power to presse seamen, without which we cannot really raise men
for this fleete of twelve sayle, besides that it will assert the King's
power of pressing, which at present is somewhat doubted, and will make the
Dutch believe that we are in earnest.  Thence by water to the office,
where we sat till almost two o'clock.  This morning Captain Ferrer came to
the office to tell me that my Lord hath given him a promise of Young's
place in the Wardrobe, and hearing that I pretend a promise to it he comes
to ask my consent, which I denied him, and told him my Lord may do what he
pleases with his promise to me, but my father's condition is not so as
that I should let it go if my Lord will stand to his word, and so I sent
him going, myself being troubled a little at it.  After office I with Mr.
Coventry by water to St. James's and dined with him, and had excellent
discourse from him.  So to the Committee for Tangier all afternoon, where
still the same confused doings, and my Lord Fitz-Harding now added to the
Committee; which will signify much.  It grieves me to see how brokenly
things are ordered.  So by coach home, and at my office late, and so to
supper and to bed, my body by plenty of breaking of wind being just now
pretty well again, having had a constant akeing in my back these 5 or 6
days.  Mr. Coventry discoursing this noon about Sir W. Batten (what a sad
fellow he is!) told me how the King told him the other day how Sir W.
Batten, being in the ship with him and Prince Rupert when they expected to
fight with Warwick, did walk up and down sweating with a napkin under his
throat to dry up his sweat; and that Prince Rupert being a most jealous
man, and particularly of Batten, do walk up and down swearing bloodily to
the King, that Batten had a mind to betray them to-day, and that the
napkin was a signal; "but, by God," says he, "if things go ill, the first
thing I will do is to shoot him."  He discoursed largely and bravely to me
concerning the different sort of valours, the active and passive valour.
For the latter, he brought as an instance General Blake; who, in the
defending of Taunton and Lime for the Parliament, did through his stubborn
sort of valour defend it the most 'opiniastrement' that ever any man did
any thing; and yet never was the man that ever made any attaque by land or
sea, but rather avoyded it on all, even fair occasions.  On the other
side, Prince Rupert, the boldest attaquer in the world for personal
courage; and yet, in the defending of Bristol, no man ever did anything
worse, he wanting the patience and seasoned head to consult and advise for
defence, and to bear with the evils of a siege.  The like he says is said
of my Lord Tiviott, who was the boldest adventurer of his person in the
world, and from a mean man in few years was come to this greatness of
command and repute only by the death of all his officers, he many times
having the luck of being the only survivor of them all, by venturing upon
services for the King of France that nobody else would; and yet no man
upon a defence, he being all fury and no judgment in a fight.  He tells me
above all of the Duke of Yorke, that he is more himself and more of
judgement is at hand in him in the middle of a desperate service, than at
other times, as appeared in the business of Dunkirke, wherein no man ever
did braver things, or was in hotter service in the close of that day,
being surrounded with enemies; and then, contrary to the advice of all
about him, his counsel carried himself and the rest through them safe, by
advising that he might make his passage with but a dozen with him; "For,"
says he, "the enemy cannot move after me so fast with a great body, and
with a small one we shall be enough to deal with them;" and though he is a
man naturally martiall to the highest degree, yet a man that never in his
life talks one word of himself or service of his owne, but only that he
saw such or such a thing, and lays it down for a maxime that a Hector can
have no courage.  He told me also, as a great instance of some men, that
the Prince of Condo's excellence is, that there not being a more furious
man in the world, danger in fight never disturbs him more than just to
make him civill, and to command in words of great obligation to his
officers and men; but without any the least disturbance in his judgment or
spirit.

5th (Lord's day).  About one in the morning I was knocked up by my mayds
to come to my wife who is very ill.  I rose, and from some cold she got
to-day, or from something else, she is taken with great gripings, a
looseness, and vomiting.  I lay a while by her upon the bed, she being in
great pain, poor wretch, but that being a little over I to bed again, and
lay, and then up and to my office all the morning, setting matters to
rights in some accounts and papers, and then to dinner, whither Mr.
Shepley, late come to town, came to me, and after dinner and some pleasant
discourse he went his way, being to go out of town to Huntington again
to-morrow.  So all the afternoon with my wife discoursing and talking, and
in the evening to my office doing business, and then home to supper and to
bed.

6th.  Up and found my wife very ill again, which troubles me, but I was
forced to go forth.  So by water with Mr. Gauden and others to see a ship
hired by me for the Commissioners of Tangier, and to give order therein.
So back to the office, and by coach with Mr. Gauden to White Hall, and
there to my Lord Sandwich, and here I met Mr. Townsend very opportunely
and Captain Ferrer, and after some discourse we did accommodate the
business of the Wardrobe place, that he shall have the reversion if he
will take it out by giving a covenant that if Mr. Young' dyes before my
father my father shall have the benefit of it for his life.  So home, and
thence by water to Deptford, and there found our Trinity Brethren come
from their election to church, where Dr. Britton made, methought, an
indifferent sermon touching the decency that we ought to observe in God's
house, the church, but yet to see how ridiculously some men will carry
themselves.  Sir W. Batten did at open table anon in the name of the whole
Society desire him to print his sermon, as if the Doctor could think that
they were fit judges of a good sermon.  Then by barge with Sir W. Batten
to Trinity House.  It seems they have with much ado carried it for Sir G.
Carteret against Captain Harrison, poor man, who by succession ought to
have been it, and most hands were for him, but only they were forced to
fright the younger Brethren by requiring them to set their hands (which is
an ill course) and then Sir G. Carteret carryed it.  Here was at dinner my
Lord Sandwich, Mr. Coventry, my Lord Craven, and others. A great dinner,
and good company.  Mr. Prin also, who would not drink any health, no, not
the King's, but sat down with his hat on all the while;

     [William Prynne had published in 1628 a small book against the
     drinking of healths, entitled, "Healthes, Sicknesse; or a
     compendious and briefe Discourse, prouing, the Drinking and Pledging
     of Healthes to be sinfull and utterly unlawfull unto Christians
     .  .  . wherein all those ordinary objections, excuses or pretences,
     which are made to justifie, extenuate, or excuse the drinking or
     pledging of Healthes are likewise cleared and answered."  The
     pamphlet was dedicated to Charles I. as "more interessed in the
     theame and subject of this compendious discourse then any other that
     I know," and "because your Majestie of all other persons within your
     owne dominions, are most dishonoured, prejudiced, and abused by
     these Healthes."]

but nobody took notice of it to him at all; but in discourse with the
Doctor he did declare himself that he ever was, and has expressed himself
in all his books for mixt communion against the Presbyterian examination.
Thence after dinner by water, my Lord Sandwich and all us Tangier men,
where at the Committee busy till night with great confusion, and then by
coach home, with this content, however, that I find myself every day
become more and more known, and shall one day hope to have benefit by it.
I found my wife a little better.  A little to my office, then home to
supper and to bed.

7th.  Up and to the office (having by my going by water without any thing
upon my legs yesterday got some pain upon me again), where all the
morning.  At noon a little to the 'Change, and thence home to dinner, my
wife being ill still in bed.  Thence to the office, where busy all the
afternoon till 9 at night, and so home to my wife, to supper, and to bed.

8th.  All day before dinner with Creed, talking of many things, among
others, of my Lord's going so often to Chelsy, and he, without my speaking
much, do tell me that his daughters do perceive all, and do hate the
place, and the young woman there, Mrs. Betty Becke; for my Lord, who sent
them thither only for a disguise for his going thither, will come under
pretence to see them, and pack them out of doors to the Parke, and stay
behind with her; but now the young ladies are gone to their mother to
Kensington.  To dinner, and after dinner till 10 at night in my study
writing of my old broken office notes in shorthand all in one book, till
my eyes did ake ready to drop out.  So home to supper and to bed.

9th.  Up and at my office all the morning.  At noon dined at home, Mr.
Hunt and his kinswoman (wife in the country), after dinner I to the
office, where we sat all the afternoon.  Then at night by coach to attend
the Duke of Albemarle about the Tangier ship.  Coming back my wife spied
me going home by coach from Mr. Hunt's, with whom she hath gained much in
discourse to-day concerning W. Howe's discourse of me to him.  That he was
the man that got me to be secretary to my Lord; and all that I have
thereby, and that for all this I never did give him 6d. in my life. Which
makes me wonder that this rogue dare talk after this manner, and I think
all the world is grown false.  But I hope I shall make good use of it.  So
home to supper and to bed, my eyes aching mightily since last night.

10th.  Up and by water to White Hall, and there to a Committee of Tangier,
and had occasion to see how my Lord Ashworth--[Lord Ashworth is probably a
miswriting for Lord Ashley (afterwards Earl of Shaftesbury).]--deports
himself, which is very fine indeed, and it joys my heart to see that there
is any body looks so near into the King's business as I perceive he do in
this business of my Lord Peterborough's accounts. Thence into the Parke,
and met and walked with Captain Sylas Taylor, my old acquaintance while I
was of the Exchequer, and Dr. Whore, talking of musique, and particularly
of Mr. Berckenshaw's way, which Taylor magnifies mightily, and perhaps but
what it deserves, but not so easily to be understood as he and others make
of it.  Thence home by water, and after dinner abroad to buy several
things, as a map, and powder, and other small things, and so home to my
office, and in the evening with Captain Taylor by water to our Tangier
ship, and so home, well pleased, having received L26 profit to-day of my
bargain for this ship, which comforts me mightily, though I confess my
heart, what with my being out of order as to my health, and the fear I
have of the money my Lord oweth me and I stand indebted to him in, is much
cast down of late.  In the evening home to supper and to bed.

11th.  Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning, where some
discourse arose from Sir G. Carteret and Mr. Coventry, which gives me
occasion to think that something like a war is expected now indeed, though
upon the 'Change afterwards I hear too that an Embassador is landed from
Holland, and one from their East India Company, to treat with ours about
the wrongs we pretend to.  Mr. Creed dined with me, and thence after
dinner by coach with my wife only to take the ayre, it being very warm and
pleasant, to Bowe and Old Ford; and thence to Hackney.  There 'light, and
played at shuffle-board, eat cream and good churies; and so with good
refreshment home.  Then to my office vexed with Captain Taylor about the
delay of carrying down the ship hired by me for Tangier, and late about
that and other things at the office.  So home to supper and to bed.

12th (Lord's day).  All the morning in my chamber consulting my lesson of
ship building, and at noon Mr. Creed by appointment came and dined with
us, and sat talking all the afternoon till, about church time, my wife and
I began our great dispute about going to Griffin's child's christening,
where I was to have been godfather, but Sir J. Minnes refusing, he wanted
an equal for me and my Lady Batten, and so sought for other.  Then the
question was whether my wife should go, and she having dressed herself on
purpose, was very angry, and began to talk openly of my keeping her within
doors before Creed, which vexed me to the guts, but I had the discretion
to keep myself without passion, and so resolved at last not to go, but to
go down by water, which we did by H. Russell--[a waterman]--to the
Half-way house, and there eat and drank, and upon a very small occasion
had a difference again broke out, where without any the least cause she
had the cunning to cry a great while, and talk and blubber, which made me
mighty angry in mind, but said nothing to provoke her because Creed was
there, but walked home, being troubled in my mind also about the knavery
and neglect of Captain Fudge and Taylor, who were to have had their ship
for Tangier ready by Thursday last, and now the men by a mistake are come
on board, and not any master or man or boy of the ship's company on board
with them when we came by her side this afternoon, and also received a
letter from Mr. Coventry this day in complaint of it.  We came home, and
after supper Creed went home, and I to bed.  My wife made great means to
be friends, coming to my bedside and doing all things to please me, and at
last I could not hold out, but seemed pleased, and so parted, and I with
much ado to sleep, but was easily wakened by extraordinary great rain, and
my mind troubled the more to think what the soldiers would do on board
tonight in all this weather.

13th.  So up at 5 o'clock, and with Captain Taylor on board her at
Deptford, and found all out of order, only the soldiers civil, and Sir
Arthur Bassett a civil person.  I rated at Captain Taylor, whom, contrary
to my expectation, I found a lying and a very stupid blundering fellow,
good for nothing, and yet we talk of him in the Navy as if he had been an
excellent officer, but I find him a lying knave, and of no judgment or
dispatch at all.  After finding the condition of the ship, no master, not
above four men, and many ship's provisions, sayls, and other things
wanting, I went back and called upon Fudge, whom I found like a lying
rogue unready to go on board, but I did so jeer him that I made him get
every thing ready, and left Taylor and H. Russell to quicken him, and so
away and I by water on to White Hall, where I met his Royal Highnesse at a
Tangier Committee about this very thing, and did there satisfy him how
things are, at which all was pacified without any trouble, and I hope may
end well, but I confess I am at a real trouble for fear the rogue should
not do his work, and I come to shame and losse of the money I did hope
justly to have got by it.  Thence walked with Mr. Coventry to St. James's,
and there spent by his desire the whole morning reading of some old Navy
books given him of old Sir John Cooke's by the Archbishop of Canterbury
that now is; wherein the order that was observed in the Navy then, above
what it is now, is very observable, and fine things we did observe in our
reading.  Anon to dinner, after dinner to discourse of the business of the
Dutch warr, wherein he tells me the Dutch do in every particular, which
are but few and small things that we can demand of them, whatever cry we
unjustly make, do seem to offer at an accommodation, for they do owne that
it is not for their profit to have warr with England.  We did also talk of
a History of the Navy of England, how fit it were to be writ; and he did
say that it hath been in his mind to propose to me the writing of the
History of the late Dutch warr, which I am glad to hear, it being a thing
I much desire, and sorts mightily with my genius; and, if well done, may
recommend me much.  So he says he will get me an order for making of
searches to all records, &c., in order thereto, and I shall take great
delight in doing of it.  Thence by water down to the Tower, and thither
sent for Mr. Creed to my house, where he promised to be, and he and I down
to the ship, and find all things in pretty good order, and I hope will end
to my mind.  Thence having a gaily down to Greenwich, and there saw the
King's works, which are great, a-doing there, and so to the Cherry Garden,
and so carried some cherries home, and after supper to bed, my wife lying
with me, which from my not being thoroughly well, nor she, we have not
done above once these two or three weeks.

14th.  Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and had great
conflict about the flags again, and am vexed methought to see my Lord
Berkely not satisfied with what I said, but however I stop the King's
being abused by the flag makers for the present.  I do not know how it may
end, but I will do my best to preserve it.  So home to dinner, and after
dinner by coach to Kensington.  In the way overtaking Mr. Laxton, the
apothecary, with his wife and daughters, very fine young lasses, in a
coach; and so both of us to my Lady Sandwich, who hath lain this fortnight
here at Deane Hodges's.  Much company came hither to-day, my Lady
Carteret, &c., Sir William Wheeler and his lady, and, above all, Mr.
Becke, of Chelsy, and wife and daughter, my Lord's mistress, and one that
hath not one good feature in her face, and yet is a fine lady, of a fine
taille, and very well carriaged, and mighty discreet.  I took all the
occasion I could to discourse with the young ladies in her company to give
occasion to her to talk, which now and then she did, and that mighty
finely, and is, I perceive, a woman of such an ayre, as I wonder the less
at my Lord's favour to her, and I dare warrant him she hath brains enough
to entangle him.  Two or three houres we were in her company, going into
Sir H. Finche's garden, and seeing the fountayne, and singing there with
the ladies, and a mighty fine cool place it is, with a great laver of
water in the middle and the bravest place for musique I ever heard. After
much mirthe, discoursing to the ladies in defence of the city against the
country or court, and giving them occasion to invite themselves to-morrow
to me to dinner, to my venison pasty, I got their mother's leave, and so
good night, very well pleased with my day's work, and, above all, that I
have seen my Lord's mistresse.  So home to supper, and a little at my
office, and to bed.

15th.  Up and by appointment with Captain Witham (the Captain that brought
the newes of the disaster at Tangier, where my Lord Tiviott was slain) and
Mr. Tooker to Beares Quay, and there saw and more afterward at the several
grannarys several parcels of oates, and strange it is to hear how it will
heat itself if laid up green and not often turned.  We came not to any
agreement, but did cheapen several parcels, and thence away, promising to
send again to them.  So to the Victualling office, and then home.  And in
our garden I got Captain Witham to tell me the whole story of my Lord
Tiviott's misfortune; for he was upon the guard with his horse neare the
towne, when at a distance he saw the enemy appear upon a hill, a mile and
a half off, and made up to them, and with much ado escaped himself; but
what became of my Lord he neither knows nor thinks that any body but the
enemy can tell.  Our losse was about four hundred.  But he tells me that
the greater wonder is that my Lord Tiviott met no sooner with such a
disaster; for every day he did commit himself to more probable danger than
this, for now he had the assurance of all his scouts that there was no
enemy thereabouts; whereas he used every day to go out with two or three
with him, to make his discoveries, in greater danger, and yet the man that
could not endure to have anybody else to go a step out of order to
endanger himself.  He concludes him to be the man of the hardest fate to
lose so much honour at one blow that ever was.  His relation being done he
parted; and so I home to look after things for dinner.  And anon at noon
comes Mr. Creed by chance, and by and by the three young ladies:--[Lord
Sandwich's daughters.]--and very merry we were with our pasty, very well
baked; and a good dish of roasted chickens; pease, lobsters, strawberries.
And after dinner to cards: and about five o'clock, by water down to
Greenwich; and up to the top of the hill, and there played upon the ground
at cards.  And so to the Cherry Garden, and then by water singing finely
to the Bridge, and there landed; and so took boat again, and to Somersett
House.  And by this time, the tide being against us, it was past ten of
the clock; and such a troublesome passage, in regard of my Lady Paulina's
fearfullness, that in all my life I never did see any poor wretch in that
condition.  Being come hither, there waited for them their coach; but it
being so late, I doubted what to do how to get them home.  After half an
hour's stay in the street, I sent my wife home by coach with Mr. Creed's
boy; and myself and Creed in the coach home with them.  But, Lord! the
fear that my Lady Paulina was in every step of the way; and indeed at this
time of the night it was no safe thing to go that road; so that I was even
afeard myself, though I appeared otherwise.--We came safe, however, to
their house, where all were abed; we knocked them up, my Lady and all the
family being in bed.  So put them into doors; and leaving them with the
mayds, bade them good night, and then into the towne, Creed and I, it
being about twelve o'clock and past; and to several houses, inns, but
could get no lodging, all being in bed.  At the last house, at last, we
found some people drinking and roaring; and there got in, and after
drinking, got an ill bed, where

16th.  I lay in my drawers and stockings and wastecoate till five of the
clock, and so up; and being well pleased with our frolique, walked to
Knightsbridge, and there eat a messe of creame, and so to St. James's, and
there walked a little, and so I to White Hall, and took coach, and found
my wife well got home last night, and now in bed.  So I to the office,
where all the morning, and at noon to the 'Change, so home and to my
office, where Mr. Ackworth came to me (though he knows himself and I know
him to be a very knave), yet he came to me to discover the knavery of
other people like the most honest man in the world.  However, good use I
shall make of his discourse, for in this he is much in the right.  He
being gone I to the 'Change, Mr. Creed with me, after we had been by water
to see a vessell we have hired to carry more soldiers to Tangier, and also
visited a rope ground, wherein I learnt several useful things. The talk
upon the 'Change is, that De Ruyter is dead, with fifty men of his own
ship, of the plague, at Cales: that the Holland Embassador here do
endeavour to sweeten us with fair words; and things likely to be
peaceable.  Home after I had spoke with my cozen Richard Pepys upon the
'Change, about supplying us with bewpers from Norwich, which I should be
glad of, if cheap.  So home to supper and bed.

17th.  Up, and to my office, where I dispatched much business, and then
down by water to Woolwich to make a discovery of a cheate providing for us
in the working of some of our own ground Tows into new cordage, to be sold
to us for Riga cordage.  Thence to Mr. Falconer's, where I met Sir W.
Batten and Lady, and Captain Tinker, and there dined with them, and so to
the Dockyarde and to Deptford by water, and there very long informing
myself in the business of flags and bewpers and other things, and so home
late, being weary, and full of good information to-day, but I perceive the
corruptions of the Navy are of so many kinds that it is endless to look
after them, especially while such a one as Sir W. Batten discourages every
man that is honest.  So home to my office, there very late, and then to
supper and to bed mightily troubled in my mind to hear how Sir W. Batten
and Sir J. Minnes do labour all they can to abuse or enable others to
abuse the King.

18th.  From morning till 11 at night (only a little at dinner at home) at
my office very busy, setting many businesses in order to my great trouble,
but great content in the end.  So home to supper and to bed. Strange to
see how pert Sir W. Pen is to-day newly come from Portsmouth with his head
full of great reports of his service and the state of the ships there.
When that is over he will be just as another man again or worse.  But I
wonder whence Mr. Coventry should take all this care for him, to send for
him up only to look after his Irish business with my Lord Ormond and to
get the Duke's leave for him to come with so much officiousness, when I am
sure he knows him as well as I do as to his little service he do.

19th (Lord's day).  Up, and all the morning and afternoon (only at dinner
at home) at my office doing many businesses for want of time on the week
days.  In the afternoon the greatest shower of rain of a sudden and the
greatest and most continued thunder that ever I heard I think in my life.
In the evening home to my wife, and there talked seriously of several of
our family concernments, and among others of bringing Pall out of the
country to us here to try to put her off, which I am very desirous, and my
wife also of.  So to supper, prayers, which I have of late too much
omitted.  So to bed.

20th.  It having been a very cold night last night I had got some cold,
and so in pain by wind, and a sure precursor of pain is sudden letting off
farts, and when that stops, then my passages stop and my pain begins. Up
and did several businesses, and so with my wife by water to White Hall,
she to her father's, I to the Duke, where we did our usual business.  And
among other discourse of the Dutch, he was merrily saying how they print
that Prince Rupert, Duke of Albemarle, and my Lord Sandwich, are to be
Generalls; and soon after is to follow them "Vieux Pen;" and so the Duke
called him in mirth Old Pen.  They have, it seems, lately wrote to the
King, to assure him that their setting-out ships were only to defend their
fishing-trade, and to stay near home, not to annoy the King's subjects;
and to desire that he would do the like with his ships: which the King
laughs at, but yet is troubled they should think him such a child, to
suffer them to bring home their fish and East India Company's ships, and
then they will not care a fart for us.  Thence to Westminster Hall, it
being term time, meeting Mr. Dickering, he tells me how my Lady last week
went to see Mrs. Becke, the mother; and by and by the daughter came in,
but that my Lady do say herself, as he says, that she knew not for what
reason, for she never knew they had a daughter, which I do not believe.
She was troubled, and her heart did rise as soon as she appeared, and
seems the most ugly woman that ever she saw.  This if true were strange,
but I believe it is not.  Thence to my Lord's lodgings; and were merry
with the young ladies, who make a great story of their appearing before
their mother the morning after we carried them, the last week, home so
late; and that their mother took it very well, at least without any anger.
Here I heard how the rich widow, my Lady Gold, is married to one Neale,
after he had received a box on the eare by her brother (who was there a
sentinel, in behalf of some courtier) at the door; but made him draw, and
wounded him.  She called Neale up to her, and sent for a priest, married
presently, and went to bed.  The brother sent to the Court, and had a
serjeant sent for Neale; but Neale sent for him up to be seen in bed, and
she owned him for her husband: and so all is past.  It seems Sir H. Bennet
did look after her.  My Lady very pleasant.  After dinner came in Sir
Thomas Crew and Mr. Sidney, lately come from France, who is growne a
little, and a pretty youth he is; but not so improved as they did give him
out to be, but like a child still. But yet I can perceive he hath good
parts and good inclinations.  Thence with Creed, who dined here, to
Westminster to find out Mr. Hawly, and did, but he did not accept of my
offer of his being steward to my Lord at sea.  Thence alone to several
places about my law businesses, and with good success; at last I to Mr.
Townsend at the Wardrobe, and received kind words from him to be true to
me against Captain Ferrers his endeavours to get the place from my father
as my Lord hath promised him. Here met Will. Howe, and he went forth with
me; and by water back to White Hall to wait on my Lord, who is come back
from Hinchinbroke; where he has been about 4 or 5 days.  But I was never
more vexed to see how an over-officious visitt is received, for he
received me with as little concernment as in the middle of his discontent,
and a fool I am to be of so servile a humour, and vexed with that
consideration I took coach home, and could not get it off my mind all
night.  To supper and to bed, my wife finding fault with Besse for her
calling upon Jane that lived with us, and there heard Mrs. Harper and her
talk ill of us and not told us of it.  With which I was also vexed, and
told her soundly of it till she cried, poor wench, and I hope without
dissimulation, and yet I cannot tell; however, I was glad to see in what
manner she received it, and so to sleep.

21st.  Being weary yesterday with walking I sleep long, and at last up and
to the office, where all the morning.  At home to dinner, Mr. Deane with
me.  After dinner I to White Hall (setting down my wife by the way) to a
Committee of Tangier, where the Duke of Yorke, I perceive, do attend the
business very well, much better than any man there or most of them, and my
[mind] eased of some trouble I lay under for fear of his thinking ill of
me from the bad successe in the setting forth of these crew men to
Tangier.  Thence with Mr. Creed, and walked in the Parke, and so to the
New Exchange, meeting Mr. Moore, and he with us.  I shewed him no friendly
look, but he took no notice to me of the Wardrobe business, which vexes
me.  I perceive by him my Lord's business of his family and estate goes
very ill, and runs in debt mightily.  I would to God I were clear of it,
both as to my owne money and the bond of L1000, which I stand debtor for
him in, to my cozen Thomas Pepys.  Thence by coach home and to my office a
little, and so to supper and to bed.

22nd.  Up and I found Mr. Creed below, who staid with me a while, and then
I to business all the morning.  At noon to the 'Change and Coffee-house,
where great talke of the Dutch preparing of sixty sayle of ships. The
plague grows mightily among them, both at sea and land.  From the 'Change
to dinner to Trinity House with Sir W. Rider and Cutler, where a very good
dinner.  Here Sir G. Ascue dined also, who I perceive desires to make
himself known among the seamen.  Thence home, there coming to me my Lord
Peterborough's Sollicitor with a letter from him to desire present
dispatch in his business of freight, and promises me L50, which is good
newes, and I hope to do his business readily for him.  This much rejoiced
me.  All the afternoon at his business, and late at night comes the
Sollicitor again, and I with him at 9 o'clock to Mr. Povy's, and there
acquainted him with the business.  The money he won't pay without warrant,
but that will be got done in a few days.  So home by coach and to bed.

23rd.  Up, and to the office, and there we sat all the morning.  So to the
'Change, and then home to dinner and to my office, where till 10 at night
very busy, and so home to supper and to bed.  My cozen, Thomas Pepys, was
with me yesterday and I took occasion to speak to him about the bond I
stand bound for my Lord Sandwich to him in L1000.  I did very plainly,
obliging him to secrecy, tell him how the matter stands, yet with all duty
to my Lord my resolution to be bound for whatever he desires me for him,
yet that I would be glad he had any other security. I perceive by Mr.
Moore today that he hath been with my Lord, and my Lord how he takes it I
know not, but he is looking after other security and I am mighty glad of
it.  W. Howe was with me this afternoon, to desire some things to be got
ready for my Lord against his going down to his ship, which will be soon;
for it seems the King and both the Queenes intend to visit him.  The Lord
knows how my Lord will get out of this charge; for Mr. Moore tells me
to-day that he is L10,000 in debt and this will, with many other things
that daily will grow upon him (while he minds his pleasure as he do), set
him further backward.  But it was pretty this afternoon to hear W. Howe
mince the matter, and say that he do believe that my Lord is in debt L2000
or L3000, and then corrected himself and said, No, not so, but I am afraid
he is in debt L1000.  I pray God gets me well rid of his Lordship as to
his debt, and I care not.

24th.  Up and out with Captain Witham in several places again to look for
oats for Tangier, and among other places to the City granarys, where it
seems every company have their granary and obliged to keep such a quantity
of corne always there or at a time of scarcity to issue so much at so much
a bushell: and a fine thing it is to see their stores of all sorts, for
piles for the bridge, and for pipes, a thing I never saw before.

     [From the commencement of the reign of Henry VIII., or perhaps
     earlier, it was the custom of the City of London to provide against
     scarcity, by requiring each of the chartered Companies to keep in
     store a certain quantity of corn, which was to be renewed from time
     to time, and when required for that purpose, produced in the market
     for sale, at such times and prices, and in such quantities, as the
     Lord Mayor or Common Council should direct.  See the report of a
     case in the Court of Chancery, "Attorney-General v. Haberdashers'
     Company" (Mylne and Keens "Reports," vol. i., p. 420).--B.]

Thence to the office, and there busy all the morning.  At noon to my uncle
Wight's, and there dined, my wife being there all the morning. After
dinner to White Hall; and there met with Mr. Pierce, and he showed me the
Queene's bed-chamber, and her closett, where she had nothing but some
pretty pious pictures, and books of devotion; and her holy water at her
head as she sleeps, with her clock by her bed-side, wherein a lamp burns
that tells her the time of the night at any time.  Thence with him to the
Parke, and there met the Queene coming from Chappell, with her Mayds of
Honour, all in silver-lace gowns again: which is new to me, and that which
I did not think would have been brought up again.  Thence he carried me to
the King's closett: where such variety of pictures, and other things of
value and rarity, that I was properly confounded and enjoyed no pleasure
in the sight of them; which is the only time in my life that ever I was so
at a loss for pleasure, in the greatest plenty of objects to give it me.
Thence home, calling in many places and doing abundance of errands to my
great content, and at night weary home, where Mr. Creed waited for me, and
he and I walked in the garden, where he told me he is now in a hurry
fitting himself for sea, and that it remains that he deals as an ingenuous
man with me in the business I wot of, which he will do before he goes.
But I perceive he will have me do many good turns for him first, both as
to his bills coming to him in this office, and also in his absence at the
Committee of Tangier, which I promise, and as he acquits himself to me I
will willingly do.  I would I knew the worst of it, what it is he intends,
that so I may either quit my hands of him or continue my kindness still to
him.

25th.  We staid late, and he lay with me all night and rose very merry
talking, and excellent company he is, that is the truth of it, and a most
cunning man.  He being gone I to the office, where we sat all the morning.
At noon to dinner, and then to my office busy, and by and by home with Mr.
Deane to a lesson upon raising a Bend of Timbers,

     [This seems to refer to knee timber, of which there was not a
     sufficient supply.  A proposal was made to produce this bent wood
     artificially: "June 22, 1664.  Sir William Petty intimated that it
     seemed by the scarcity and greater rate of knee timber that nature
     did not furnish crooked wood enough for building: wherefore he
     thought it would be fit to raise by art, so much of it in
     proportion, as to reduce it to an equal rate with strait timber"
     (Birch's "History of the Royal Society,")]

and he being gone I to the office, and there came Captain Taylor, and he
and I home, and I have done all very well with him as to the business of
the last trouble, so that come what will come my name will be clear of any
false dealing with him.  So to my office again late, and then to bed.

26th (Lord's day).  Up, and Sir J. Minnes set me down at my Lord
Sandwich's, where I waited till his coming down, when he came, too, could
find little to say to me but only a general question or two, and so
good-bye.  Here his little daughter, my Lady Katharine was brought, who is
lately come from my father's at Brampton, to have her cheek looked after,
which is and hath long been sore.  But my Lord will rather have it be as
it is, with a scarr in her face, than endanger it being worse by
tampering.  He being gone, I went home, a little troubled to see he minds
me no more, and with Creed called at several churches, which, God knows,
are supplied with very young men, and the churches very empty; so home and
at our owne church looked in, and there heard one preach whom Sir W. Pen
brought, which he desired us yesterday to hear, that had been his chaplin
in Ireland, a very silly fellow.  So home and to dinner, and after dinner
a frolique took us, we would go this afternoon to the Hope; so my wife
dressed herself, and, with good victuals and drink, we took boat presently
and the tide with us got down, but it was night, and the tide spent by the
time we got to Gravesend; so there we stopped, but went not on shore, only
Creed, to get some cherries,

     [Pliny tells us that cherries were introduced into Britain by the
     Romans, and Lydgate alludes to them as sold in the London streets.
     Richard Haines, fruiterer to Henry VI IL, imported a number of
     cherry trees from Flanders, and planted them at Tenham, in Kent.
     Hence the fame of the Kentish cherries.]

and send a letter to the Hope, where the Fleete lies.  And so, it being
rainy, and thundering mightily, and lightning, we returned.  By and by the
evening turned mighty clear and moonshine; we got with great pleasure
home, about twelve o'clock, which did much please us, Creed telling pretty
stories in the boat.  He lay with me all night.

27th.  Up, and he and I walked to Paul's Church yard, and there saw Sir
Harry Spillman's book, and I bespoke it and others, and thence we took
coach, and he to my Lord's and I to St. James's, where we did our usual
business, and thence I home and dined, and then by water to Woolwich, and
there spent the afternoon till night under pretence of buying Captain
Blackman's house and grounds, and viewing the ground took notice of
Clothiers' cordage with which he, I believe, thinks to cheat the King.
That being done I by water home, it being night first, and there I find
our new mayd Jane come, a cook mayd.  So to bed.

28th.  Up, and this day put on a half shirt first this summer, it being
very hot; and yet so ill-tempered I am grown, that I am afeard I shall
catch cold, while all the world is ready to melt away.  To the office all
the morning, at noon to dinner at home, then to my office till the
evening, then out about several businesses and then by appointment to the
'Change, and thence with my uncle Wight to the Mum house, and there
drinking, he do complain of his wife most cruel as the most troublesome
woman in the world, and how she will have her will, saying she brought him
a portion and God knows what.  By which, with many instances more, I
perceive they do live a sad life together.  Thence to the Mitre and there
comes Dr. Burnett to us and Mr. Maes, but the meeting was chiefly to bring
the Doctor and me together, and there I began to have his advice about my
disease, and then invited him to my house: and I am resolved to put myself
into his hands.  Here very late, but I drank nothing, nor will, though he
do advise me to take care of cold drinks.  So home and to bed.

29th.  Up, and Mr. Shepley came to me, who is lately come to town; among
other things I hear by him how the children are sent for away from my
father's, but he says without any great discontent.  I am troubled there
should be this occasion of difference, and yet I am glad they are gone,
lest it should have come to worse.  He tells me how my brave dogg I did
give him, going out betimes one morning to Huntington, was set upon by
five other doggs, and worried to pieces, of which I am a little, and he
the most sorry I ever saw man for such a thing.  Forth with him and walked
a good way talking, then parted and I to the Temple, and to my cozen Roger
Pepys, and thence by water to Westminster to see Dean Honiwood, whom I had
not visited a great while.  He is a good-natured, but a very weak man, yet
a Dean, and a man in great esteem.  Thence walked to my Lord Sandwich's,
and there dined, my Lord there.  He was pleasant enough at table with me,
but yet without any discourse of business, or any regard to me when dinner
was over, but fell to cards, and my Lady and I sat two hours alone,
talking of the condition of her family's being greatly in debt, and many
children now coming up to provide for.  I did give her my sense very plain
of it, which she took well and carried further than myself, to the
bemoaning their condition, and remembering how finely things were ordered
about six years ago, when I lived there and my Lord at sea every year.
Thence home, doing several errands by the way.  So to my office, and there
till late at night, Mr. Comander coming to me for me to sign and seal the
new draft of my will, which I did do, I having altered something upon the
death of my brother Tom.  So home to supper and to bed.

30th.  Up, and to the office, where we sat all the morning.  At noon home
to dinner, Mr. Wayth with me, and by and by comes in Mr. Falconer and his
wife and dined with us, the first time she was ever here.  We had a pretty
good dinner, very merry in discourse, sat after dinner an hour or two,
then down by water to Deptford and Woolwich about getting of some business
done which I was bound to by my oath this month, and though in some things
I have not come to the height of my vow of doing all my business in paying
all my petty debts and receipt of all my petty monies due to me, yet I
bless God I am not conscious of any neglect in me that they are not done,
having not minded my pleasure at all, and so being resolved to take no
manner of pleasure till it be done, I doubt not God will forgive me for
not forfeiting the L10 promised.  Walked back from Woolwich to Greenwich
all alone, save a man that had a cudgell in his hand, and, though he told
me he laboured in the King's yarde, and many other good arguments that he
is an honest man, yet, God forgive me!  I did doubt he might knock me on
the head behind with his club.  But I got safe home.  Then to the making
up my month's accounts, and find myself still a gainer and rose to L951,
for which God be blessed.  I end the month with my mind full of business
and some sorrow that I have not exactly performed all my vowes, though my
not doing is not my fault, and shall be made good out of my first leisure.
Great doubts yet whether the Dutch wary go on or no.  The Fleet ready in
the Hope, of twelve sayle. The King and Queenes go on board, they say, on
Saturday next.  Young children of my Lord Sandwich gone with their mayds
from my mother's, which troubles me, it being, I hear from Mr. Shepley,
with great discontent, saying, that though they buy good meate, yet can
never have it before it stinks, which I am ashamed of.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                 JULY
                                 1664

July 1st.  Up and within all the morning, first bringing down my Tryangle
to my chamber below, having a new frame made proper for it to stand on. By
and by comes Dr. Burnett, who assures me that I have an ulcer either in
the kidneys or bladder, for my water, which he saw yesterday, he is sure
the sediment is not slime gathered by heat, but is a direct pusse. He did
write me down some direction what to do for it, but not with the
satisfaction I expected.

                       Dr. Burnett's advice to mee.

                 The Originall is fyled among my letters.

     Take of ye Rootes of Marsh-Mallows foure ounces, of Cumfry, of
     Liquorish, of each two ounces, of ye Mowers of St. John's Wort two
     Handsfull, of ye Leaves of Plantan, of Alehoofe, of each three
     handfulls, of Selfeheale, of Red Roses, of each one Handfull, of
     Cynament, of Nutmegg, of each halfe an ounce.  Beate them well, then
     powre upon them one Quart of old Rhenish wine, and about Six houres
     after strayne it and clarify it with ye white of an Egge, and with a
     sufficient quantity of sugar, boyle it to ye consistence of a Syrrup
     and reserve it for use.

     Dissolve one spoonefull of this Syrrup in every draught of Ale or
     beere you drink.

     Morning and evening swallow ye quantity of an hazle-nutt of Cyprus
     Terebintine.

     If you are bound or have a fit of ye Stone eate an ounce of Cassia
     new drawne, from ye poynt of a knife.

     Old Canary or Malaga wine you may drinke to three or 4 glasses, but
     noe new wine, and what wine you drinke, lett it bee at meales.-[From
     a slip of paper inserted in the Diary at this place.]

I did give him a piece, with good hopes, however, that his advice will be
of use to me, though it is strange that Mr. Hollyard should never say one
word of this ulcer in all his life to me.  He being gone, I to the
'Change, and thence home to dinner, and so to my office, busy till the
evening, and then by agreement came Mr. Hill and Andrews and one
Cheswicke, a maister who plays very well upon the Spinette, and we sat
singing Psalms till 9 at night, and so broke up with great pleasure, and
very good company it is, and I hope I shall now and then have their
company.  They being gone, I to my office till towards twelve o'clock, and
then home and to bed.  Upon the 'Change, this day, I saw how uncertain the
temper of the people is, that, from our discharging of about 200 that lay
idle, having nothing to do, upon some of our ships, which were ordered to
be fitted for service, and their works are now done, the towne do talk
that the King discharges all his men, 200 yesterday and 800 to-day, and
that now he hath got L100,000 in his hand, he values not a Dutch warr.
But I undeceived a great many, telling them how it is.

2nd.  Up and to the office, where all the morning.  At noon to the
'Change, and there, which is strange, I could meet with nobody that I
could invite home to my venison pasty, but only Mr. Alsopp and Mr. Lanyon,
whom I invited last night, and a friend they brought along with them.  So
home and with our venison pasty we had other good meat and good discourse.
After dinner sat close to discourse about our business of the victualling
of the garrison of Tangier, taking their prices of all provisions, and I
do hope to order it so that they and I also may get something by it, which
do much please me, for I hope I may get nobly and honestly with profit to
the King.  They being gone came Sir W. Warren, and he and I discoursed
long about the business of masts, and then in the evening to my office,
where late writing letters, and then home to look over some Brampton
papers, which I am under an oathe to dispatch before I spend one half
houre in any pleasure or go to bed before 12 o'clock, to which, by the
grace of God, I will be true.  Then to bed.  When I came home I found that
to-morrow being Sunday I should gain nothing by doing it to-night, and
to-morrow I can do it very well and better than to-night.  I went to bed
before my time, but with a resolution of doing the thing to better purpose
to-morrow.

3rd (Lord's day).  Up and ready, and all the morning in my chamber looking
over and settling some Brampton businesses.  At noon to dinner, where the
remains of yesterday's venison and a couple of brave green geese, which we
are fain to eat alone, because they will not keepe, which troubled us.
After dinner I close to my business, and before the evening did end it
with great content, and my mind eased by it.  Then up and spent the
evening walking with my wife talking, and it thundering and lightning all
the evening, and this yeare have had the most of thunder and lightning
they say of any in man's memory, and so it is, it seems, in France and
everywhere else.  So to prayers and to bed.

4th.  Up, and many people with me about business, and then out to several
places, and so at noon to my Lord Crew's, and there dined and very much
made of there by him.  He offered me the selling of some land of his in
Cambridgeshire, a purchase of about L1000, and if I can compass it I will.
After dinner I walked homeward, still doing business by the way, and at
home find my wife this day of her owne accord to have lain out 25s. upon a
pair of pendantes for her eares, which did vex me and brought both me and
her to very high and very foule words from her to me, such as trouble me
to think she should have in her mouth, and reflecting upon our old
differences, which I hate to have remembered.  I vowed to breake them, or
that she should go and get what she could for them again.  I went with
that resolution out of doors; the poor wretch afterwards in a little while
did send out to change them for her money again.  I followed Besse her
messenger at the 'Change, and there did consult and sent her back; I would
not have them changed, being satisfied that she yielded. So went home, and
friends again as to that business; but the words I could not get out of my
mind, and so went to bed at night discontented, and she came to bed to me,
but all would not make me friends, but sleep and rise in the morning
angry.  This day the King and the Queene went to visit my Lord Sandwich
and the fleete, going forth in the Hope.

     ["Their Majesties were treated at Tilbury Hope by the Earl of
     Sandwich, returning the same day, abundantly satisfied both with the
     dutiful respects of that honourable person and with the excellent
     condition of all matters committed to his charge" ("The Newes," July
     7th, 1664).--B.]

5th.  Up and to the office, where all the morning.  At noon to the 'Change
a little, then with W. Howe home and dined.  So after dinner to my office,
and there busy till late at night, having had among other things much
discourse with young Gregory about the Chest business, wherein Sir W.
Batten is so great a knave, and also with Alsop and Lanyon about the
Tangier victualling, wherein I hope to get something for myself.  Late
home to supper and to bed, being full of thoughts of a sudden resolution
this day taken upon the 'Change of going down to-morrow to the Hope.

6th.  Up very betimes, and my wife also, and got us ready; and about eight
o'clock, having got some bottles of wine and beer and neat's tongues, we
went to our barge at the Towre, where Mr. Pierce and his wife, and a
kinswoman and his sister, and Mrs. Clerke and her sister and cozen were to
expect us; and so set out for the Hope, all the way down playing at cards
and other sports, spending our time pretty merry.  Come to the Hope about
one and there showed them all the ships, and had a collacion of anchovies,
gammon, &c., and after an houre's stay or more, embarked again for home;
and so to cards and other sports till we came to Greenwich, and there Mrs.
Clerke and my wife and I on shore to an alehouse, for them to do their
business, and so to the barge again, having shown them the King's pleasure
boat; and so home to the Bridge, bringing night home with us; and it
rained hard, but we got them on foot to the Beare, and there put them into
a boat, and I back to my wife in the barge, and so to the Tower Wharf and
home, being very well pleased today with the company, especially Mrs.
Pierce, who continues her complexion as well as ever, and hath, at this
day, I think, the best complexion that ever I saw on any woman, young or
old, or child either, all days of my life.  Also Mrs. Clerke's kinswoman
sings very prettily, but is very confident in it; Mrs. Clerke herself
witty, but spoils all in being so conceited and making so great a flutter
with a few fine clothes and some bad tawdry things worne with them.  But
the charge of the barge lies heavy upon me, which troubles me, but it is
but once, and I may make Pierce do me some courtesy as great.  Being come
home, I weary to bed with sitting.  The reason of Dr. Clerke's not being
here was the King's being sicke last night and let blood, and so he durst
not come away to-day.

7th.  Up, and this day begun, the first day this year, to put off my
linnen waistcoat, but it happening to be a cool day I was afraid of taking
cold, which troubles me, and is the greatest pain I have in the world to
think of my bad temper of my health.  At the office all the morning.
Dined at home, to my office to prepare some things against a Committee of
Tangier this afternoon.  So to White Hall, and there found the Duke and
twenty more reading their commission (of which I am, and was also sent to,
to come) for the Royall Fishery, which is very large, and a very serious
charter it is; but the company generally so ill fitted for so serious a
worke that I do much fear it will come to little.  That being done, and
not being able to do any thing for lacke of an oathe for the Governor and
Assistants to take, we rose.  Then our Committee for the Tangier
victualling met and did a little, and so up, and I and Mr. Coventry walked
in the garden half an hour, talking of the business of our masts, and
thence away and with Creed walked half an hour or more in the Park, and
thence to the New Exchange to drink some creame, but missed it and so
parted, and I home, calling by the way for my new bookes, viz., Sir H.
Spillman's "Whole Glossary," "Scapula's Lexicon," and Shakespeare's plays,
which I have got money out of my stationer's bills to pay for.  So home
and to my office a while, and then home and to bed, finding myself pretty
well for all my waistecoate being put off to-day. The king is pretty well
to-day, though let blood the night before yesterday.

8th.  Up and called out by my Lord Peterborough's gentleman to Mr. Povy's
to discourse about getting of his money, wherein I am concerned in hopes
of the L50 my Lord hath promised me, but I dare not reckon myself sure of
it till I have it in my main,--[hand.]--for these Lords are hard to be
trusted.  Though I well deserve it.  I staid at Povy's for his coming in,
and there looked over his stables and every thing, but notwithstanding all
the times I have been there I do yet find many fine things to look on.
Thence to White Hall a little, to hear how the King do, he not having been
well these three days.  I find that he is pretty well again. So to Paul's
Churchyarde about my books, and to the binder's and directed the doing of
my Chaucer,

     [This was Speght's edition of 1602, which is still in the Pepysian
     Library.  The book is bound in calf, with brass clasps and bosses.
     It is not lettered.]

though they were not full neate enough for me, but pretty well it is; and
thence to the clasp-maker's to have it clasped and bossed.  So to the
'Change and home to dinner, and so to my office till 5 o'clock, and then
came Mr. Hill and Andrews, and we sung an houre or two.  Then broke up and
Mr. Alsop and his company came and consulted about our Tangier victualling
and brought it to a good head.  So they parted, and I to supper and to
bed.

9th.  Up, and at the office all the morning.  In the afternoon by coach
with Sir J. Minnes to White Hall, and there to a Committee for Fishing;
but the first thing was swearing to be true to the Company, and we were
all sworne; but a great dispute we had, which, methought, is very ominous
to the Company; some, that we should swear to be true to the best of our
power, and others to the best of our understanding; and carried in the
last, though in that we are the least able to serve the Company, because
we would not be obliged to attend the business when we can, but when we
list.  This consideration did displease me, but it was voted and so went.
We did nothing else, but broke up till a Committee of Guinny was set and
ended, and then met again for Tangier, and there I did my business about
my Lord Peterborough's order and my own for my expenses for the garrison
lately.  So home, by the way calling for my Chaucer and other books, and
that is well done to my mind, which pleased me well.  So to my office till
late writing letters, and so home to my wife to supper and bed, where we
have not lain together because of the heat of the weather a good while,
but now against her going into the country.

10th (Lord's day).  Up and by water, towards noon, to Somersett House, and
walked to my Lord Sandwich's, and there dined with my Lady and the
children.  And after some ordinary discourse with my Lady, after dinner
took our leaves and my wife hers, in order to her going to the country
to-morrow.  But my Lord took not occasion to speak one word of my father
or mother about the children at all, which I wonder at, and begin I will
not.  Here my Lady showed us my Lady Castlemayne's picture, finely done;
given my Lord; and a most beautiful picture it is.  Thence with my Lady
Jemimah and Mr. Sidney to St. Gyles's Church, and there heard a long,
poore sermon.  Thence set them down and in their coach to Kate Joyce's
christening, where much company, good service of sweetmeates; and after an
houre's stay, left them, and in my Lord's coach--his noble, rich
coach--home, and there my wife fell to putting things in order against her
going to-morrow, and I to read, and so to bed, where I not well, and so
had no pleasure at all with my poor wife.

11th.  But betimes up this morning, and, getting ready, we by coach to
Holborne, where, at nine o'clock, they set out, and I and my man Will on
horseback, by my wife, to Barnett; a very pleasant day; and there dined
with her company, which was very good; a pretty gentlewoman with her, that
goes but to Huntington, and a neighbour to us in towne.  Here we staid two
hours and then parted for all together, and my poor wife I shall soon want
I am sure.  Thence I and Will to see the Wells, half a mile off,

     [The mineral springs at Barnet Common, nearly a mile to the west of
     High Barnet.  The discovery of the wells was announced in the
     "Perfect Diurnall" of June 5th, 1652, and Fuller, writing in 1662,
     says that there are hopes that the waters may "save as many lives as
     were lost in the fatal battle at Barnet" ("Worthies," Herts).  A
     pamphlet on "The Barnet Well Water" was published by the Rev. W. M.
     Trinder, M.D., as late as the year 1800, but in 1840 the old well-
     house was pulled down.]

and there I drank three glasses, and went and walked and came back and
drunk two more; the woman would have had me drink three more; but I could
not, my belly being full, but this wrought very well, and so we rode home,
round by Kingsland, Hackney, and Mile End till we were quite weary, and my
water working at least 7 or 8 times upon the road, which pleased me well,
and so home weary, and not being very well, I betimes to bed, and there
fell into a most mighty sweat in the night, about eleven o'clock, and
there, knowing what money I have in the house and hearing a noyse, I begun
to sweat worse and worse, till I melted almost to water. I rung, and could
not in half an houre make either of the wenches hear me, and this made me
fear the more, lest they might be gaga; and then I begun to think that
there was some design in a stone being flung at the window over our
stayres this evening, by which the thiefes meant to try what looking there
would be after them and know our company.  These thoughts and fears I had,
and do hence apprehend the fears of all rich men that are covetous and
have much money by them.  At last Jane rose, and then I understand it was
only the dogg wants a lodging and so made a noyse.  So to bed, but hardly
slept, at last did, and so till morning,

12th.  And so rose, called up by my Lord Peterborough's gentleman about
getting his Lord's money to-day of Mr. Povy, wherein I took such order,
that it was paid, and I had my L50 brought me, which comforts my heart. We
sat at the office all the morning, then at home.  Dined alone; sad for
want of company and not being very well, and know not how to eat alone.
After dinner down with Sir G. Carteret, Sir J. Minnes, and Sir W. Batten
to view, and did like a place by Deptford yard to lay masts in.  By and by
comes Mr. Coventry, and after a little stay he and I down to Blackwall, he
having a mind to see the yarde, which we did, and fine storehouses there
are and good docks, but of no great profit to him that oweth them for
ought we see.

     [For "owneth."  This sense is very common in Shakespeare.  In the
     original edition of the authorized version of the Bible we read: "So
     shall the Jews at Jerusalem bind the man that oweth this girdle"
     (Acts xxi.  I i) Nares's Glossary.]

So home by water with him, having good discourse by the way, and so I to
the office a while, and late home to supper and to bed.

13th.  Up and to my office, at noon (after having at an alehouse hard by
discoursed with one Mr. Tyler, a neighbour, and one Captain Sanders about
the discovery of some pursers that have sold their provisions) I to my
Lord Sandwich, thinking to have dined there, but they not dining at home,
I with Captain Ferrers to Mr. Barwell the King's Squire Sadler, where
about this time twelvemonths I dined before at a good venison pasty.  The
like we had now, and very good company, Mr. Tresham and others.  Thence to
White Hall to the Fishery, and there did little.  So by water home, and
there met Lanyon, &c., about Tangier matters, and so late to my office,
and thence home and to bed.  Mr. Moore was with me late to desire me to
come to my Lord Sandwich tomorrow morning, which I shall, but I wonder
what my business is.

14th.  My mind being doubtful what the business should be, I rose a little
after four o'clock, and abroad.  Walked to my Lord's, and nobody up, but
the porter rose out of bed to me so I back again to Fleete Streete, and
there bought a little book of law; and thence, hearing a psalm sung, I
went into St. Dunstan's, and there heard prayers read, which, it seems, is
done there every morning at six o'clock; a thing I never did do at a
chappell, but the College Chappell, in all my life. Thence to my Lord's
again, and my Lord being up, was sent for up, and he and I alone.  He did
begin with a most solemn profession of the same confidence in and love for
me that he ever had, and then told me what a misfortune was fallen upon me
and him: in me, by a displeasure which my Lord Chancellor did show to him
last night against me, in the highest and most passionate manner that ever
any man did speak, even to the not hearing of any thing to be said to him:
but he told me, that he did say all that could be said for a man as to my
faithfullnesse and duty to his Lordship, and did me the greatest right
imaginable.  And what should the business be, but that I should be forward
to have the trees in Clarendon Park marked and cut down, which he, it
seems, hath bought of my Lord Albemarle; when, God knows!  I am the most
innocent man in the world in it, and did nothing of myself, nor knew of
his concernment therein, but barely obeyed my Lord Treasurer's warrant for
the doing thereof.  And said that I did most ungentlemanlike with him, and
had justified the rogues in cutting down a tree of his; and that I had
sent the veriest Fanatique [Deane] that is in England to mark them, on
purpose to nose--[provoke]--him.  All which, I did assure my Lord, was
most properly false, and nothing like it true; and told my Lord the whole
passage.  My Lord do seem most nearly affected; he is partly, I believe,
for me, and partly for himself.  So he advised me to wait presently upon
my Lord, and clear myself in the most perfect manner I could, with all
submission and assurance that I am his creature both in this and all other
things; and that I do owne that all I have, is derived through my Lord
Sandwich from his Lordship.  So, full of horror, I went, and found him
busy in tryals of law in his great room; and it being Sitting-day, durst
not stay, but went to my Lord and told him so: whereupon he directed me to
take him after dinner; and so away I home, leaving my Lord mightily
concerned for me.  I to the office, and there sat busy all the morning.
At noon to the 'Change, and from the 'Change over with Alsopp and the
others to the Pope's Head tavern, and there staid a quarter of an hour,
and concluded upon this, that in case I got them no more than 3s. per week
per man I should have of them but L150 per ann., but to have it without
any adventure or charge, but if I got them 3s. 2d., then they would give
me L300 in the like manner.  So I directed them to draw up their tender in
a line or two against the afternoon, and to meet me at White Hall.  So I
left them, and I to my Lord Chancellor's; and there coming out after
dinner I accosted him, telling him that I was the unhappy Pepys that had
fallen into his high displeasure, and come to desire him to give me leave
to make myself better understood to his Lordship, assuring him of my duty
and service.  He answered me very pleasingly, that he was confident upon
the score of my Lord Sandwich's character of me, but that he had reason to
think what he did, and desired me to call upon him some evening: I named
to-night, and he accepted of it.  So with my heart light I to White Hall,
and there after understanding by a stratagem, and yet appearing wholly
desirous not to understand Mr. Gauden's price when he desired to show it
me, I went down and ordered matters in our tender so well that at the
meeting by and by I was ready with Mr. Gauden's and his, both directed him
a letter to me to give the board their two tenders, but there being none
but the Generall Monk and Mr. Coventry and Povy and I, I did not think fit
to expose them to view now, but put it off till Saturday, and so with good
content rose.  Thence I to the Half Moone, against the 'Change, to
acquaint Lanyon and his friends of our proceedings, and thence to my Lord
Chancellor's, and there heard several tryals, wherein I perceive my Lord
is a most able and ready man.  After all done, he himself called, "Come,
Mr. Pepys, you and I will take a turn in the garden."  So he was led down
stairs, having the goute, and there walked with me, I think, above an
houre, talking most friendly, yet cunningly.  I told him clearly how
things were; how ignorant I was of his Lordship's concernment in it; how I
did not do nor say one word singly, but what was done was the act of the
whole Board.  He told me by name that he was more angry with Sir G.
Carteret than with me, and also with the whole body of the Board.  But
thinking who it was of the Board that knew him least, he did place his
fear upon me; but he finds that he is indebted to none of his friends
there.  I think I did thoroughly appease him, till he thanked me for my
desire and pains to satisfy him; and upon my desiring to be directed who I
should of his servants advise with about this business, he told me nobody,
but would be glad to hear from me himself.  He told me he would not direct
me in any thing, that it might not be said that the Lord Chancellor did
labour to abuse the King; or (as I offered) direct the suspending the
Report of the Purveyors but I see what he means, and I will make it my
worke to do him service in it.  But, Lord! to see how he is incensed
against poor Deane, as a fanatique rogue, and I know not what: and what he
did was done in spite to his Lordship, among all his friends and tenants.
He did plainly say that he would not direct me in any thing, for he would
not put himself into the power of any man to say that he did so and so;
but plainly told me as if he would be glad I did something.  Lord! to see
how we poor wretches dare not do the King good service for fear of the
greatness of these men.  He named Sir G. Carteret, and Sir J. Minnes, and
the rest; and that he was as angry with them all as me.  But it was
pleasant to think that, while he was talking to me, comes into the garden
Sir G. Carteret; and my Lord avoided speaking with him, and made him and
many others stay expecting him, while I walked up and down above an houre,
I think; and would have me walk with my hat on.  And yet, after all this,
there has been so little ground for this his jealousy of me, that I am
sometimes afeard that he do this only in policy to bring me to his side by
scaring me; or else, which is worse, to try how faithfull I would be to
the King; but I rather think the former of the two.  I parted with great
assurance how I acknowledged all I had to come from his Lordship; which he
did not seem to refuse, but with great kindness and respect parted.  So I
by coach home, calling at my Lord's, but he not within.  At my office
late, and so home to eat something, being almost starved for want of
eating my dinner to-day, and so to bed, my head being full of great and
many businesses of import to me.

15th.  Up, and to my Lord Sandwich's; where he sent for me up, and I did
give my Lord an account of what had passed with my Lord Chancellor
yesterday; with which he was well pleased, and advised me by all means to
study in the best manner I could to serve him in this business.  After
this discourse ended, he begun to tell me that he had now pitched upon his
day of going to sea upon Monday next, and that he would now give me an
account how matters are with him.  He told me that his work now in the
world is only to keep up his interest at Court, having little hopes to get
more considerably, he saying that he hath now about L8,000 per annum. It
is true, he says, he oweth about L10,000; but he hath been at great
charges in getting things to this pass in his estate; besides his building
and good goods that he hath bought.  He says he hath now evened his
reckonings at the Wardrobe till Michaelmas last, and hopes to finish it to
Ladyday before he goes.  He says now there is due, too, L7,000 to him
there, if he knew how to get it paid, besides L2000 that Mr. Montagu do
owe him.  As to his interest, he says that he hath had all the injury done
him that ever man could have by another bosom friend that knows all his
secrets, by Mr. Montagu; but he says that the worst of it all is past, and
he gone out and hated, his very person by the King, and he believes the
more upon the score of his carriage to him; nay, that the Duke of Yorke
did say a little while since in his closett, that he did hate him because
of his ungratefull carriage to my Lord of Sandwich.  He says that he is as
great with the Chancellor, or greater, than ever in his life.  That with
the King he is the like; and told me an instance, that whereas he formerly
was of the private council to the King before he was last sicke, and that
by the sickness an interruption was made in his attendance upon him; the
King did not constantly call him, as he used to do, to his private
council, only in businesses of the sea and the like; but of late the King
did send a message to him by Sir Harry Bennet, to excuse the King to my
Lord that he had not of late sent for him as he used to do to his private
council, for it was not out of any distaste, but to avoid giving offence
to some others whom he did not name; but my Lord supposes it might be
Prince Rupert, or it may be only that the King would rather pass it by an
excuse, than be thought unkind: but that now he did desire him to attend
him constantly, which of late he hath done, and the King never more kind
to him in his life than now.  The Duke of Yorke, as much as is possible;
and in the business of late, when I was to speak to my Lord about his
going to sea, he says that he finds the Duke did it with the greatest
ingenuity and love in the world; "and whereas," says my Lord, "here is a
wise man hard by that thinks himself so, and would be thought so, and it
may be is in a degree so (naming by and by my Lord Crew), would have had
me condition with him that neither Prince Rupert nor any body should come
over his head, and I know not what."  The Duke himself hath caused in his
commission, that he be made Admirall of this and what other ships or
fleets shall hereafter be put out after these; which is very noble.  He
tells me in these cases, and that of Mr. Montagu's, and all others, he
finds that bearing of them patiently is his best way, without noise or
trouble, and things wear out of themselves and come fair again.  But, says
he, take it from me, never to trust too much to any man in the world, for
you put yourself into his power; and the best seeming friend and real
friend as to the present may have or take occasion to fall out with you,
and then out comes all.  Then he told me of Sir Harry Bennet, though they
were always kind, yet now it is become to an acquaintance and familiarity
above ordinary, that for these months he hath done no business but with my
Lord's advice in his chamber, and promises all faithfull love to him and
service upon all occasions.  My Lord says, that he hath the advantage of
being able by his experience to helpe and advise him; and he believes that
that chiefly do invite Sir Harry to this manner of treating him.  "Now,"
says my Lord, "the only and the greatest embarras that I have in the world
is, how to behave myself to Sir H. Bennet and my Lord Chancellor, in case
that there do lie any thing under the embers about my Lord Bristoll, which
nobody can tell; for then," says he, "I must appear for one or other, and
I will lose all I have in the world rather than desert my Lord Chancellor:
so that," says he, "I know not for my life what to do in that case."  For
Sir H. Bennet's love is come to the height, and his confidence, that he
hath given my Lord a character, and will oblige my Lord to correspond with
him.  "This," says he, "is the whole condition of my estate and interest;
which I tell you, because I know not whether I shall see you again or no."
Then as to the voyage, he thinks it will be of charge to him, and no
profit; but that he must not now look after nor think to encrease, but
study to make good what he hath, that what is due to him from the Wardrobe
or elsewhere may be paid, which otherwise would fail, and all a man hath
be but small content to him.  So we seemed to take leave one of another;
my Lord of me, desiring me that I would write to him and give him
information upon all occasions in matters that concern him; which, put
together with what he preambled with yesterday, makes me think that my
Lord do truly esteem me still, and desires to preserve my service to him;
which I do bless God for.  In the middle of our discourse my Lady Crew
came in to bring my Lord word that he hath another son, my Lady being
brought to bed just now, I did not think her time had been so nigh, but
she's well brought to bed, for which God be praised!  and send my Lord to
study the laying up of something the more!  Then with Creed to St.
James's, and missing Mr. Coventry, to White Hall; where, staying for him
in one of the galleries, there comes out of the chayre-room Mrs. Stewart,
in a most lovely form, with her hair all about her eares, having her
picture taking there.  There was the King and twenty more, I think,
standing by all the while, and a lovely creature she in this dress seemed
to be.  Thence to the 'Change by coach, and so home to dinner and then to
my office.  In the evening Mr. Hill, Andrews and I to my chamber to sing,
which we did very pleasantly, and then to my office again, where very late
and so home, with my mind I bless God in good state of ease and body of
health, only my head at this juncture very full of business, how to get
something.  Among others what this rogue Creed will do before he goes to
sea, for I would fain be rid of him and see what he means to do, for I
will then declare myself his firm friend or enemy.

16th.  Up in the morning, my head mightily confounded with the great deale
of business I have upon me to do.  But to the office, and there dispatched
Mr. Creed's business pretty well about his bill; but then there comes W.
Howe for my Lord's bill of Imprest for L500 to carry with him this voyage,
and so I was at a loss how to carry myself in it, Creed being there, but
there being no help I delivered it to them both, and let them contend,
when I perceive they did both endeavour to have it, but W. Howe took it,
and the other had the discretion to suffer it.  But I think I cleared
myself to Creed that it past not from any practice of mine.  At noon rose
and did some necessary business at the 'Change.  Thence to Trinity House
to a dinner which Sir G. Carteret makes there as Maister this year.
Thence to White Hall to the Tangier Committee, and there, above my
expectation, got the business of our contract for the victualling carried
for my people, viz., Alsopp, Lanyon, and Yeabsly; and by their promise I
do thereby get L300 per annum to myself, which do overjoy me; and the
matter is left to me to draw up.  Mr. Lewes was in the gallery and is
mightily amazed at it, and I believe Mr. Gauden will make some stir about
it, for he wrote to Mr. Coventry to-day about it to argue why he should
for the King's convenience have it, but Mr. Coventry most justly did argue
freely for them that served cheapest.  Thence walked a while with Mr.
Coventry in the gallery, and first find that he is mighty cold in his
present opinion of Mr. Peter Pett for his flagging and doing things so
lazily there, and he did also surprise me with a question why Deane did
not bring in their report of the timber of Clarendon.  What he means
thereby I know not, but at present put him off; nor do I know how to steer
myself: but I must think of it, and advise with my Lord Sandwich.  Thence
with Creed by coach to my Lord Sandwich's, and there I got Mr. Moore to
give me my Lord's hand for my receipt of L109 more of my money of Sir G.
Carteret, so that then his debt to me will be under L500, I think.  This
do ease my mind also.  Thence carried him and W. Howe into London, and set
them down at Sir G. Carteret's to receive some money, and I home and there
busy very late, and so home to supper and to bed, with my mind in pretty
good ease, my business being in a pretty good condition every where.

17th (Lord's day).  All the morning at my office doing business there, it
raining hard.  So dined at home alone.  After dinner walked to my Lord's,
and there found him and much other guests at table at dinner, and it seems
they have christened his young son to-day-called him James.  I got a piece
of cake.  I got my Lord to signe and seale my business about my selling of
Brampton land, which though not so full as I would, yet is as full as I
can at present.  Walked home again, and there fell to read, and by and by
comes my uncle Wight, Dr. Burnett, and another gentleman, and talked and
drank, and the Doctor showed me the manner of eating, turpentine, which
pleases me well, for it is with great ease.  So they being gone, I to
supper and to bed.

18th.  Up, and walked to my Lord's, and there took my leave of him, he
seeming very friendly to me in as serious a manner as ever in his life,
and I believe he is very confident of me.  He sets out this morning for
Deale.  Thence to St. James's to the Duke, and there did our usual
business.  He discourses very freely of a warr with Holland, to begin
about winter, so that I believe we shall come to it.  Before we went up to
the Duke, Sir G. Carteret and I did talk together in the Parke about my
Lord Chancellor's business of the timber; he telling me freely that my
Lord Chancellor was never so angry with him in all his life, as he was for
this business, in great passion; and that when he saw me there, he knew
what it was about.  And plots now with me how we may serve my Lord, which
I am mightily glad of; and I hope together we may do it.  Thence to
Westminster to my barber's, to have my Periwigg he lately made me cleansed
of its nits, which vexed me cruelly that he should put such a thing into
my hands.  Here meeting his mayd Jane, that has lived with them so long, I
talked with her, and sending her of an errand to Dr. Clerk's, did meet
her, and took her into a little alehouse in Brewers Yard, and there did
sport with her, without any knowledge of her though, and a very pretty
innocent girl she is.  Thence to my Lord Chancellor's, but he being busy I
went away to the 'Change, and so home to dinner.  By and by comes Creed,
and I out with him to Fleet Street, and he to Mr. Povy's, I to my Lord
Chancellor's, and missing him again walked to Povy's, and there saw his
new perspective in his closet.  Povy, to my great surprise and wonder, did
here attacque me in his own and Mr. Bland's behalf that I should do for
them both for the new contractors for the victualling of the garrison.
Which I am ashamed that he should ask of me, nor did I believe that he was
a man that did seek benefit in such poor things.  Besides that he
professed that he did not believe that I would have any hand myself in the
contract, and yet here declares that he himself would have profit by it,
and himself did move me that Sir W. Rider might join, and Ford with
Gauden.  I told him I had no interest in them, but I fear they must do
something to him, for he told me that those of the Mole did promise to
consider him.  Thence home and Creed with me, and there he took occasion
to owne his obligations to me, and did lay down twenty pieces in gold upon
my shelf in my closett, which I did not refuse, but wish and expected
should have been more.  But, however, this is better than nothing, and now
I am out of expectation, and shall henceforward know how to deal with him.
After discourse of settling his matters here, we went out by coach, and he
'light at the Temple, and there took final leave of me, in order to his
following my Lord to-morrow.  I to my Lord Chancellor, and discoursed his
business with him.  I perceive, and he says plainly, that he will not have
any man to have it in his power to say that my Lord Chancellor did
contrive the wronging the King of his timber; but yet I perceive, he would
be glad to have service done him therein; and told me Sir G. Carteret hath
told him that he and I would look after his business to see it done in the
best manner for him.  Of this I was glad, and so away.  Thence home, and
late with my Tangier men about drawing up their agreement with us, wherein
I find much trouble, and after doing as much as we could to-night, broke
up and I to bed.

19th.  Up, and to the office, where we sat all the morning.  At noon dined
alone at home.  After dinner Sir W. Batten and I down by water to
Woolwich, where coming to the ropeyarde we are told that Mr. Falconer, who
hath been ill of a relapse these two days, is just now dead.  We went up
to his widow, who is sicke in bed also.  The poor woman in great sorrow,
and entreats our friendship, which we shall, I think, in every thing do
for her.  I am sure I will.  Thence to the Docke, and there in Sheldon's
garden eat some fruit; so to Deptford a little, and thence home, it
raining mightily, and being cold I doubted my health after it. At the
office till 9 o'clock about Sir W. Warren's contract for masts, and then
at home with Lanyon and Yeabsly till 12 and past about their contract for
Tangier, wherein they and I differed, for I would have it drawn to the
King's advantage, as much as might be, which they did not like, but parted
good friends; however, when they were gone, I wished that I had forborne
any disagreement till I had had their promise to me in writing.  They
being gone, I to bed.

20th.  Up, and a while to my office, and then home with Mr. Deane till
dinner, discoursing upon the business of my Lord Chancellor's timber in
Clarendon Parke, and how to make a report therein without offending him;
which at last I drew up, and hope it will please him.  But I would to God
neither I nor he ever had had any thing to have done with it!  Dined
together with a good pig, and then out by coach to White Hall, to the
Committee for Fishing; but nothing done, it being a great day to-day there
upon drawing at the Lottery of Sir Arthur Slingsby.  I got in and stood by
the two Queenes and the Duchesse of Yorke, and just behind my Lady
Castlemayne, whom I do heartily adore; and good sport it was to see how
most that did give their ten pounds did go away with a pair of globes only
for their lot, and one gentlewoman, one Mrs. Fish, with the only blanke.
And one I staid to see drew a suit of hangings valued at L430, and they
say are well worth the money, or near it.  One other suit there is better
than that; but very many lots of three and fourscore pounds.  I observed
the King and Queenes did get but as poor lots as any else.  But the wisest
man I met with was Mr. Cholmley, who insured as many as would, from
drawing of the one blank for 12d.; in which case there was the whole
number of persons to one, which I think was three or four hundred.  And so
he insured about 200 for 200 shillings, so that he could not have lost if
one of them had drawn it, for there was enough to pay the L10; but it
happened another drew it, and so he got all the money he took.  I left the
lottery, and went to a play, only a piece of it, which was the Duke's
house, "Worse and Worse;" just the same manner of play, and writ, I
believe, by the same man as "The Adventures of Five Hours;" very pleasant
it was, and I begin to admire Harris more than ever.  Thence to
Westminster to see Creed, and he and I took a walk in the Parke.  He is
ill, and not able yet to set out after my Lord, but will do to-morrow. So
home, and late at my office, and so home to bed.  This evening being
moonshine I played a little late upon my flageolette in the garden.  But
being at Westminster Hall I met with great news that Mrs. Lane is married
to one Martin, one that serves Captain Marsh.  She is gone abroad with him
to-day, very fine.  I must have a bout with her very shortly to see how
she finds marriage.

21st.  Up, and to the office, where we sat all the morning, among other
things making a contract with Sir W. Warren for almost 1000 Gottenburg
masts, the biggest that ever was made in the Navy, and wholly of my
compassing and a good one I hope it is for the King.  Dined at Sir W.
Batten's, where I have not eat these many months.  Sir G. Carteret, Mr.
Coventry, Sir J. Minnes, and myself there only, and my Lady.  A good
venison pasty, and very merry, and pleasant I made myself with my Lady,
and she as much to me.  This morning to the office comes Nicholas Osborne,
Mr. Gauden's clerke, to desire of me what piece of plate I would choose to
have a L100, or thereabouts, bestowed upon me in, he having order to lay
out so much; and, out of his freedom with me, do of himself come to make
this question.  I a great while urged my unwillingnesse to take any, not
knowing how I could serve Mr. Gauden, but left it wholly to himself; so at
noon I find brought home in fine leather cases, a pair of the noblest
flaggons that ever I saw all the days of my life; whether I shall keepe
them or no I cannot tell; for it is to oblige me to him in the business of
the Tangier victualling, wherein I doubt I shall not; but glad I am to see
that I shall be sure to get something on one side or other, have it which
will: so, with a merry heart, I looked upon them, and locked them up.
After dinner to [give] my Lord Chancellor a good account of his business,
and he is very well pleased therewith, and carries himself with great
discretion to me, without seeming over glad or beholding to me; and yet I
know that he do think himself very well served by me.  Thence to
Westminster and to Mrs. Lane's lodgings, to give her joy, and there
suffered me to deal with her as I hoped to do, and by and by her husband
comes, a sorry, simple fellow, and his letter to her which she proudly
showed me a simple, nonsensical thing.  A man of no discourse, and I fear
married her to make a prize of, which he is mistaken in, and a sad wife I
believe she will prove to him, for she urged me to appoint a time as soon
as he is gone out of town to give her a meeting next week.  So by water
with a couple of cozens of Mrs. Lane's, and set them down at Queenhive,
and I through Bridge home, and there late at business, and so home to
supper and to bed.

22nd.  Up and to my office, where busy all the morning.  At noon to the
'Change, and so home to dinner, and then down by water to Deptford, where
coming too soon, I spent an houre in looking round the yarde, and putting
Mr. Shish

     [Jonas Shish, master-shipwright at Deptford.  There are several
     papers of his among the State Papers.  "I was at the funeral of old
     Mr. Shish, Master Shipwright of His Majesty's Yard here, an honest
     and remarkable man, and his death a public loss, for his excellent
     success in building ships (though altogether illiterate) and for
     bringing up so many of his children to be able artists.  I held up
     the pall with three knights who did him that honour, and he was
     worthy of it.  It was the custom of this good man to rise in the
     night and pray, kneeling in his own coffin, which he had lying by
     him for many years.  He was born that famous year, the Gunpowder-
     plot, 1605" (Evelyn's "Diary," May 13th, 1680).]

to measure a piece or two of timber, which he did most cruelly wrong, and
to the King's losse 12 or 13s. in a piece of 28 feet in contents.  Thence
to the Clerke of the Cheques, from whose house Mr. Falconer was buried
to-day; Sir J. Minnes and I the only principal officers that were there.
We walked to church with him, and then I left them without staying the
sermon and straight home by water, and there find, as I expected, Mr.
Hill, and Andrews, and one slovenly and ugly fellow, Seignor Pedro, who
sings Italian songs to the theorbo most neatly, and they spent the whole
evening in singing the best piece of musique counted of all hands in the
world, made by Seignor Charissimi, the famous master in Rome.  Fine it
was, indeed, and too fine for me to judge of. They have spoke to Pedro to
meet us every weeke, and I fear it will grow a trouble to me if we once
come to bid judges to meet us, especially idle Masters, which do a little
displease me to consider. They gone comes Mr. Lanyon, who tells me Mr.
Alsopp is now become dangerously ill, and fears his recovery, covery,
which shakes my expectation of L630 per annum by the business; and,
therefore, bless God for what Mr. Gauden hath sent me, which, from some
discourse to-day with Mr. Osborne, swearing that he knows not any thing of
this business of the victualling; but, the contrary, that it is not that
moves Mr. Gauden to send it me, for he hath had order for it any time
these two months. Whether this be true or no, I know not; but I shall
hence with the more confidence keepe it.  To supper and to the office a
little, and to walk in the garden, the moon shining bright, and fine warm
fair weather, and so home to bed.

23rd.  Up, and all the morning at the office.  At noon to the 'Change,
where I took occasion to break the business of my Lord Chancellor's timber
to Mr. Coventry in the best manner I could.  He professed to me, that,
till, Sir G. Carteret did speake of it at the table, after our officers
were gone to survey it, he did not know that my Lord Chancellor had any
thing to do with it; but now he says that he had been told by the Duke
that Sir G. Carteret had spoke to him about it, and that he had told the
Duke that, were he in my Lord Chancellor's case, if he were his father, he
would rather fling away the gains of two or L3,000, than have it said that
the timber, which should have been the King's, if it had continued the
Duke of Albemarle's, was concealed by us in favour of my Lord Chancellor;
for, says he, he is a great man, and all such as he, and he himself
particularly, have a great many enemies that would be glad of such an
advantage against him.  When I told him it was strange that Sir J. Minnes
and Sir G. Carteret, that knew my Lord Chancellor's concernment therein,
should not at first inform us, he answered me that for Sir J. Minnes, he
is looked upon to be an old good companion, but by nobody at the other end
of the towne as any man of business, and that my Lord Chancellor, he dares
say, never did tell him of it, only Sir G. Carteret, he do believe, must
needs know it, for he and Sir J. Shaw are the greatest confidants he hath
in the world.  So for himself, he said, he would not mince the matter, but
was resolved to do what was fit, and stand upon his owne legs therein, and
that he would speak to the Duke, that he and Sir G. Carteret might be
appointed to attend my Lord Chancellor in it.  All this disturbs me
mightily.  I know not what to say to it, nor how to carry myself therein;
for a compliance will discommend me to Mr. Coventry, and a discompliance
to my Lord Chancellor.  But I think to let it alone, or at least meddle in
it as little more as I can. From thence walked toward Westminster, and
being in an idle and wanton humour, walked through Fleet Alley, and there
stood a most pretty wench at one of the doors, so I took a turn or two,
but what by sense of honour and conscience I would not go in, but much
against my will took coach and away, and away to Westminster Hall, and
there 'light of Mrs. Lane, and plotted with her to go over the water.  So
met at White's stairs in Chanel Row, and over to the old house at Lambeth
Marsh, and there eat and drank, and had my pleasure of her twice, she
being the strangest woman in talk of love to her husband sometimes, and
sometimes again she do not care for him, and yet willing enough to allow
me a liberty of doing what I would with her.  So spending 5s. or 6s.  upon
her, I could do what I would, and after an hour's stay and more back again
and set her ashore there again, and I forward to Fleet Street, and called
at Fleet Alley, not knowing how to command myself, and went in and there
saw what formerly I have been acquainted with, the wickedness of these
houses, and the forcing a man to present expense.  The woman indeed is a
most lovely woman, but I had no courage to meddle with her for fear of her
not being wholesome, and so counterfeiting that I had not money enough, it
was pretty to see how cunning she was, would not suffer me to have to do
in any manner with her after she saw I had no money, but told me then I
would not come again, but she now was sure I would come again, but I hope
in God I shall not, for though she be one of the prettiest women I ever
saw, yet I fear her abusing me.  So desiring God to forgive me for this
vanity, I went home, taking some books from my bookseller, and taking his
lad home with me, to whom I paid L10 for books I have laid up money for,
and laid out within these three weeks, and shall do no more a great while
I hope.  So to my office writing letters, and then home and to bed, weary
of the pleasure I have had to-day, and ashamed to think of it.

24th (Lord's day).  Up, in some pain all day from yesterday's passages,
having taken cold, I suppose.  So staid within all day reading of two or
three good plays.  At night to my office a little, and so home, after
supper to bed.

25th.  Up, and with Sir J. Minnes and Sir W. Batten by coach to St.
James's, but there the Duke being gone out we to my Lord Berkeley's
chamber, Mr. Coventry being there, and among other things there met with a
printed copy of the King's commission for the repair of Paul's, which is
very large, and large power for collecting money, and recovering of all
people that had bought or sold formerly any thing belonging to the Church.
And here I find my Lord Mayor of the City set in order before the
Archbishopp or any nobleman, though all the greatest officers of state are
there.  But yet I do not hear by my Lord Berkeley, who is one of them,
that any thing is like to come of it.  Thence back again homewards, and
Sir W. Batten and I to the Coffee-house, but no newes, only the plague is
very hot still, and encreases among the Dutch.  Home to dinner, and after
dinner walked forth, and do what I could I could not keep myself from
going through Fleet Lane, but had the sense of safety and honour not to go
in, and the rather being a holiday I feared I might meet with some people
that might know me.  Thence to Charing Cross, and there called at
Unthanke's to see what I owed, but found nothing, and here being a couple
of pretty ladies, lodgers in the kitchen, I staid a little there.  Thence
to my barber Gervas, who this day buries his child, which it seems was
born without a passage behind, so that it never voided any thing in the
week or fortnight that it has been born.  Thence to Mr. Reeves, it coming
just now in my head to buy a microscope, but he was not within, so I
walked all round that end of the town among the loathsome people and
houses, but, God be thanked!  had no desire to visit any of them.  So
home, where I met Mr. Lanyon, who tells me Mr. Alsop is past hopes, which
will mightily disappoint me in my hopes there, and yet it may be not.  I
shall think whether it will be safe for me to venture myself or no, and
come in as an adventurer.  He gone, Mr. Cole (my old Jack Cole) comes to
see and speak with me, and his errand in short to tell me that he is
giving over his trade; he can do no good in it, and will turn what he has
into money and go to sea, his father being dead and leaving him little, if
any thing.  This I was sorry to hear, he being a man of good parts, but, I
fear, debauched.  I promised him all the friendship I can do him, which
will end in little, though I truly mean it, and so I made him stay with me
till 11 at night, talking of old school stories, and very pleasing ones,
and truly I find that we did spend our time and thoughts then otherwise
than I think boys do now, and I think as well as methinks that the best
are now.  He supped with me, and so away, and I to bed.  And strange to
see how we are all divided that were bred so long at school together, and
what various fortunes we have run, some good, some bad.

26th.  All the morning at the office, at noon to Anthony Joyce's, to our
gossip's dinner.  I had sent a dozen and a half of bottles of wine
thither, and paid my double share besides, which is 18s.  Very merry we
were, and when the women were merry and rose from table, I above with
them, ne'er a man but I, I began discourse of my not getting of children,
and prayed them to give me their opinions and advice, and they freely and
merrily did give me these ten, among them (1) Do not hug my wife too hard
nor too much; (2) eat no late suppers; (3) drink juyce of sage; (4) tent
and toast; (5) wear cool holland drawers; (6) keep stomach warm and back
cool; (7) upon query whether it was best to do at night or morn, they
answered me neither one nor other, but when we had most mind to it; (8)
wife not to go too straight laced; (9) myself to drink mum and sugar; (10)
Mrs. Ward did give me, to change my place.  The 3rd, 4th, 6th, 7th, and
10th they all did seriously declare, and lay much stress upon them as
rules fit to be observed indeed, and especially the last, to lie with our
heads where our heels do, or at least to make the bed high at feet and low
at head.  Very merry all, as much as I could be in such sorry company.
Great discourse of the fray yesterday in Moorefields, how the butchers at
first did beat the weavers (between whom there hath been ever an old
competition for mastery), but at last the weavers rallied and beat them.
At first the butchers knocked down all for weavers that had green or blue
aprons, till they were fain to pull them off and put them in their
breeches.  At last the butchers were fain to pull off their sleeves, that
they might not be known, and were soundly beaten out of the field, and
some deeply wounded and bruised; till at last the weavers went out
tryumphing, calling L100 for a butcher.  I to Mr. Reeves to see a
microscope, he having been with me to-day morning, and there chose one
which I will have.  Thence back and took up young Mrs. Harman, a pretty
bred and pretty humoured woman whom I could love well, though not
handsome, yet for her person and carriage, and black.  By the way met her
husband going for her, and set them both down at home, and so home to my
office a while, and so to supper and bed.

27th.  Up, and after some discourse with Mr. Duke, who is to be Secretary
to the Fishery, and is now Secretary to the Committee for Trade, who I
find a very ingenious man, I went to Mr. Povy's, and there heard a little
of his empty discourse, and fain he would have Mr. Gauden been the
victualler for Tangier, which none but a fool would say to me when he
knows he hath made it his request to me to get him something of these men
that now do it.  Thence to St. James's, but Mr. Coventry being ill and in
bed I did not stay, but to White Hall a little, walked up and down, and so
home to fit papers against this afternoon, and after dinner to the 'Change
a little, and then to White Hall, where anon the Duke of Yorke came, and a
Committee we had of Tangier, where I read over my rough draught of the
contract for Tangier victualling, and acquainted them with the death of
Mr. Alsopp, which Mr. Lanyon had told me this morning, which is a sad
consideration to see how uncertain a thing our lives are, and how little
to be presumed of in our greatest undertakings.  The words of the contract
approved of, and I home and there came Mr. Lanyon to me and brought my
neighbour, Mr. Andrews, to me, whom he proposes for his partner in the
room of Mr. Alsopp, and I like well enough of it.  We read over the
contract together, and discoursed it well over and so parted, and I am
glad to see it once over in this condition again, for Mr. Lanyon and I had
some discourse to-day about my share in it, and I hope if it goes on to
have my first hopes of L300 per ann.  They gone, I to supper and to bed.
This afternoon came my great store of Coles in, being to Chaldron, so that
I may see how long they will last me.

28th.  At the office all the morning, dined, after 'Change, at home, and
then abroad, and seeing "The Bondman"  upon the posts, I consulted my
oaths and find I may go safely this time without breaking it; I went
thither, notwithstanding my great desire to have gone to Fleet Alley, God
forgive me, again.  There I saw it acted.  It is true, for want of
practice, they had many of them forgot their parts a little; but Betterton
and my poor Ianthe outdo all the world.  There is nothing more taking in
the world with me than that play.  Thence to Westminster to my barber's,
and strange to think how when I find that Jervas himself did intend to
bring home my periwigg, and not Jane his maid, I did desire not to have it
at all, for I had a mind to have her bring it home.  I also went to Mr.
Blagrave's about speaking to him for his kinswoman to come live with my
wife, but they are not come to town, and so I home by coach and to my
office, and then to supper and to bed.  My present posture is thus: my
wife in the country and my mayde Besse with her and all quiett there.  I
am endeavouring to find a woman for her to my mind, and above all one that
understands musique, especially singing.  I am the willinger to keepe one
because I am in good hopes to get 2 or L300 per annum extraordinary by the
business of the victualling of Tangier, and yet Mr. Alsopp, my chief
hopes, is dead since my looking after it, and now Mr. Lanyon, I fear, is,
falling sicke too.  I am pretty well in health, only subject to wind upon
any cold, and then immediate and great pains.  All our discourse is of a
Dutch warr and I find it is likely to come to it, for they are very high
and desire not to compliment us at all, as far as I hear, but to send a
good fleete to Guinny to oppose us there.  My Lord Sandwich newly gone to
sea, and I, I think, fallen into his very good opinion again, at least he
did before his going, and by his letter since, show me all manner of
respect and confidence.  I am over-joyed in hopes that upon this month's
account I shall find myself worth L1000, besides the rich present of two
silver and gilt flaggons which Mr. Gauden did give me the other day.  I do
now live very prettily at home, being most seriously, quietly, and neatly
served by my two mayds Jane and the girle Su, with both of whom I am
mightily well pleased.  My greatest trouble is the settling of Brampton
Estate, that I may know what to expect, and how to be able to leave it
when I die, so as to be just to my promise to my uncle Thomas and his son.
The next thing is this cursed trouble my brother Tom is likely to put us
to by his death, forcing us to law with his creditors, among others Dr.
Tom Pepys, and that with some shame as trouble, and the last how to know
in what manner as to saving or spending my father lives, lest they should
run me in debt as one of my uncle's executors, and I never the wiser nor
better for it.  But in all this I hope shortly to be at leisure to
consider and inform myself well.

29th.  At the office all the morning dispatching of business, at noon to
the 'Change after dinner, and thence to Tom Trice about Dr. Pepys's
business, and thence it raining turned into Fleet Alley, and there was
with Cocke an hour or so.  The jade, whether I would not give her money or
not enough; she would not offer to invite to do anything, but on the
contrary saying she had no time, which I was glad of, for I had no mind to
meddle with her, but had my end to see what a cunning jade she was, to see
her impudent tricks and ways of getting money and raising the reckoning by
still calling for things, that it come to 6 or 7 shillings presently.  So
away home, glad I escaped without any inconvenience, and there came Mr.
Hill, Andrews and Seignor Pedro, and great store of musique we had, but I
begin to be weary of having a master with us, for it spoils, methinks, the
ingenuity of our practice.  After they were gone comes Mr. Bland to me,
sat till 11 at night with me, talking of the garrison of Tangier and
serving them with pieces of eight.  A mind he hath to be employed there,
but dares not desire any courtesy of me, and yet would fain engage me to
be for him, for I perceive they do all find that I am the busy man to see
the King have right done him by inquiring out other bidders.  Being quite
tired with him, I got him gone, and so to bed.

30th.  All the morning at the office; at noon to the 'Change, where great
talke of a rich present brought by an East India ship from some of the
Princes of India, worth to the King L70,000 in two precious stones. After
dinner to the office, and there all the afternoon making an end of several
things against the end of the month, that I may clear all my reckonings
tomorrow; also this afternoon, with great content, I finished the
contracts for victualling of Tangier with Mr. Lanyon and the rest, and to
my comfort got him and Andrews to sign to the giving me L300 per annum, by
which, at least, I hope to be a L100 or two the better.  Wrote many
letters by the post to ease my mind of business and to clear my paper of
minutes, as I did lately oblige myself to clear every thing against the
end of the month.  So at night with my mind quiet and contented to bed.
This day I sent a side of venison and six bottles of wine to Kate Joyce.

31st (Lord's day).  Up, and to church, where I have not been these many
weeks.  So home, and thither, inviting him yesterday, comes Mr. Hill, at
which I was a little troubled, but made up all very well, carrying him
with me to Sir J. Minnes, where I was invited and all our families to a
venison pasty.  Here good cheer and good discourse.  After dinner Mr. Hill
and I to my house, and there to musique all the afternoon.  He being gone,
in the evening I to my accounts, and to my great joy and with great thanks
to Almighty God, I do find myself most clearly worth L1014, the first time
that ever I was worth L1000 before, which is the height of all that ever I
have for a long time pretended to.  But by the blessing of God upon my
care I hope to lay up something more in a little time, if this business of
the victualling of Tangier goes on as I hope it will. So with praise to
God for this state of fortune that I am brought to as to wealth, and my
condition being as I have at large set it down two days ago in this book,
I home to supper and to bed, desiring God to give me the grace to make
good use of what I have and continue my care and diligence to gain more.




     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     All divided that were bred so long at school together
     Began discourse of my not getting of children
     Came to bed to me, but all would not make me friends
     Feared I might meet with some people that might know me
     Had no mind to meddle with her
     Her impudent tricks and ways of getting money
     How little to be presumed of in our greatest undertakings
     Mind to have her bring it home
     My wife made great means to be friends, coming to my bedside
     Never to trust too much to any man in the world
     Not well, and so had no pleasure at all with my poor wife
     Not when we can, but when we list
     Now against her going into the country (lay together)
     Periwigg he lately made me cleansed of its nits
     Presse seamen, without which we cannot really raise men
     Shakespeare's plays
     She had the cunning to cry a great while, and talk and blubber
     There eat and drank, and had my pleasure of her twice
     These Lords are hard to be trusted
     Things wear out of themselves and come fair again
     To my Lord Sandwich, thinking to have dined there
     Upon a very small occasion had a difference again broke out
     Very high and very foule words from her to me
     What wine you drinke, lett it bee at meales





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Diary of Samuel Pepys, June/July 1664
by Samuel Pepys

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***

***** This file should be named 4149.txt or 4149.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/4/1/4/4149/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
