The Project Gutenberg EBook of Diary of Samuel Pepys, January/February
1964/65, by Samuel Pepys

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Diary of Samuel Pepys, January/February 1964/65

Author: Samuel Pepys

Release Date: November 30, 2004 [EBook #4154]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***




Produced by David Widger





                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A. F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

   TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                        DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.

                              1665 N.S.

                               JANUARY
                              1664-1665

January 1st (Lord's day).  Lay long in bed, having been busy late last
night, then up and to my office, where upon ordering my accounts and
papers with respect to my understanding my last year's gains and expense,
which I find very great, as I have already set down yesterday.  Now this
day I am dividing my expense, to see what my clothes and every particular
hath stood me in: I mean all the branches of my expense.  At noon a good
venison pasty and a turkey to ourselves without any body so much as
invited by us, a thing unusuall for so small a family of my condition: but
we did it and were very merry.  After dinner to my office again, where
very late alone upon my accounts, but have not brought them to order yet,
and very intricate I find it, notwithstanding my care all the year to keep
things in as good method as any man can do.  Past 11 o'clock home to
supper and to bed.

2nd.  Up, and it being a most fine, hard frost I walked a good way toward
White Hall, and then being overtaken with Sir W. Pen's coach, went into
it, and with him thither, and there did our usual business with the Duke.
Thence, being forced to pay a great deale of money away in boxes (that is,
basins at White Hall), I to my barber's, Gervas, and there had a little
opportunity of speaking with my Jane alone, and did give her something,
and of herself she did tell me a place where I might come to her on Sunday
next, which I will not fail, but to see how modestly and harmlessly she
brought it out was very pretty.  Thence to the Swan, and there did sport a
good while with Herbert's young kinswoman without hurt, though they being
abroad, the old people.  Then to the Hall, and there agreed with Mrs.
Martin, and to her lodgings which she has now taken to lie in, in Bow
Streete, pitiful poor things, yet she thinks them pretty, and so they are
for her condition I believe good enough.  Here I did 'ce que je voudrais
avec' her most freely, and it having cost 2s. in wine and cake upon her, I
away sick of her impudence, and by coach to my Lord Brunker's, by
appointment, in the Piazza, in Covent-Guarding; where I occasioned much
mirth with a ballet I brought with me, made from the seamen at sea to
their ladies in town; saying Sir W. Pen, Sir G. Ascue, and Sir J. Lawson
made them.  Here a most noble French dinner and banquet, the best I have
seen this many a day and good discourse. Thence to my bookseller's and at
his binder's saw Hooke's book of the Microscope,

     ["Micrographia: or some physiological descriptions of minute bodies
     made by Magnifying Glasses.  London, 1665," a very remarkable work
     with elaborate plates, some of which have been used for lecture
     illustrations almost to our own day.  On November 23rd, 1664, the
     President of the Royal Society was "desired to sign a licence for
     printing of Mr. Hooke's microscopical book."  At this time the book
     was mostly printed, but it was delayed, much to Hooke's disgust, by
     the examination of several Fellows of the Society.  In spite of this
     examination the council were anxious that the author should make it
     clear that he alone was responsible for any theory put forward, and
     they gave him notice to that effect.  Hooke made this clear in his
     dedication (see Birch's "History," vol. i., pp. 490-491)]

which is so pretty that I presently bespoke it, and away home to the
office, where we met to do something, and then though very late by coach
to Sir Ph. Warwicke's, but having company with him could not speak with
him.  So back again home, where thinking to be merry was vexed with my
wife's having looked out a letter in Sir Philip Sidney about jealousy for
me to read, which she industriously and maliciously caused me to do, and
the truth is my conscience told me it was most proper for me, and
therefore was touched at it, but tooke no notice of it, but read it out
most frankly, but it stucke in my stomach, and moreover I was vexed to
have a dog brought to my house to line our little bitch, which they make
him do in all their sights, which, God forgive me, do stir my jealousy
again, though of itself the thing is a very immodest sight.  However, to
cards with my wife a good while, and then to bed.

3rd.  Up, and by coach to Sir Ph. Warwicke's, the streete being full of
footballs, it being a great frost, and found him and Mr. Coventry walking
in St. James's Parke.  I did my errand to him about the felling of the
King's timber in the forests, and then to my Lord of Oxford, Justice in
Eyre, for his consent thereto, for want whereof my Lord Privy Seale stops
the whole business.  I found him in his lodgings, in but an ordinary
furnished house and roome where he was, but I find him to be a man of good
discreet replys.  Thence to the Coffee-house, where certain newes that the
Dutch have taken some of our colliers to the North; some say four, some
say seven.  Thence to the 'Change a while, and so home to dinner and to
the office, where we sat late, and then I to write my letters, and then to
Sir W. Batten's, who is going out of towne to Harwich to-morrow to set up
a light-house there, which he hath lately got a patent from the King to
set up, that will turne much to his profit. Here very merry, and so to my
office again, where very late, and then home to supper and to bed, but sat
up with my wife at cards till past two in the morning.

4th.  Lay long, and then up and to my Lord of Oxford's, but his Lordshipp
was in bed at past ten o'clock: and, Lord helpe us! so rude a dirty family
I never saw in my life.  He sent me out word my business was not done, but
should against the afternoon.  I thence to the Coffee-house, there but
little company, and so home to the 'Change, where I hear of some more of
our ships lost to the Northward.  So to Sir W. Batten's, but he was set
out before I got thither.  I sat long talking with my lady, and then home
to dinner.  Then come Mr. Moore to see me, and he and I to my Lord of
Oxford's, but not finding him within Mr. Moore and I to "Love in a Tubb,"
which is very merry, but only so by gesture, not wit at all, which
methinks is beneath the House.  So walked home, it being a very hard
frost, and I find myself as heretofore in cold weather to begin to burn
within and pimples and pricks all over my body, my pores with cold being
shut up.  So home to supper and to cards and to bed.

5th.  Up, it being very cold and a great snow and frost tonight.  To the
office, and there all the morning.  At noon dined at home, troubled at my
wife's being simply angry with Jane, our cook mayde (a good servant,
though perhaps hath faults and is cunning), and given her warning to be
gone.  So to the office again, where we sat late, and then I to my office,
and there very late doing business.  Home to supper and to the office
again, and then late home to bed.

6th.  Lay long in bed, but most of it angry and scolding with my wife
about her warning Jane our cookemayde to be gone and upon that she desires
to go abroad to-day to look a place.  A very good mayde she is and fully
to my mind, being neat, only they say a little apt to scold, but I hear
her not.  To my office all the morning busy.  Dined at home. To my office
again, being pretty well reconciled to my wife, which I did desire to be,
because she had designed much mirthe to-day to end Christmas with among
her servants.  At night home, being twelfenight, and there chose my piece
of cake, but went up to my viall, and then to bed, leaving my wife and
people up at their sports, which they continue till morning, not coming to
bed at all.

7th.  Up and to the office all the morning.  At noon dined alone, my wife
and family most of them a-bed.  Then to see my Lady Batten and sit with
her a while, Sir W. Batten being out of town, and then to my office doing
very much business very late, and then home to supper and to bed.

8th (Lord's day).  Up betimes, and it being a very fine frosty day, I and
my boy walked to White Hall, and there to the Chappell, where one Dr.
Beaumont' preached a good sermon, and afterwards a brave anthem upon the
150 Psalm, where upon the word "trumpet" very good musique was made.  So
walked to my Lady's and there dined with her (my boy going home), where
much pretty discourse, and after dinner walked to Westminster, and there
to the house where Jane Welsh had appointed me, but it being sermon time
they would not let me in, and said nobody was there to speak with me.  I
spent the whole afternoon walking into the Church and Abbey, and up and
down, but could not find her, and so in the evening took a coach and home,
and there sat discoursing with my wife, and by and by at supper, drinking
some cold drink I think it was, I was forced to go make water, and had
very great pain after it, but was well by and by and continued so, it
being only I think from the drink, or from my straining at stool to do
more than my body would.  So after prayers to bed.

9th.  Up and walked to White Hall, it being still a brave frost, and I in
perfect good health, blessed be God!  In my way saw a woman that broke her
thigh, in her heels slipping up upon the frosty streete.  To the Duke, and
there did our usual worke.  Here I saw the Royal Society bring their new
book, wherein is nobly writ their charter' and laws, and comes to be
signed by the Duke as a Fellow; and all the Fellows' hands are to be
entered there, and lie as a monument; and the King hath put his with the
word Founder.  Thence I to Westminster, to my barber's, and found occasion
to see Jane, but in presence of her mistress, and so could not speak to
her of her failing me yesterday, and then to the Swan to Herbert's girl,
and lost time a little with her, and so took coach, and to my Lord Crew's
and dined with him, who receives me with the greatest respect that could
be, telling me that he do much doubt of the successe of this warr with
Holland, we going about it, he doubts, by the instigation of persons that
do not enough apprehend the consequences of the danger of it, and therein
I do think with him.  Holmes was this day sent to the Tower,--[For taking
New York from the Dutch]--but I perceive it is made matter of jest only;
but if the Dutch should be our masters, it may come to be of earnest to
him, to be given over to them for a sacrifice, as Sir W. Rawly [Raleigh]
was.  Thence to White Hall to a Tangier Committee, where I was accosted
and most highly complimented by my Lord Bellasses,

     [John Belasyse, second son of Thomas, first Viscount Fauconberg,
     created Baron Belasyse of Worlaby, January 27th, 1644, Lord
     Lieutenant of the East Riding of Yorkshire, and Governor of Hull.
     He was appointed Governor of Tangier, and Captain of the Band of
     Gentlemen Pensioners.  He was a Roman Catholic, and therefore was
     deprived of all his appointments in 1672 by the provisions of the
     Test Act, but in 1684 James II. made him First Commissioner of the
     Treasury.  He died 1689.]

our new governor, beyond my expectation, or measure I could imagine he
would have given any man, as if I were the only person of business that he
intended to rely on, and desires my correspondence with him.  This I was
not only surprized at, but am well pleased with, and may make good use of
it.  Our patent is renewed, and he and my Lord Barkeley, and Sir Thomas
Ingram put in as commissioners.  Here some business happened which may
bring me some profit.  Thence took coach and calling my wife at her
tailor's (she being come this afternoon to bring her mother some apples,
neat's tongues, and wine); I home, and there at my office late with Sir W.
Warren, and had a great deal of good discourse and counsel from him, which
I hope I shall take, being all for my good in my deportment in my office,
yet with all honesty.  He gone I home to supper and to bed.

10th.  Lay long, it being still very cold, and then to the office, where
till dinner, and then home, and by and by to the office, where we sat and
were very late, and I writing letters till twelve at night, and then after
supper to bed.

11th.  Up, and very angry with my boy for lying long a bed and forgetting
his lute.  To my office all the morning.  At noon to the 'Change, and so
home to dinner.  After dinner to Gresham College to my Lord Brunker and
Commissioner Pett, taking, Mr. Castle with me there to discourse over his
draught of a ship he is to build for us.  Where I first found reason to
apprehend Commissioner Pett to be a man of an ability extraordinary in any
thing, for I found he did turn and wind Castle like a chicken in his
business, and that most pertinently and mister-like, and great pleasure it
was to me to hear them discourse, I, of late having studied something
thereof, and my Lord Brunker is a very able person also himself in this
sort of business, as owning himself to be a master in the business of all
lines and Conicall Sections: Thence home, where very late at my office
doing business to my content, though [God] knows with what ado it was that
when I was out I could get myself to come home to my business, or when I
was there though late would stay there from going abroad again. To supper
and to bed.  This evening, by a letter from Plymouth, I hear that two of
our ships, the Leopard and another, in the Straights, are lost by running
aground; and that three more had like to have been so, but got off,
whereof Captain Allen one: and that a Dutch fleete are gone thither; which
if they should meet with our lame ships, God knows what would become of
them.  This I reckon most sad newes; God make us sensible of it!  This
night, when I come home, I was much troubled to hear my poor canary bird,
that I have kept these three or four years, is dead.

12th.  Up, and to White Hall about getting a privy seal for felling of the
King's timber for the navy, and to the Lords' House to speak with my Lord
Privy Seale about it, and so to the 'Change, where to my last night's ill
news I met more.  Spoke with a Frenchman who was taken, but released, by a
Dutch man-of-war of thirty-six guns (with seven more of the like or
greater ships), off the North Foreland, by Margett.  Which is a strange
attempt, that they should come to our teeth; but the wind being easterly,
the wind that should bring our force from Portsmouth, will carry them away
home.  God preserve us against them, and pardon our making them in our
discourse so contemptible an enemy!  So home and to dinner, where Mr.
Hollyard with us dined.  So to the office, and there late till 11 at night
and more, and then home to supper and to bed.

13th.  Up betimes and walked to my Lord Bellasses's lodgings in Lincolne's
Inne Fieldes, and there he received and discoursed with me in the most
respectfull manner that could be, telling me what a character of my
judgment, and care, and love to Tangier he had received of me, that he
desired my advice and my constant correspondence, which he much valued,
and in my courtship, in which, though I understand his designe very well,
and that it is only a piece of courtship, yet it is a comfort to me that I
am become so considerable as to have him need to say that to me, which, if
I did not do something in the world, would never have been.  Here well
satisfied I to Sir Ph. Warwicke, and there did some business with him;
thence to Jervas's and there spent a little idle time with him, his wife,
Jane, and a sweetheart of hers.  So to the Hall awhile and thence to the
Exchange, where yesterday's newes confirmed, though in a little different
manner; but a couple of ships in the Straights we have lost, and the Dutch
have been in Margaret [Margate] Road.  Thence home to dinner and so abroad
and alone to the King's house, to a play, "The Traytor," where,
unfortunately, I met with Sir W. Pen, so that I must be forced to confess
it to my wife, which troubles me.  Thence walked home, being ill-satisfied
with the present actings of the House, and prefer the other House before
this infinitely.  To my Lady Batten's, where I find Pegg Pen, the first
time that ever I saw her to wear spots.  Here very merry, Sir W. Batten
being looked for to-night, but is not yet come from Harwich.  So home to
supper and to bed.

14th.  Up and to White Hall, where long waited in the Duke's chamber for a
Committee intended for Tangier, but none met, and so I home and to the
office, where we met a little, and then to the 'Change, where our late ill
newes confirmed in loss of two ships in the Straights, but are now the
Phoenix and Nonsuch!  Home to dinner, thence with my wife to the King's
house, there to see "Vulpone," a most excellent play; the best I think I
ever saw, and well, acted.  So with Sir W. Pen home in his coach, and then
to the office.  So home, to supper, and bed, resolving by the grace of God
from this day to fall hard to my business again, after some weeke or
fortnight's neglect.

15th (Lord's day).  Up, and after a little at my office to prepare a fresh
draught of my vowes for the next yeare, I to church, where a most insipid
young coxcomb preached.  Then home to dinner, and after dinner to read in
"Rushworth's Collections" about the charge against the late Duke of
Buckingham, in order to the fitting me to speak and understand the
discourse anon before the King about the suffering the Turkey merchants to
send out their fleete at this dangerous time, when we can neither spare
them ships to go, nor men, nor King's ships to convoy them.  At four
o'clock with Sir W. Pen in his coach to my Lord Chancellor's, where by and
by Mr. Coventry, Sir W. Pen, Sir J. Lawson, Sir G. Ascue, and myself were
called in to the King, there being several of the Privy Council, and my
Lord Chancellor lying at length upon a couch (of the goute I suppose); and
there Sir W. Pen begun, and he had prepared heads in a paper, and spoke
pretty well to purpose, but with so much leisure and gravity as was
tiresome; besides, the things he said were but very poor to a man in his
trade after a great consideration, but it was to purpose, indeed to
dissuade the King from letting these Turkey ships to go out: saying (in
short) the King having resolved to have 130 ships out by the spring, he
must have above 20 of them merchantmen.  Towards which, he in the whole
River could find but 12 or 14, and of them the five ships taken up by
these merchants were a part, and so could not be spared. That we should
need 30,000 [sailors] to man these 130 ships, and of them in service we
have not above 16,000; so we shall need 14,000 more.  That these ships
will with their convoys carry above 2,000 men, and those the best men that
could be got; it being the men used to the Southward that are the best men
for warr, though those bred in the North among the colliers are good for
labour.  That it will not be safe for the merchants, nor honourable for
the King, to expose these rich ships with his convoy of six ships to go,
it not being enough to secure them against the Dutch, who, without doubt,
will have a great fleete in the Straights. This, Sir J. Lawson enlarged
upon.  Sir G. Ascue he chiefly spoke that the warr and trade could not be
supported together, and, therefore, that trade must stand still to give
way to them.  This Mr. Coventry seconded, and showed how the medium of the
men the King hath one year with another employed in his Navy since his
coming, hath not been above 3,000 men, or at most 4,000 men; and now
having occasion of 30,000, the remaining 26,000 must be found out of the
trade of the nation.  He showed how the cloaths, sending by these
merchants to Turkey, are already bought and paid for to the workmen, and
are as many as they would send these twelve months or more; so the poor do
not suffer by their not going, but only the merchant, upon whose hands
they lit dead; and so the inconvenience is the less.  And yet for them he
propounded, either the King should, if his Treasure would suffer it, buy
them, and showed the losse would not be so great to him: or, dispense with
the Act of Navigation, and let them be carried out by strangers; and
ending that he doubted not but when the merchants saw there was no remedy,
they would and could find ways of sending them abroad to their profit.
All ended with a conviction (unless future discourse with the merchants
should alter it) that it was not fit for them to go out, though the ships
be loaded.  The King in discourse did ask me two or three questions about
my newes of Allen's loss in the Streights, but I said nothing as to the
business, nor am not much sorry for it, unless the King had spoke to me as
he did to them, and then I could have said something to the purpose I
think.  So we withdrew, and the merchants were called in.  Staying
without, my Lord Fitz Harding come thither, and fell to discourse of
Prince Rupert, and made nothing to say that his disease was the pox and
that he must be fluxed, telling the horrible degree of the disease upon
him with its breaking out on his head.  But above all I observed how he
observed from the Prince, that courage is not what men take it to be, a
contempt of death; for, says he, how chagrined the Prince was the other
day when he thought he should die, having no more mind to it than another
man.  But, says he, some men are more apt to think they shall escape than
another man in fight, while another is doubtfull he shall be hit.  But
when the first man is sure he shall die, as now the Prince is, he is as
much troubled and apprehensive of it as any man else; for, says he, since
we told [him] that we believe he would overcome his disease, he is as
merry, and swears and laughs and curses, and do all the things of a [man]
in health, as ever he did in his life; which, methought, was a most
extraordinary saying before a great many persons there of quality.  So by
and by with Sir W. Pen home again, and after supper to the office to
finish my vows, and so to bed.

16th.  Up and with Sir W. Batten and Sir W. Pen to White Hall, where we
did our business with the Duke.  Thence I to Westminster Hall and walked
up and down.  Among others Ned Pickering met me and tells me how active my
Lord is at sea, and that my Lord Hinchingbroke is now at Rome, and, by all
report, a very noble and hopefull gentleman.  Thence to Mr. Povy's, and
there met Creed, and dined well after his old manner of plenty and
curiosity.  But I sat in pain to think whether he would begin with me
again after dinner with his enquiry after my bill, but he did not, but
fell into other discourse, at which I was glad, but was vexed this morning
meeting of Creed at some bye questions that he demanded of me about some
such thing, which made me fear he meant that very matter, but I perceive
he did not.  Thence to visit my Lady Sandwich and so to a Tangier
Committee, where a great company of the new Commissioners, Lords, that in
behalfe of my Lord Bellasses are very loud and busy and call for Povy's
accounts, but it was a most sorrowful thing to see how he answered to
questions so little to the purpose, but to his owne wrong.  All the while
I sensible how I am concerned in my bill of L100 and somewhat more. So
great a trouble is fear, though in a case that at the worst will bear
enquiry.  My Lord Barkeley was very violent against Povy.  But my Lord
Ashly, I observe, is a most clear man in matters of accounts, and most
ingeniously did discourse and explain all matters.  We broke up, leaving
the thing to a Committee of which I am one.  Povy, Creed, and I staid
discoursing, I much troubled in mind seemingly for the business, but
indeed only on my own behalf, though I have no great reason for it, but so
painfull a thing is fear.  So after considering how to order business,
Povy and I walked together as far as the New Exchange and so parted, and I
by coach home.  To the office a while, then to supper and to bed.  This
afternoon Secretary Bennet read to the Duke of Yorke his letters, which
say that Allen

     [Among the State Papers is a letter from Captain Thomas Allin to Sir
     Richard Fanshaw, dated from "The Plymouth, Cadiz Bay," December
     25th, 1664, in which he writes: "On the 19th attacked with his seven
     ships left, a Dutch fleet of fourteen, three of which were men-of-
     war; sunk two vessels and took two others, one a rich prize from
     Smyrna; the others retired much battered.  Has also taken a Dutch
     prize laden with iron and planks, coming from Lisbon ("Calendar,"
     Domestic, 1664-65, p. 122).]

has met with the Dutch Smyrna fleet at Cales,--[The old form of the name
Cadiz.]--and sunk one and taken three.  How true or what these ships are
time will show, but it is good newes and the newes of our ships being lost
is doubted at dales and Malaga.  God send it false!

17th.  Up and walked to Mr. Povy's by appointment, where I found him and
Creed busy about fitting things for the Committee, and thence we to my
Lord Ashly's, where to see how simply, beyond all patience, Povy did
again, by his many words and no understanding, confound himself and his
business, to his disgrace, and rendering every body doubtfull of his being
either a foole or knave, is very wonderfull.  We broke up all
dissatisfied, and referred the business to a meeting of Mr. Sherwin and
others to settle, but here it was mighty strange methought to find myself
sit herein Committee with my hat on, while Mr. Sherwin stood bare as a
clerke, with his hat off to his Lord Ashlyand the rest, but I thank God I
think myself never a whit the better man for all that.  Thence with Creed
to the 'Change and Coffee-house, and so home, where a brave dinner, by
having a brace of pheasants and very merry about Povy's folly.  So anon to
the office, and there sitting very late, and then after a little time at
Sir W. Batten's, where I am mighty great and could if I thought it fit
continue so, I to the office again, and there very late, and so home to
the sorting of some of my books, and so to bed, the weather becoming
pretty warm, and I think and hope the frost will break.

18th.  Up and by and by to my bookseller's, and there did give thorough
direction for the new binding of a great many of my old books, to make my
whole study of the same binding, within very few.  Thence to my Lady
Sandwich's, who sent for me this morning.  Dined with her, and it was to
get a letter of hers conveyed by a safe hand to my Lord's owne hand at
Portsmouth, which I did undertake.  Here my Lady did begin to talk of what
she had heard concerning Creed, of his being suspected to be a fanatique
and a false fellow.  I told her I thought he was as shrewd and cunning a
man as any in England, and one that I would feare first should outwit me
in any thing.  To which she readily concurred.  Thence to Mr. Povy's by
agreement, and there with Mr. Sherwin, Auditor Beale, and Creed and I hard
at it very late about Mr. Povy's accounts, but such accounts I never did
see, or hope again to see in my days.  At night, late, they gone, I did
get him to put out of this account our sums that are in posse only yet,
which he approved of when told, but would never have stayed it if I had
been gone.  Thence at 9 at night home, and so to supper vexed and my head
akeing and to bed.

19th.  Up, and it being yesterday and to-day a great thaw it is not for a
man to walk the streets, but took coach and to Mr. Povy's, and there
meeting all of us again agreed upon an answer to the Lords by and by, and
thence we did come to Exeter House, and there was a witness of most [base]
language against Mr. Povy, from my Lord Peterborough, who is most
furiously angry with him, because the other, as a foole, would needs say
that the L26,000 was my Lord Peterborough's account, and that he had
nothing to do with it.  The Lords did find fault also with our answer, but
I think really my Lord Ashly would fain have the outside of an
Exchequer,--[This word is blotted, and the whole sentence is
confused.]--but when we come better to be examined.  So home by coach,
with my Lord Barkeley, who, by his discourse, I find do look upon Mr.
Coventry as an enemy, but yet professes great justice and pains.  I at
home after dinner to the office, and there sat all the afternoon and
evening, and then home to supper and to bed.  Memorandum.  This day and
yesterday, I think it is the change of the weather, I have a great deal of
pain, but nothing like what I use to have.  I can hardly keep myself
loose, but on the contrary am forced to drive away my pain.  Here I am so
sleepy I cannot hold open my eyes, and therefore must be forced to break
off this day's passages more shortly than I would and should have done.
This day was buried (but I could not be there) my cozen Percivall Angier;
and yesterday I received the newes that Dr. Tom Pepys is dead, at
Impington, for which I am but little sorry, not only because he would have
been troublesome to us, but a shame to his family and profession; he was
such a coxcomb.

20th.  Up and to Westminster, where having spoke with Sir Ph. Warwicke, I
to Jervas, and there I find them all in great disorder about Jane, her
mistress telling me secretly that she was sworn not to reveal anything,
but she was undone.  At last for all her oath she told me that she had
made herself sure to a fellow that comes to their house that can only
fiddle for his living, and did keep him company, and had plainly told her
that she was sure to him never to leave him for any body else.  Now they
were this day contriving to get her presently to marry one Hayes that was
there, and I did seem to persuade her to it.  And at last got them to
suffer me to advise privately, and by that means had her company and think
I shall meet her next Sunday, but I do really doubt she will be undone in
marrying this fellow.  But I did give her my advice, and so let her do her
pleasure, so I have now and then her company.  Thence to the Swan at noon,
and there sent for a bit of meat and dined, and had my baiser of the fille
of the house there, but nothing plus.  So took coach and to my Lady
Sandwich's, and so to my bookseller's, and there took home Hooke's book of
microscopy, a most excellent piece, and of which I am very proud.  So
home, and by and by again abroad with my wife about several businesses,
and met at the New Exchange, and there to our trouble found our pretty
Doll is gone away to live they say with her father in the country, but I
doubt something worse.  So homeward, in my way buying a hare and taking it
home, which arose upon my discourse to-day with Mr. Batten, in Westminster
Hall, who showed me my mistake that my hare's foote hath not the joynt to
it; and assures me he never had his cholique since he carried it about
him: and it is a strange thing how fancy works, for I no sooner almost
handled his foote but my belly began to be loose and to break wind, and
whereas I was in some pain yesterday and t'other day and in fear of more
to-day, I became very well, and so continue.  At home to my office a
while, and so to supper, read, and to cards, and to bed.

21st.  At the office all the morning.  Thence my Lord Brunker carried me
as far as Mr. Povy's, and there I 'light and dined, meeting Mr. Sherwin,
Creed, &c., there upon his accounts.  After dinner they parted and Mr.
Povy carried me to Somersett House, and there showed me the
Queene-Mother's chamber and closett, most beautiful places for furniture
and pictures; and so down the great stone stairs to the garden, and tried
the brave echo upon the stairs; which continues a voice so long as the
singing three notes, concords, one after another, they all three shall
sound in consort together a good while most pleasantly.  Thence to a
Tangier Committee at White Hall, where I saw nothing ordered by judgment,
but great heat and passion and faction now in behalf of my Lord Bellasses,
and to the reproach of my Lord Tiviott, and dislike as it were of former
proceedings.  So away with Mr. Povy, he carrying me homeward to Mark Lane
in his coach, a simple fellow I now find him, to his utter shame in his
business of accounts, as none but a sorry foole would have discovered
himself; and yet, in little, light, sorry things very cunning; yet, in the
principal, the most ignorant man I ever met with in so great trust as he
is.  To my office till past 12, and then home to supper and to bed, being
now mighty well, and truly I cannot but impute it to my fresh hare's
foote.  Before I went to bed I sat up till two o'clock in my chamber
reading of Mr. Hooke's Microscopicall Observations, the most ingenious
book that ever I read in my life.

22nd (Lord's day).  Up, leaving my wife in bed, being sick of her months,
and to church.  Thence home, and in my wife's chamber dined very merry,
discoursing, among other things, of a design I have come in my head this
morning at church of making a match between Mrs. Betty Pickering and Mr.
Hill, my friend the merchant, that loves musique and comes to me
a'Sundays, a most ingenious and sweet-natured and highly accomplished
person.  I know not how their fortunes may agree, but their disposition
and merits are much of a sort, and persons, though different, yet equally,
I think, acceptable.  After dinner walked to Westminster, and after being
at the Abbey and heard a good anthem well sung there, I as I had appointed
to the Trumpett, there expecting when Jane Welsh should come, but anon
comes a maid of the house to tell me that her mistress and master would
not let her go forth, not knowing of my being here, but to keep her from
her sweetheart.  So being defeated, away by coach home, and there spent
the evening prettily in discourse with my wife and Mercer, and so to
supper, prayers, and to bed.

23rd.  Up, and with Sir W. Batten and Sir W. Pen to White Hall; but there
finding the Duke gone to his lodgings at St. James's for all together, his
Duchesse being ready to lie in, we to him, and there did our usual
business.  And here I met the great newes confirmed by the Duke's own
relation, by a letter from Captain Allen.  First, of our own loss of two
ships, the Phoenix and Nonesuch, in the Bay of Gibraltar: then of his, and
his seven ships with him, in the Bay of Cales, or thereabouts, fighting
with the 34 Dutch Smyrna fleete; sinking the King Salamon, a ship worth a
L150,000 or more, some say L200,000, and another; and taking of three
merchant-ships.  Two of our ships were disabled, by the Dutch
unfortunately falling against their will against them; the Advice, Captain
W. Poole, and Antelope, Captain Clerke: The Dutch men-of-war did little
service.  Captain Allen did receive many shots at distance before he would
fire one gun, which he did not do till he come within pistol-shot of his
enemy.  The Spaniards on shore at Cales did stand laughing at the Dutch,
to see them run away and flee to the shore, 34 or thereabouts, against
eight Englishmen at most.  I do purpose to get the whole relation, if I
live, of Captain Allen himself.  In our loss of the two ships in the Bay
of Gibraltar, it is observable how the world do comment upon the
misfortune of Captain Moone of the Nonesuch (who did lose, in the same
manner, the Satisfaction), as a person that hath ill-luck attending him;
without considering that the whole fleete was ashore. Captain Allen led
the way, and Captain Allen himself writes that all the masters of the
fleete, old and young, were mistaken, and did carry their ships aground.
But I think I heard the Duke say that Moone, being put into the Oxford,
had in this conflict regained his credit, by sinking one and taking
another.  Captain Seale of the Milford hath done his part very well, in
boarding the King Salamon, which held out half an hour after she was
boarded; and his men kept her an hour after they did master her, and then
she sunk, and drowned about 17 of her men.  Thence to Jervas's, my mind,
God forgive me, running too much after some folly, but 'elle' not being
within I away by coach to the 'Change, and thence home to dinner. And
finding Mrs. Bagwell waiting at the office after dinner, away she and I to
a cabaret where she and I have eat before, and there I had her company
'tout' and had 'mon plaisir' of 'elle'.  But strange to see how a woman,
notwithstanding her greatest pretences of love 'a son mari' and religion,
may be 'vaincue'.  Thence to the Court of the Turkey Company at Sir Andrew
Rickard's to treat about carrying some men of ours to Tangier, and had
there a very civil reception, though a denial of the thing as not
practicable with them, and I think so too.  So to my office a little and
to Jervas's again, thinking 'avoir rencontrais' Jane, 'mais elle n'etait
pas dedans'.  So I back again and to my office, where I did with great
content 'ferais' a vow to mind my business, and 'laisser aller les femmes'
for a month, and am with all my heart glad to find myself able to come to
so good a resolution, that thereby I may follow my business, which and my
honour thereby lies a bleeding.  So home to supper and to bed.

24th.  Up and by coach to Westminster Hall and the Parliament House, and
there spoke with Mr. Coventry and others about business and so back to the
'Change, where no news more than that the Dutch have, by consent of all
the Provinces, voted no trade to be suffered for eighteen months, but that
they apply themselves wholly to the warr.

     [This statement of a total prohibition of all trade, and for so long
     a period as eighteen months, by a government so essentially
     commercial as that of the United Provinces, seems extraordinary.
     The fact was, that when in the beginning of the year 1665 the States
     General saw that the war with England was become inevitable, they
     took several vigorous measures, and determined to equip a formidable
     fleet, and with a view to obtain a sufficient number of men to man
     it, prohibited all navigation, especially in the great and small
     fisheries as they were then called, and in the whale fishery.  This
     measure appears to have resembled the embargoes so commonly resorted
     to in this country on similar occasions, rather than a total
     prohibition of trade.--B.]

And they say it is very true, but very strange, for we use to believe they
cannot support themselves without trade.  Thence home to dinner and then
to the office, where all the afternoon, and at night till very late, and
then home to supper and bed, having a great cold, got on Sunday last, by
sitting too long with my head bare, for Mercer to comb my hair and wash my
eares.

25th.  Up, and busy all the morning, dined at home upon a hare pye, very
good meat, and so to my office again, and in the afternoon by coach to
attend the Council at White Hall, but come too late, so back with Mr.
Gifford, a merchant, and he and I to the Coffee-house, where I met Mr.
Hill, and there he tells me that he is to be Assistant to the Secretary of
the Prize Office (Sir Ellis Layton), which is to be held at Sir Richard
Ford's, which, methinks, is but something low, but perhaps may bring him
something considerable; but it makes me alter my opinion of his being so
rich as to make a fortune for Mrs. Pickering.  Thence home and visited Sir
J. Minnes, who continues ill, but is something better; there he told me
what a mad freaking fellow Sir Ellis Layton hath been, and is, and once at
Antwerp was really mad.  Thence to my office late, my cold troubling me,
and having by squeezing myself in a coach hurt my testicles, but I hope
will cease its pain without swelling.  So home out of order, to supper and
to bed.

26th.  Lay, being in some pain, but not much, with my last night's bruise,
but up and to my office, where busy all the morning, the like after dinner
till very late, then home to supper and to bed.  My wife mightily troubled
with the tooth ake, and my cold not being gone yet, but my bruise
yesterday goes away again, and it chiefly occasioned I think now from the
sudden change of the weather from a frost to a great rayne on a sudden.

27th.  Called up by Mr. Creed to discourse about some Tangier business,
and he gone I made me ready and found Jane Welsh, Mr. Jervas his mayde,
come to tell me that she was gone from her master, and is resolved to
stick to this sweetheart of hers, one Harbing (a very sorry little fellow,
and poor), which I did in a word or two endeavour to dissuade her from,
but being unwilling to keep her long at my house, I sent her away and by
and by followed her to the Exchange, and thence led her about down to the
3 Cranes, and there took boat for the Falcon, and at a house looking into
the fields there took up and sat an hour or two talking and discoursing
.  .  .  . Thence having endeavoured to make her think of making herself
happy by staying out her time with her master and other counsels, but she
told me she could not do it, for it was her fortune to have this man,
though she did believe it would be to her ruine, which is a strange,
stupid thing, to a fellow of no kind of worth in the world and a beggar to
boot.  Thence away to boat again and landed her at the Three Cranes again,
and I to the Bridge, and so home, and after shifting myself, being dirty,
I to the 'Change, and thence to Mr. Povy's and there dined, and thence
with him and Creed to my Lord Bellasses', and there debated a great while
how to put things in order against his going, and so with my Lord in his
coach to White Hall, and with him to my Lord Duke of Albemarle, finding
him at cards.  After a few dull words or two, I away to White Hall again,
and there delivered a letter to the Duke of Yorke about our Navy business,
and thence walked up and down in the gallery, talking with Mr. Slingsby,
who is a very ingenious person, about the Mint and coynage of money.
Among other things, he argues that there being L700,000 coined in the Rump
time, and by all the Treasurers of that time, it being their opinion that
the Rump money was in all payments, one with another, about a tenth part
of all their money.  Then, says he, to my question, the nearest guess we
can make is, that the money passing up and down in business is L7,000,000.
To another question of mine he made me fully understand that the old law
of prohibiting bullion to be exported, is, and ever was a folly and an
injury, rather than good. Arguing thus, that if the exportations exceed
importations, then the balance must be brought home in money, which, when
our merchants know cannot be carried out again, they will forbear to bring
home in money, but let it lie abroad for trade, or keepe in foreign banks:
or if our importations exceed our exportations, then, to keepe credit, the
merchants will and must find ways of carrying out money by stealth, which
is a most easy thing to do, and is every where done; and therefore the law
against it signifies nothing in the world.  Besides, that it is seen, that
where money is free, there is great plenty; where it is restrained, as
here, there is a great want, as in Spayne.  These and many other fine
discourses I had from him.  Thence by coach home (to see Sir J. Minnes
first), who is still sick, and I doubt worse than he seems to be.  Mrs.
Turner here took me into her closet, and there did give me a glass of most
pure water, and shewed me her Rocke, which indeed is a very noble thing
but a very bawble.  So away to my office, where late, busy, and then home
to supper and to bed.

28th.  Up and to my office, where all the morning, and then home to
dinner, and after dinner abroad, walked to Paul's Churchyard, but my books
not bound, which vexed me.  So home to my office again, where very late
about business, and so home to supper and to bed, my cold continuing in a
great degree upon me still.  This day I received a good sum of money due
to me upon one score or another from Sir G. Carteret, among others to
clear all my matters about Colours,--[Flags]--wherein a month or two since
I was so embarrassed and I thank God I find myself to have got clear, by
that commodity, L50 and something more; and earned it with dear pains and
care and issuing of my owne money, and saved the King near L100 in it.

29th (Lord's day).  Up and to my office, where all the morning, putting
papers to rights which now grow upon my hands.  At noon dined at home. All
the afternoon at my business again.  In the evening come Mr. Andrews and
Hill, and we up to my chamber and there good musique, though my great cold
made it the less pleasing to me.  Then Mr. Hill (the other going away) and
I to supper alone, my wife not appearing, our discourse upon the
particular vain humours of Mr. Povy, which are very extraordinary indeed.
After supper I to Sir W. Batten's, where I found him, Sir W. Pen, Sir J.
Robinson, Sir R. Ford and Captain Cocke and Mr. Pen, junior. Here a great
deal of sorry disordered talk about the Trinity House men, their being
exempted from land service.  But, Lord! to see how void of method and
sense their discourse was, and in what heat, insomuch as Sir R. Ford (who
we judged, some of us, to be a little foxed) fell into very high terms
with Sir W. Batten, and then with Captain Cocke.  So that I see that no
man is wise at all times.  Thence home to prayers and to bed.

30th.  This is solemnly kept as a Fast all over the City, but I kept my
house, putting my closett to rights again, having lately put it out of
order in removing my books and things in order to being made clean.  At
this all day, and at night to my office, there to do some business, and
being late at it, comes Mercer to me, to tell me that my wife was in bed,
and desired me to come home; for they hear, and have, night after night,
lately heard noises over their head upon the leads.  Now it is strange to
think how, knowing that I have a great sum of money in my house, this puts
me into a most mighty affright, that for more than two hours, I could not
almost tell what to do or say, but feared this and that, and remembered
that this evening I saw a woman and two men stand suspiciously in the
entry, in the darke; I calling to them, they made me only this answer, the
woman said that the men came to see her; but who she was I could not tell.
The truth is, my house is mighty dangerous, having so many ways to be come
to; and at my windows, over the stairs, to see who goes up and down; but,
if I escape to-night, I will remedy it.  God preserve us this night safe!
So at almost two o'clock, I home to my house, and, in great fear, to bed,
thinking every running of a mouse really a thiefe; and so to sleep, very
brokenly, all night long, and found all safe in the morning.

31st.  Up and with Sir W. Batten to Westminster, where to speak at the
House with my Lord Bellasses, and am cruelly vexed to see myself put upon
businesses so uncertainly about getting ships for Tangier being ordered, a
servile thing, almost every day.  So to the 'Change, back by coach with
Sir W. Batten, and thence to the Crowne, a taverne hard by, with Sir W.
Rider and Cutler, where we alone, a very good dinner.  Thence home to the
office, and there all the afternoon late.  The office being up, my wife
sent for me, and what was it but to tell me how Jane carries herself, and
I must put her away presently.  But I did hear both sides and find my wife
much in fault, and the grounds of all the difference is my wife's fondness
of Tom, to the being displeased with all the house beside to defend the
boy, which vexes me, but I will cure it.  Many high words between my wife
and I, but the wench shall go, but I will take a course with the boy, for
I fear I have spoiled him already.  Thence to the office, to my accounts,
and there at once to ease my mind I have made myself debtor to Mr. Povy
for the L117  5s. got with so much joy the last month, but seeing that it
is not like to be kept without some trouble and question, I do even
discharge my mind of it, and so if I come now to refund it, as I fear I
shall, I shall now be ne'er a whit the poorer for it, though yet it is
some trouble to me to be poorer by such a sum than I thought myself a
month since.  But, however, a quiet mind and to be sure of my owne is
worth all.  The Lord be praised for what I have, which is this month come
down to L1257.  I staid up about my accounts till almost two in the
morning.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                               FEBRUARY
                               1664-1665

February 1st.  Lay long in bed, which made me, going by coach to St.
James's by appointment to have attended the Duke of Yorke and my Lord
Bellasses, lose the hopes of my getting something by the hire of a ship to
carry men to Tangier.  But, however, according to the order of the Duke
this morning, I did go to the 'Change, and there after great pains did
light of a business with Mr. Gifford and Hubland [Houblon] for bringing me
as much as I hoped for, which I have at large expressed in my stating the
case of the "King's Fisher," which is the ship that I have hired, and got
the Duke of Yorke's agreement this afternoon after much pains and not
eating a bit of bread till about 4 o'clock.  Going home I put in to an
ordinary by Temple Barr and there with my boy Tom eat a pullet, and thence
home to the office, being still angry with my wife for yesterday's
foolery.  After a good while at the office, I with the boy to the Sun
behind the Exchange, by agreement with Mr. Young the flag-maker, and there
was met by Mr. Hill, Andrews, and Mr. Hubland, a pretty serious man.  Here
two very pretty savoury dishes and good discourse.  After supper a song,
or three or four (I having to that purpose carried Lawes's book), and
staying here till 12 o'clock got the watch to light me home, and in a
continued discontent to bed.  After being in bed, my people come and say
there is a great stinke of burning, but no smoake.  We called up Sir J.
Minnes's and Sir W. Batten's people, and Griffin, and the people at the
madhouse, but nothing could be found to give occasion to it.  At this
trouble we were till past three o'clock, and then the stinke ceasing, I to
sleep, and my people to bed, and lay very long in the morning.

2nd.  Then up and to my office, where till noon and then to the 'Change,
and at the Coffee-house with Gifford, Hubland, the Master of the ship, and
I read over and approved a charter-party for carrying goods for Tangier,
wherein I hope to get some money.  Thence home, my head akeing for want of
rest and too much business.  So to the office.  At night comes, Povy, and
he and I to Mrs. Bland's to discourse about my serving her to helpe her to
a good passage for Tangier.  Here I heard her kinswoman sing 3 or 4 very
fine songs and in good manner, and then home and to supper.  My cook mayd
Jane and her mistresse parted, and she went away this day.  I vexed to
myself, but was resolved to have no more trouble, and so after supper to
my office and then to bed.

3rd.  Up, and walked with my boy (whom, because of my wife's making him
idle, I dare not leave at home) walked first to Salsbury court, there to
excuse my not being at home at dinner to Mrs. Turner, who I perceive is
vexed, because I do not serve her in something against the great feasting
for her husband's Reading--[On his appointment as Reader in Law.]--in
helping her to some good penn'eths, but I care not.  She was dressing
herself by the fire in her chamber, and there took occasion to show me her
leg, which indeed is the finest I ever saw, and she not a little proud of
it.  Thence to my Lord Bellasses; thence to Mr. Povy's, and so up and down
at that end of the town about several businesses, it being a brave frosty
day and good walking.  So back again on foot to the 'Change, in my way
taking my books from binding from my bookseller's.  My bill for the
rebinding of some old books to make them suit with my study, cost me,
besides other new books in the same bill, L3; but it will be very
handsome.  At the 'Change did several businesses, and here I hear that
newes is come from Deale, that the same day my Lord Sandwich sailed thence
with the fleete, that evening some Dutch men of warr were seen on the back
side of the Goodwin, and, by all conjecture, must be seen by my Lord's
fleete; which, if so, they must engage.  Thence, being invited, to my
uncle Wight's, where the Wights all dined; and, among the others, pretty
Mrs. Margaret, who indeed is a very pretty lady; and though by my vowe it
costs me 12d. a kiss after the first, yet I did adventure upon a couple.
So home, and among other letters found one from Jane, that is newly gone,
telling me how her mistresse won't pay her her Quarter's wages, and withal
tells me how her mistress will have the boy sit 3 or 4 hours together in
the dark telling of stories, but speaks of nothing but only her
indiscretion in undervaluing herself to do it, but I will remedy that, but
am vexed she should get some body to write so much because of making it
publique.  Then took coach and to visit my Lady Sandwich, where she
discoursed largely to me her opinion of a match, if it could be thought
fit by my Lord, for my Lady Jemimah, with Sir G. Carteret's eldest son;
but I doubt he hath yet no settled estate in land.  But I will inform
myself, and give her my opinion.  Then Mrs. Pickering (after private
discourse ended, we going into the other room) did, at my Lady's command,
tell me the manner of a masquerade

     [The masquerade at Court took place on the 2nd, and is referred to
     by Evelyn, who was present, in his Diary.  Some amusing incidents
     connected with the entertainment are related in the "Grammont
     Memoirs" (chapter vii.).]

before the King and Court the other day.  Where six women (my Lady
Castlemayne and Duchesse of Monmouth being two of them) and six men (the
Duke of Monmouth and Lord Arran and Monsieur Blanfort, being three of
them) in vizards, but most rich and antique dresses, did dance admirably
and most gloriously.  God give us cause to continue the mirthe!  So home,
and after awhile at my office to supper and to bed.

4th.  Lay long in bed discoursing with my wife about her mayds, which by
Jane's going away in discontent and against my opinion do make some
trouble between my wife and me.  But these are but foolish troubles and so
not to be set to heart, yet it do disturb me mightily these things. To my
office, and there all the morning.  At noon being invited, I to the Sun
behind the 'Change, to dinner to my Lord Belasses, where a great deal of
discourse with him, and some good, among others at table he told us a very
handsome passage of the King's sending him his message about holding out
the town of Newarke, of which he was then governor for the King. This
message he sent in a sluggbullet, being writ in cypher, and wrapped up in
lead and swallowed.  So the messenger come to my Lord and told him he had
a message from the King, but it was yet in his belly; so they did give him
some physique, and out it come.  This was a month before the King's flying
to the Scotts; and therein he told him that at such a day, being the 3d or
6th of May, he should hear of his being come to the Scotts, being assured
by the King of France that in coming to them he should be used with all
the liberty, honour, and safety, that could be desired.  And at the just
day he did come to the Scotts.  He told us another odd passage: how the
King having newly put out Prince Rupert of his generallshipp, upon some
miscarriage at Bristoll, and Sir Richard Willis

     [Sir Richard Willis, the betrayer of the Royalists, was one of the
     "Sealed Knot."  When the Restoration had become a certainty, he
     wrote to Clarendon imploring him to intercede for him with the king
     (see Lister's "Life of Clarendon," vol. iii., p. 87).]

of his governorship of Newarke, at the entreaty of the gentry of the
County, and put in my Lord Bellasses, the great officers of the King's
army mutinyed, and come in that manner with swords drawn, into the
market-place of the towne where the King was; which the King hearing,
says, "I must to horse."  And there himself personally, when every body
expected they should have been opposed, the King come, and cried to the
head of the mutineers, which was Prince Rupert, "Nephew, I command you to
be gone."  So the Prince, in all his fury and discontent, withdrew, and
his company scattered, which they say was the greatest piece of mutiny in
the world.  Thence after dinner home to my office, and in the evening was
sent to by Jane that I would give her her wages.  So I sent for my wife to
my office, and told her that rather than be talked on I would give her all
her wages for this Quarter coming on, though two months is behind, which
vexed my wife, and we begun to be angry, but I took myself up and sent her
away, but was cruelly vexed in my mind that all my trouble in this world
almost should arise from my disorders in my family and the indiscretion of
a wife that brings me nothing almost (besides a comely person) but only
trouble and discontent.  She gone I late at my business, and then home to
supper and to bed.

5th (Lord's day).  Lay in bed most of the morning, then up and down to my
chamber, among my new books, which is now a pleasant sight to me to see my
whole study almost of one binding.  So to dinner, and all the afternoon
with W. Hewer at my office endorsing of papers there, my business having
got before me much of late.  In the evening comes to see me Mr. Sheply,
lately come out of the country, who goes away again to-morrow, a good and
a very kind man to me.  There come also Mr. Andrews and Hill, and we sang
very pleasantly; and so, they being gone, I and my wife to supper, and to
prayers and bed.

6th.  Up and with Sir J. Minnes and Sir W. Pen to St. James's, but the
Duke is gone abroad.  So to White Hall to him, and there I spoke with him,
and so to Westminster, did a little business, and then home to the
'Change, where also I did some business, and went off and ended my
contract with the "Kingfisher" I hired for Tangier, and I hope to get
something by it.  Thence home to dinner, and visited Sir W. Batten, who is
sick again, worse than he was, and I am apt to think is very ill.  So to
my office, and among other things with Sir W. Warren 4 hours or more till
very late, talking of one thing or another, and have concluded a firm
league with him in all just ways to serve him and myself all I can, and I
think he will be a most usefull and thankfull man to me.  So home to
supper and to bed.  This being one of the coldest days, all say, they ever
felt in England; and I this day, under great apprehensions of getting an
ague from my putting a suit on that hath lain by without ayring a great
while, and I pray God it do not do me hurte.

7th.  Up and to my office, where busy all the morning, and at home to
dinner.  It being Shrove Tuesday, had some very good fritters.  All the
afternoon and evening at the office, and at night home to supper and to
bed.  This day, Sir W. Batten, who hath been sicke four or five days, is
now very bad, so as people begin to fear his death; and I am at a loss
whether it will be better for me to have him die, because he is a bad man,
or live, for fear a worse should come.

8th.  Up and by coach to my Lord Peterborough's, where anon my Lord Ashly
and Sir Thomas Ingram met, and Povy about his accounts, who is one of the
most unhappy accountants that ever I knew in all my life, and one that if
I were clear in reference to my bill of L117 he should be hanged before I
would ever have to do with him, and as he understands nothing of his
business himself, so he hath not one about him that do.  Here late till I
was weary, having business elsewhere, and thence home by coach, and after
dinner did several businesses and very late at my office, and so home to
supper and to bed.

9th.  Up and to my office, where all the morning very busy.  At noon home
to dinner, and then to my office again, where Sir William Petty come,
among other things to tell me that Mr. Barlow

     [Thomas Barlow, Pepys's predecessor as Clerk of the Acts, to whom he
     paid part of the salary.  Barlow held the office jointly with Dennis
     Fleeting.]

is dead; for which, God knows my heart, I could be as sorry as is possible
for one to be for a stranger, by whose death he gets L100 per annum, he
being a worthy, honest man; but after having considered that when I come
to consider the providence of God by this means unexpectedly to give me
L100 a year more in my estate, I have cause to bless God, and do it from
the bottom of my heart.  So home late at night, after twelve o'clock, and
so to bed.

10th.  Up and abroad to Paul's Churchyard, there to see the last of my
books new bound: among others, my "Court of King James,"

     ["The Court and Character of King James, written and taken by Sir
     Anthony Weldon, being an eye and eare witnesse," was published in
     1650, and reprinted in 1651 under the title of "Truth brought to
     Light" Weldon's book was answered in a work entitled "Aulicus
     Coquinariae."  Both the original book and the answer were reprinted
     in "The Secret History of the Court of King James," Edinburgh, 1811,
     two vols.  (edited by Sir Walter Scott).]

and "The Rise and Fall of the Family of the Stewarts;" and much pleased I
am now with my study; it being, methinks, a beautifull sight.  Thence (in
Mr. Grey's coach, who took me up), to Westminster, where I heard that
yesterday the King met the Houses to pass the great bill for the
L2,500,000.  After doing a little business I home, where Mr. Moore dined
with me, and evened our reckonings on my Lord Sandwich's bond to me for
principal and interest.  So that now on both there is remaining due to me
L257. 7s., and I bless God it is no more.  So all the afternoon at my
office, and late home to supper, prayers, and to bed.

11th.  Up and to my office, where all the morning.  At noon to 'Change by
coach with my Lord Brunkard, and thence after doing much business home to
dinner, and so to my office all the afternoon till past 12 at night very
busy.  So home to bed.

12th (Lord's day).  Up and to church to St. Lawrence to hear Dr. Wilkins,
the great scholar, for curiosity, I having never heard him: but was not
satisfied with him at all, only a gentleman sat in the pew I by chance sat
in, that sang most excellently, and afterward I found by his face that he
had been a Paul's scholler, but know not his name, and I was also well
pleased with the church, it being a very fine church.  So home to dinner,
and then to my office all the afternoon doing of business, and in the
evening comes Mr. Hill (but no Andrews) and we spent the evening very
finely, singing, supping and discoursing.  Then to prayers and to bed.

13th.  Up and to St. James's, did our usual business before the Duke.
Thence I to Westminster and by water (taking Mr. Stapely the rope-maker by
the way), to his rope-ground and to Limehouse, there to see the manner of
stoves and did excellently inform myself therein, and coming home did go
on board Sir W. Petty's "Experiment," which is a brave roomy vessel, and I
hope may do well.  So went on shore to a Dutch [house] to drink some mum,
and there light upon some Dutchmen, with whom we had good discourse
touching stoveing

     [Stoveing, in sail-making, is the heating of the bolt-ropes, so as
     to make them pliable.--B.]

and making of cables.  But to see how despicably they speak of us for our
using so many hands more to do anything than they do, they closing a cable
with 20, that we use 60 men upon.  Thence home and eat something, and then
to my office, where very late, and then to supper and to bed. Captain
Stokes, it seems, is at last dead at Portsmouth.

14th (St. Valentine).  This morning comes betimes Dicke Pen, to be my
wife's Valentine, and come to our bedside.  By the same token, I had him
brought to my side, thinking to have made him kiss me; but he perceived
me, and would not; so went to his Valentine: a notable, stout, witty boy.
I up about business, and, opening the door, there was Bagwell's wife, with
whom I talked afterwards, and she had the confidence to say she came with
a hope to be time enough to be my Valentine, and so indeed she did, but my
oath preserved me from loosing any time with her, and so I and my boy
abroad by coach to Westminster, where did two or three businesses, and
then home to the 'Change, and did much business there.  My Lord Sandwich
is, it seems, with his fleete at Alborough Bay.  So home to dinner and
then to the office, where till 12 almost at night, and then home to supper
and to bed.

15th.  Up and to my office, where busy all the morning.  At noon with
Creed to dinner to Trinity-house, where a very good dinner among the old
sokers, where an extraordinary discourse of the manner of the loss of the
"Royall Oake" coming home from Bantam, upon the rocks of Scilly, many
passages therein very extraordinary, and if I can I will get it in
writing.  Thence with Creed to Gresham College, where I had been by Mr.
Povy the last week proposed to be admitted a member;

     [According to the minutes of the Royal Society for February 15th,
     1664-65, "Mr. Pepys was unanimously elected and admitted."  Notes of
     the experiments shown by Hooke and Boyle are given in Birch's
     "History of the Royal Society," vol. ii., p. 15.]

and was this day admitted, by signing a book and being taken by the hand
by the President, my Lord Brunkard, and some words of admittance said to
me.  But it is a most acceptable thing to hear their discourse, and see
their experiments; which were this day upon the nature of fire, and how it
goes out in a place where the ayre is not free, and sooner out where the
ayre is exhausted, which they showed by an engine on purpose.  After this
being done, they to the Crowne Taverne, behind the 'Change, and there my
Lord and most of the company to a club supper; Sir P. Neale, Sir R.
Murrey, Dr. Clerke, Dr. Whistler, Dr. Goddard, and others of most eminent
worth.  Above all, Mr. Boyle to-day was at the meeting, and above him Mr.
Hooke, who is the most, and promises the least, of any man in the world
that ever I saw.  Here excellent discourse till ten at night, and then
home, and to Sir W. Batten's, where I hear that Sir Thos. Harvy intends to
put Mr. Turner out of his house and come in himself, which will be very
hard to them, and though I love him not, yet for his family's sake I pity
him.  So home and to bed.

16th.  Up, and with Mr. Andrews to White Hall, where a Committee of
Tangier, and there I did our victuallers' business for some more money,
out of which I hope to get a little, of which I was glad; but, Lord! to
see to what a degree of contempt, nay, scorn, Mr. Povy, through his
prodigious folly, hath brought himself in his accounts, that if he be not
a man of a great interest, he will be kicked out of his employment for a
foole, is very strange, and that most deservedly that ever man was, for
never any man, that understands accounts so little, ever went through so
much, and yet goes through it with the greatest shame and yet with
confidence that ever I saw man in my life.  God deliver me in my owne
business of my bill out of his hands, and if ever I foul my fingers with
him again let me suffer for it!  Back to the 'Change, and thence home to
dinner, where Mrs. Hunt dined with me, and poor Mrs. Batters; who brought
her little daughter with her, and a letter from her husband, wherein, as a
token, the foole presents me very seriously with his daughter for me to
take the charge of bringing up for him, and to make my owne.  But I took
no notice to her at all of the substance of the letter, but fell to
discourse, and so went away to the office, where all the afternoon till
almost one in the morning, and then home to bed.

17th.  Up, and it being bitter cold, and frost and snow, which I had
thought had quite left us, I by coach to Povy's, where he told me, as I
knew already, how he was handled the other day, and is still, by my Lord
Barkeley, and among other things tells me, what I did not know, how my
Lord Barkeley will say openly, that he hath fought more set
fields--[Battles or actions]--than any man in England hath done.  I did my
business with him, which was to get a little sum of money paid, and so
home with Mr. Andrews, who met me there, and there to the office.  At noon
home and there found Lewellin, which vexed me out of my old jealous
humour.  So to my office, where till 12 at night, being only a little
while at noon at Sir W. Batten's to see him, and had some high words with
Sir J. Minnes about Sir W. Warren, he calling him cheating knave, but I
cooled him, and at night at Sir W. Pen's, he being to go to Chatham
to-morrow.  So home to supper and to bed.

18th.  Up, and to the office, where sat all the morning; at noon to the
'Change, and thence to the Royall Oake taverne in Lumbard Streete, where
Sir William Petty and the owners of the double-bottomed boat (the
Experiment) did entertain my Lord Brunkard, Sir R. Murrey, myself, and
others, with marrow bones and a chine of beefe of the victuals they have
made for this ship; and excellent company and good discourse: but, above
all, I do value Sir William Petty.  Thence home; and took my Lord
Sandwich's draught of the harbour of Portsmouth down to Ratcliffe, to one
Burston, to make a plate for the King, and another for the Duke, and
another for himself; which will be very neat.  So home, and till almost
one o'clock in the morning at my office, and then home to supper and to
bed.  My Lord Sandwich, and his fleete of twenty-five ships in the Downes,
returned from cruising, but could not meet with any Dutchmen.

19th.  Lay in bed, it being Lord's day, all the morning talking with my
wife, sometimes pleased, sometimes displeased, and then up and to dinner.
All the afternoon also at home, and Sir W. Batten's, and in the evening
comes Mr. Andrews, and we sung together, and then to supper, he not
staying, and at supper hearing by accident of my mayds their letting in a
rogueing Scotch woman that haunts the office, to helpe them to washe and
scoure in our house, and that very lately, I fell mightily out, and made
my wife, to the disturbance of the house and neighbours, to beat our
little girle, and then we shut her down into the cellar, and there she lay
all night.  So we to bed.

20th.  Up, and with Sir J. Minnes to attend the Duke, and then we back
again and rode into the beginning of my Lord Chancellor's new house, near
St. James's; which common people have already called Dunkirke-house, from
their opinion of his having a good bribe for the selling of that towne.
And very noble I believe it will be.  Near that is my Lord Barkeley
beginning another on one side, and Sir J. Denham on the other.  Thence I
to the House of Lords and spoke with my Lord Bellasses, and so to the
'Change, and there did business, and so to the Sun taverne, haling in the
morning had some high words with Sir J. Lawson about his sending of some
bayled goods to Tangier, wherein the truth is I did not favour him, but
being conscious that some of my profits may come out by some words that
fell from him, and to be quiet, I have accommodated it.  Here we dined
merry; but my club and the rest come to 7s. 6d., which was too much.
Thence to the office, and there found Bagwell's wife, whom I directed to
go home, and I would do her business, which was to write a letter to my
Lord Sandwich for her husband's advance into a better ship as there should
be occasion.  Which I did, and by and by did go down by water to Deptford,
and then down further, and so landed at the lower end of the town, and it
being dark 'entrer en la maison de la femme de Bagwell', and there had 'sa
compagnie', though with a great deal of difficulty, 'neanmoins en fin
j'avais ma volont d'elle', and being sated therewith, I walked home to
Redriffe, it being now near nine o'clock, and there I did drink some
strong waters and eat some bread and cheese, and so home. Where at my
office my wife comes and tells me that she hath hired a chamber mayde, one
of the prettiest maydes that ever she saw in her life, and that she is
really jealous of me for her, but hath ventured to hire her from month to
month, but I think she means merrily.  So to supper and to bed.

21st.  Up, and to the office (having a mighty pain in my forefinger of my
left hand, from a strain that it received last night) in struggling 'avec
la femme que je' mentioned yesterday, where busy till noon, and then my
wife being busy in going with her woman to a hot-house to bathe herself,
after her long being within doors in the dirt, so that she now pretends to
a resolution of being hereafter very clean.  How long it will hold I can
guess.  I dined with Sir W. Batten and my Lady, they being now a'days very
fond of me.  So to the 'Change, and off of the 'Change with Mr. Wayth to a
cook's shop, and there dined again for discourse with him about Hamaccos

     [Or hammock-battens: cleats or battens nailed to the sides of a
     vessel's beams, from which to suspend the seamen's hammocks.]

and the abuse now practised in tickets, and more like every day to be.
Also of the great profit Mr. Fen makes of his place, he being, though he
demands but 5 per cent. of all he pays, and that is easily computed, but
very little pleased with any man that gives him no more.  So to the
office, and after office my Lord Brunkerd carried me to Lincolne's Inne
Fields, and there I with my Lady Sandwich (good lady) talking of innocent
discourse of good housewifery and husbands for her daughters, and the
luxury and looseness of the times and other such things till past 10
o'clock at night, and so by coach home, where a little at my office, and
so to supper and to bed.  My Lady tells me how my Lord Castlemayne is
coming over from France, and is believed will be made friends with his
Lady again.  What mad freaks the Mayds of Honour at Court have: that Mrs.
Jenings, one of the Duchesses mayds, the other day dressed herself like an
orange wench, and went up and down and cried oranges; till falling down,
or by such accident, though in the evening, her fine shoes were discerned,
and she put to a great deale of shame; that such as these tricks being
ordinary, and worse among them, thereby few will venture upon them for
wives: my Lady Castlemayne will in merriment say that her daughter (not
above a year old or two) will be the first mayde in the Court that will be
married.  This day my Lord Sandwich writ me word from the Downes, that he
is like to be in towne this week.

22nd.  Lay last night alone, my wife after her bathing lying alone in
another bed.  So cold all night.  Up and to the office, where busy all the
morning.  At noon at the 'Change, busy; where great talk of a Dutch ship
in the North put on shore, and taken by a troop of horse.  Home to dinner
and Creed with me.  Thence to Gresham College, where very noble discourse,
and thence home busy till past 12 at night, and then home to supper and to
bed.  Mrs. Bland come this night to take leave of me and my wife, going to
Tangier.

23rd.  This day, by the blessing of Almighty God, I have lived thirty-two
years in the world, and am in the best degree of health at this minute
that I have been almost in my life time, and at this time in the best
condition of estate that ever I was in-the Lord make me thankfull.  Up,
and to the office, where busy all the morning.  At noon to the 'Change,
where I hear the most horrid and astonishing newes that ever was yet told
in my memory, that De Ruyter with his fleete in Guinny hath proceeded to
the taking of whatever we have, forts, goods, ships, and men, and tied our
men back to back, and thrown them all into the sea, even women and
children also.  This a Swede or Hamburgher is come into the River and
tells that he saw the thing done.

     [Similar reports of the cruelty of the English to the Dutch in
     Guinea were credited in Holland, and were related by Downing in a
     letter to Clarendon from the Hague, dated April 14th, 1665 (Lister's
     "Life of Clarendon," vol. iii., p. 374).]

But, Lord!  to see the consternation all our merchants are in is
observable, and with what fury and revenge they discourse of it.  But I
fear it will like other things in a few days cool among us.  But that
which I fear most is the reason why he that was so kind to our men at
first should afterward, having let them go, be so cruel when he went
further.  What I fear is that there he was informed (which he was not
before) of some of Holmes's dealings with his countrymen, and so was moved
to this fury.  God grant it be not so!  But a more dishonourable thing was
never suffered by Englishmen, nor a more barbarous done by man, as this by
them to us.  Home to dinner, and then to the office, where we sat all the
afternoon, and then at night to take my finall leave of Mrs. Bland, who
sets out to-morrow for Tangier, and then I back to my office till past 12,
and so home to supper and to bed.

24th.  Up, and to my office, where all the morning upon advising again
with some fishermen and the water bayliffe of the City, by Mr. Coventry's
direction, touching the protections which are desired for the fishermen
upon the River, and I am glad of the occasion to make me understand
something of it.  At noon home to dinner, and all the afternoon till 9 at
night in my chamber, and Mr. Hater with me (to prevent being disturbed at
the office), to perfect my contract book, which, for want of time, hath a
long time lain without being entered in as I used to do from month to
month.  Then to my office, where till almost 12, and so home to bed.

25th.  Up, and to the office, where all the morning.  At noon to the
'Change; where just before I come, the Swede that had told the King and
the Duke so boldly this great lie of the Dutch flinging our men back to
back into the sea at Guinny, so particularly, and readily, and
confidently, was whipt round the 'Change: he confessing it a lie, and that
he did it in hopes to get something.  It is said the judges, upon demand,
did give it their opinion that the law would judge him to be whipt, to
lose his eares, or to have his nose slit but I do not hear that anything
more is to be done to him.  They say he is delivered over to the Dutch
Embassador to do what he pleased with him.  But the world do think that
there is some design on one side or other, either of the Dutch or French,
for it is not likely a fellow would invent such a lie to get money whereas
he might have hoped for a better reward by telling something in behalf of
us to please us.  Thence to the Sun taverne, and there dined with Sir W.
Warren and Mr. Gifford, the merchant: and I hear how Nich. Colborne, that
lately lived and got a great estate there, is gone to live like a prince
in the country, and that this Wadlow, that did the like at the Devil by
St. Dunstane's, did go into the country, and there spent almost all he had
got, and hath now choused this Colborne out of his house, that he might
come to his old trade again.  But, Lord! to see how full the house is, no
room for any company almost to come into it.  Thence home to the office,
where dispatched much business; at night late home, and to clean myself
with warm water; my wife will have me, because she do herself, and so to
bed.

26th (Sunday).  Up and to church, and so home to dinner, and after dinner
to my office, and there busy all the afternoon, till in the evening comes
Mr. Andrews and Hill, and so home and to singing.  Hill staid and supped
with me, and very good discourse of Italy, where he was, which is always
to me very agreeable.  After supper, he gone, we to prayers and to bed.

27th.  Up and to St. James's, where we attended the Duke as usual.  This
morning I was much surprized and troubled with a letter from Mrs. Bland,
that she is left behind, and much trouble it cost me this day to find out
some way to carry her after the ships to Plymouth, but at last I hope I
have done it.  At noon to the 'Change to inquire what wages the Dutch give
in their men-of-warr at this day, and I hear for certain they give but
twelve guilders at most, which is not full 24s., a thing I wonder at. At
home to dinner, and then in Sir J. Minnes's coach, my wife and I with him,
and also Mercer, abroad, he and I to White Hall, and he would have his
coach to wait upon my wife on her visits, it being the first time my wife
hath been out of doors (but the other day to bathe her) several weeks.  We
to a Committee of the Council to discourse concerning pressing of men;
but, Lord! how they meet; never sit down: one comes, now another goes,
then comes another; one complaining that nothing is done, another swearing
that he hath been there these two hours and nobody come.  At last it come
to this, my Lord Annesly, says he, "I think we must be forced to get the
King to come to every committee; for I do not see that we do any thing at
any time but when he is here."  And I believe he said the truth and very
constant he is at the council table on council-days; which his
predecessors, it seems, very rarely did; but thus I perceive the greatest
affair in the world at this day is likely to be managed by us.  But to
hear how my Lord Barkeley and others of them do cry up the discipline of
the late times here, and in the former Dutch warr is strange, wishing with
all their hearts that the business of religion were not so severely
carried on as to discourage the sober people to come among us, and wishing
that the same law and severity were used against drunkennesse as there was
then, saying that our evil living will call the hand of God upon us again.
Thence to walk alone a good while in St. James's Parke with Mr. Coventry,
who I perceive is grown a little melancholy and displeased to see things
go as they do so carelessly. Thence I by coach to Ratcliffe highway, to
the plate-maker's, and he has begun my Lord Sandwich's plate very neatly,
and so back again.  Coming back I met Colonell Atkins, who in other
discourse did offer to give me a piece to receive of me 20 when he proves
the late news of the Dutch, their drowning our men, at Guinny, and the
truth is I find the generality of the world to fear that there is
something of truth in it, and I do fear it too.  Thence back by coach to
Sir Philip Warwicke's; and there he did contract with me a kind of
friendship and freedom of communication, wherein he assures me to make me
understand the whole business of the Treasurer's business of the Navy,
that I shall know as well as Sir G. Carteret what money he hath; and will
needs have me come to him sometimes, or he meet me, to discourse of things
tending to the serving the King: and I am mighty proud and happy in
becoming so known to such a man.  And I hope shall pursue it.  Thence back
home to the office a little tired and out of order, and then to supper and
to bed.

28th: At the office all the morning.  At noon dined at home.  After dinner
my wife and I to my Lady batten's, it being the first time my wife hath
been there, I think, these two years, but I had a mind in part to take
away the strangenesse, and so we did, and all very quiett and kind. Come
home, I to the taking my wife's kitchen accounts at the latter end of the
month, and there find 7s. wanting, which did occasion a very high falling
out between us, I indeed too angrily insisting upon so poor a thing, and
did give her very provoking high words, calling her beggar, and
reproaching her friends, which she took very stomachfully and reproached
me justly with mine; and I confess, being myself, I cannot see what she
could have done less.  I find she is very cunning, and when she least
shews it hath her wit at work; but it is an ill one, though I think not so
bad but with good usage I might well bear with it, and the truth is I do
find that my being over-solicitous and jealous and froward and ready to
reproach her do make her worse.  However, I find that now and then a
little difference do no hurte, but too much of it will make her know her
force too much.  We parted after many high words very angry, and I to my
office to my month's accounts, and find myself worth L1270, for which the
Lord God be praised!  So at almost 2 o'clock in the morning I home to
supper and to bed, and so ends this month, with great expectation of the
Hollanders coming forth, who are, it seems, very high and rather more
ready than we.  God give a good issue to it!




     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     Accounts I never did see, or hope again to see in my days
     At a loss whether it will be better for me to have him die
     By his many words and no understanding, confound himself
     Church, where a most insipid young coxcomb preached
     Clean myself with warm water; my wife will have me
     Costs me 12d. a kiss after the first
     Find that now and then a little difference do no hurte
     Going with her woman to a hot-house to bathe herself
     Good discourse and counsel from him, which I hope I shall take
     Great thaw it is not for a man to walk the streets
     Heard noises over their head upon the leads
     His disease was the pox and that he must be fluxed (Rupert)
     I know not how their fortunes may agree
     If the exportations exceed importations
     It is a strange thing how fancy works
     Law against it signifies nothing in the world
     Law and severity were used against drunkennesse
     Luxury and looseness of the times
     Must be forced to confess it to my wife, which troubles me
     My wife after her bathing lying alone in another bed
     No man is wise at all times
     Offer to give me a piece to receive of me 20
     Pretends to a resolution of being hereafter very clean
     Sat an hour or two talking and discoursing .  .  .  .
     So great a trouble is fear
     Those bred in the North among the colliers are good for labour
     Tied our men back to back, and thrown them all into the sea
     Too much of it will make her know her force too much
     Up, leaving my wife in bed, being sick of her months
     When she least shews it hath her wit at work
     Where money is free, there is great plenty
     Who is the most, and promises the least, of any man
     Wife that brings me nothing almost (besides a comely person)





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Diary of Samuel Pepys,
January/February 1964/65, by Samuel Pepys

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***

***** This file should be named 4154.txt or 4154.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/4/1/5/4154/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
