The Project Gutenberg EBook of Diary of Samuel Pepys, March/April 1664/65
by Samuel Pepys

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Diary of Samuel Pepys, March/April 1664/65

Author: Samuel Pepys

Release Date: November 30, 2004 [EBook #4155]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***




Produced by David Widger





                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A. F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

   TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                             MARCH & APRIL
                               1664-1665

March 1st.  Up, and this day being the day than: by a promise, a great
while ago, made to my wife, I was to give her L20 to lay out in clothes
against Easter, she did, notwithstanding last night's falling out, come to
peace with me and I with her, but did boggle mightily at the parting with
my money, but at last did give it her, and then she abroad to buy her
things, and I to my office, where busy all the morning.  At noon I to
dinner at Trinity House, and thence to Gresham College, where Mr. Hooke
read a second very curious lecture about the late Comett; among other
things proving very probably that this is the very same Comett that
appeared before in the year 1618, and that in such a time probably it will
appear again, which is a very new opinion; but all will be in print. Then
to the meeting, where Sir G. Carteret's two sons, his owne, and Sir N.
Slaning, were admitted of the society: and this day I did pay my admission
money, 40s. to the society.  Here was very fine discourses and
experiments, but I do lacke philosophy enough to understand them, and so
cannot remember them.  Among others, a very particular account of the
making of the several sorts of bread in France, which is accounted the
best place for bread in the world.  So home, where very busy getting an
answer to some question of Sir Philip Warwicke touching the expense of the
navy, and that being done I by coach at 8 at night with my wife and Mercer
to Sir Philip's and discoursed with him (leaving them in the coach), and
then back with them home and to supper and to bed.

2nd.  Begun this day to rise betimes before six o'clock, and, going down
to call my people, found Besse and the girle with their clothes on, lying
within their bedding upon the ground close by the fireside, and a candle
burning all night, pretending they would rise to scoure.  This vexed me,
but Besse is going and so she will not trouble me long.  Up, and by water
to Burston about my Lord's plate, and then home to the office, so there
all the morning sitting.  At noon dined with Sir W. Batten (my wife being
gone again to-day to buy things, having bought nothing yesterday for lack
of Mrs. Pierces company), and thence to the office again, where very busy
till 12 at night, and vexed at my wife's staying out so late, she not
being at home at 9 o'clock, but at last she is come home, but the reason
of her stay I know not yet.  So shut up my books, and home to supper and
to bed.

3rd.  Up, and abroad about several things, among others to see Mr. Peter
Honiwood, who was at my house the other day, and I find it was for nothing
but to pay me my brother John's Quarterage.  Thence to see Mrs. Turner,
who takes it mighty ill I did not come to dine with the Reader, her
husband, which, she says, was the greatest feast that ever was yet kept by
a Reader, and I believe it was well.  But I am glad I did not go, which
confirms her in an opinion that I am growne proud.  Thence to the 'Change,
and to several places, and so home to dinner and to my office, where till
12 at night writing over a discourse of mine to Mr. Coventry touching the
Fishermen of the Thames upon a reference of the business by him to me
concerning their being protected from presse.  Then home to supper and to
bed.

4th.  Up very betimes, and walked, it being bitter cold, to Ratcliffe, to
the plate-maker's and back again.  To the office, where we sat all the
morning, I, with being empty and full of ayre and wind, had some pain
to-day.  Dined alone at home, my wife being gone abroad to buy some more
things.  All the afternoon at the office.  William Howe come to see me,
being come up with my Lord from sea: he is grown a discreet, but very
conceited fellow.  He tells me how little respectfully Sir W. Pen did
carry it to my Lord onboard the Duke's ship at sea; and that Captain
Minnes, a favourite of Prince Rupert's, do shew my Lord little respect;
but that every body else esteems my Lord as they ought.  I am sorry for
the folly of the latter, and vexed at the dissimulation of the former. At
night home to supper and to bed.  This day was proclaimed at the 'Change
the war with Holland.

5th (Lord's day).  Up, and Mr. Burston bringing me by order my Lord's
plates, which he has been making this week.  I did take coach and to my
Lord Sandwich's and dined with my Lord; it being the first time he hath
dined at home since his coming from sea: and a pretty odd demand it was of
my Lord to my Lady before me: "How do you, sweetheart?  How have you done
all this week?" himself taking notice of it to me, that he had hardly seen
her the week before.  At dinner he did use me with the greatest solemnity
in the world, in carving for me, and nobody else, and calling often to my
Lady to cut for me; and all the respect possible. After dinner looked over
the plates, liked them mightily, and indeed I think he is the most exact
man in what he do in the world of that kind. So home again, and there
after a song or two in the evening with Mr. Hill, I to my office, and then
home to supper and to bed.

6th.  Up, and with Sir J. Minnes by coach, being a most lamentable cold
day as any this year, to St. James's, and there did our business with the
Duke.  Great preparations for his speedy return to sea.  I saw him try on
his buff coat and hatpiece covered with black velvet.  It troubles me more
to think of his venture, than of anything else in the whole warr. Thence
home to dinner, where I saw Besse go away; she having of all wenches that
ever lived with us received the greatest love and kindnesse and good
clothes, besides wages, and gone away with the greatest ingratitude.  I
then abroad to look after my Hamaccoes, and so home, and there find our
new chamber-mayde, Mary, come, which instead of handsome, as my wife spoke
and still seems to reckon, is a very ordinary wench, I think, and therein
was mightily disappointed.  To my office, where busy late, and then home
to supper and to bed, and was troubled all this night with a pain in my
left testicle, that run up presently into my left kidney and there kept
akeing all night.  In great pain.

7th.  Up, and was pretty well, but going to the office, and I think it was
sitting with my back to the fire, it set me in a great rage again, that I
could not continue till past noon at the office, but was forced to go
home, nor could sit down to dinner, but betook myself to my bed, and being
there a while my pain begun to abate and grow less and less.  Anon I went
to make water, not dreaming of any thing but my testicle that by some
accident I might have bruised as I used to do, but in pissing there come
from me two stones, I could feel them, and caused my water to be looked
into; but without any pain to me in going out, which makes me think that
it was not a fit of the stone at all; for my pain was asswaged upon my
lying down a great while before I went to make water.  Anon I made water
again very freely and plentifully.  I kept my bed in good ease all the
evening, then rose and sat up an hour or two, and then to bed and lay till
8 o'clock, and then,

8th.  Though a bitter cold day, yet I rose, and though my pain and
tenderness in my testicle remains a little, yet I do verily think that my
pain yesterday was nothing else, and therefore I hope my disease of the
stone may not return to me, but void itself in pissing, which God grant,
but I will consult my physitian.  This morning is brought me to the office
the sad newes of "The London," in which Sir J. Lawson's men were all
bringing her from Chatham to the Hope, and thence he was to go to sea in
her; but a little a'this side the buoy of the Nower, she suddenly blew up.
About 24 [men] and a woman that were in the round-house and coach saved;
the rest, being above 300, drowned: the ship breaking all in pieces, with
80 pieces of brass ordnance.  She lies sunk, with her round-house above
water.  Sir J. Lawson hath a great loss in this of so many good chosen
men, and many relations among them.  I went to the 'Change, where the news
taken very much to heart.  So home to dinner, and Mr. Moore with me.  Then
I to Gresham College, and there saw several pretty experiments, and so
home and to my office, and at night about I I home to supper and to bed.

9th.  Up and to the office, where we sat all the afternoon.  At noon to
dinner at home, and then abroad with my wife, left her at the New Exchange
and I to Westminster, where I hear Mrs. Martin is brought to bed of a boy
and christened Charles, which I am very glad of, for I was fearful of
being called to be a godfather to it.  But it seems it was to be done
suddenly, and so I escaped.  It is strange to see how a liberty and going
abroad without purpose of doing anything do lead a man to what is bad, for
I was just upon going to her, where I must of necessity [have] broken my
oath or made a forfeit.  But I did not, company being (I heard by my
porter) with her, and so I home again, taking up my wife, and was set down
by her at Paule's Schoole, where I visited Mr. Crumlum at his house; and,
Lord! to see how ridiculous a conceited pedagogue he is, though a learned
man, he being so dogmaticall in all he do and says.  But among other
discourse, we fell to the old discourse of Paule's Schoole; and he did,
upon my declaring my value of it, give me one of Lilly's grammars of a
very old impression, as it was in the Catholique times, which I shall much
set by.  And so, after some small discourse, away and called upon my wife
at a linen draper's shop buying linen, and so home, and to my office,
where late, and home to supper and to bed.  This night my wife had a new
suit of flowered ash-coloured silke, very noble.

10th.  Up, and to the office all the morning.  At noon to the 'Change,
where very hot, people's proposal of the City giving the King' another
ship for "The London," that is lately blown up, which would be very
handsome, and if well managed, might be done; but I fear if it be put into
ill hands, or that the courtiers do solicit it, it will never be done.
Home to dinner, and thence to the Committee of Tangier at White Hall,
where my Lord Barkely and Craven and others; but, Lord! to see how
superficially things are done in the business of the Lottery, which will
be the disgrace of the Fishery, and without profit.  Home, vexed at my
loss of time, and thereto my office.  Late at night come the two Bellamys,
formerly petty warrant Victuallers of the Navy, to take my advice about a
navy debt of theirs for the compassing of which they offer a great deal of
money, and the thing most just.  Perhaps I may undertake it, and get
something by it, which will be a good job.  So home late to bed.

11th.  Up and to the office, at noon home to dinner, and to the office
again, where very late, and then home to supper and to bed.  This day
returned Sir W. Batten and Sir J. Minnes from Lee Roade, where they have
been to see the wrecke of "The London," out of which, they say, the guns
may be got, but the hull of her will be wholly lost, as not being capable
of being weighed.

12th (Lord's day).  Up, and borrowing Sir J. Minnes's coach, to my Lord
Sandwich's, but he was gone abroad.  I sent the coach back for my wife, my
Lord a second time dining at home on purpose to meet me, he having not
dined once at home but those times since his coming from sea.  I sat down
and read over the Bishop of Chichester's' sermon upon the anniversary of
the King's death, much cried up, but, methinks, but a mean sermon.  By and
by comes in my Lord, and he and I to talke of many things in the Navy, one
from another, in general, to see how the greatest things are committed to
very ordinary men, as to parts and experience, to do; among others, my
Lord Barkeley.  We talked also of getting W. Howe to be put into the
Muster-Mastershipp in the roome of Creed, if Creed will give way, but my
Lord do it without any great gusto, calling Howe a proud coxcomb in
passion.  Down to dinner, where my wife in her new lace whiske, which,
indeed, is very noble, and I much pleased with it, and so my Lady also.
Here very pleasant my Lord was at dinner, and after dinner did look over
his plate, which Burston hath brought him to-day, and is the last of the
three that he will have made.  After satisfied with that, he abroad, and I
after much discourse with my Lady about Sir G. Carteret's son, of whom she
hath some thoughts for a husband for my Lady Jemimah, we away home by
coach again, and there sang a good while very pleasantly with Mr. Andrews
and Hill.  They gone; we to supper, and betimes to bed.

13th.  Up betimes, this being the first morning of my promise upon a
forfeite not to lie in bed a quarter of an hour after my first waking.
Abroad to St. James's, and there much business, the King also being with
us a great while.  Thence to the 'Change, and thence with Captain Tayler
and Sir W. Warren dined at a house hard by for discourse sake, and so I
home, and there meeting a letter from Mrs. Martin desiring to speak with
me, I (though against my promise of visiting her) did go, and there found
her in her childbed dress desiring my favour to get her husband a place. I
staid not long, but taking Sir W. Warren up at White Hall home, and among
other discourse fell to a business which he says shall if accomplished
bring me L100.  He gone, I to supper and to bed.  This day my wife begun
to wear light-coloured locks, quite white almost, which, though it makes
her look very pretty, yet not being natural, vexes me, that I will not
have her wear them.  This day I saw my Lord Castlemayne at St. James's,
lately come from France.

14th.  Up before six, to the office, where busy all the morning.  At noon
dined with Sir W. Batten and Sir J. Minnes, at the Tower, with Sir J.
Robinson, at a farewell dinner which he gives Major Holmes at his going
out of the Tower, where he hath for some time, since his coming from
Guinny, been a prisoner, and, it seems, had presented the Lieutenant with
fifty pieces yesterday.  Here a great deale of good victuals and company.
Thence home to my office, where very late, and home to supper and to bed
weary of business.

15th.  Up and by coach with Sir W. Batten to St. James's, where among
other things before the Duke, Captain Taylor was called in, and, Sir J.
Robinson his accuser not appearing, was acquitted quite from his charge,
and declared that he should go to Harwich, which I was very well pleased
at.  Thence I to Mr. Coventry's chamber, and there privately an houre with
him in discourse of the office, and did deliver to him many notes of
things about which he is to get the Duke's command, before he goes, for
the putting of business among us in better order.  He did largely owne his
dependance as to the office upon my care, and received very great
expressions of love from him, and so parted with great satisfaction to
myself.  So home to the 'Change, and thence home to dinner, where my wife
being gone down upon a sudden warning from my Lord Sandwich's daughters to
the Hope with them to see "The Prince," I dined alone.  After dinner to
the office, and anon to Gresham College, where, among other good
discourse, there was tried the great poyson of Maccassa upon a dogg,

     ["The experiment of trying to poison a dog with some of the Macassar
     powder in which a needle had been dipped was made, but without
     success."--Pepys himself made a communication at this meeting of
     the information he had received from the master of the Jersey ship,
     who had been in company of Major Holmes in the Guinea voyage,
     concerning the pendulum watches (Birch's "History," vol. ii., p.
     23).]

but it had no effect all the time we sat there.  We anon broke up and I
home, where late at my office, my wife not coming home.  I to bed,
troubled, about 12 or past.

16th.  Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning, my wife coming
home from the water this morning, having lain with them on board "The
Prince" all night.  At noon home to dinner, where my wife told me the
unpleasant journey she had yesterday among the children, whose fear upon
the water and folly made it very unpleasing to her.  A good dinner, and
then to the office again.  This afternoon Mr. Harris, the sayle-maker,
sent me a noble present of two large silver candlesticks and snuffers, and
a slice to keep them upon, which indeed is very handsome.  At night come
Mr. Andrews with L36, the further fruits of my Tangier contract, and so to
bed late and weary with business, but in good content of mind, blessing
God for these his benefits.

17th.  Up and to my office, and then with Sir W. Batten to St. James's,
where many come to take leave, as was expected, of the Duke, but he do not
go till Monday.  This night my Lady Wood died of the small-pox, and is
much lamented among the great persons for a good-natured woman and a good
wife, but for all that it was ever believed she was as others are. The
Duke did give us some commands, and so broke up, not taking leave of him.
But the best piece of newes is, that instead of a great many troublesome
Lords, the whole business is to be left with the Duke of Albemarle to act
as Admirall in his stead; which is a thing that do cheer my heart.  For
the other would have vexed us with attendance, and never done the
business.  Thence to the Committee of Tangier, where the Duke a little,
and then left us and we staid.  A very great Committee, the Lords
Albemarle, Sandwich, Barkely, Fitzharding, Peterborough, Ashley, Sir Thos.
Ingram, Sir G. Carteret and others.  The whole business was the stating of
Povy's accounts, of whom to say no more, never could man say worse himself
nor have worse said of him than was by the company to his face; I mean, as
to his folly and very reflecting words to his honesty. Broke up without
anything but trouble and shame, only I got my businesses done to the
signing of two bills for the Contractors and Captain Taylor, and so come
away well pleased, and home, taking up my wife at the 'Change, to dinner.
After dinner out again bringing my wife to her father's again at Charing
Cross, and I to the Committee again, where a new meeting of trouble about
Povy, who still makes his business worse and worse, and broke up with the
most open shame again to him, and high words to him of disgrace that they
would not trust him with any more money till he had given an account of
this.  So broke up.  Then he took occasion to desire me to step aside, and
he and I by water to London together.  In the way, of his owne accord, he
proposed to me that he would surrender his place of Treasurer' to me to
have half the profit.  The thing is new to me; but the more I think the
more I like it, and do put him upon getting it done by the Duke.  Whether
it takes or no I care not, but I think at present it may have some
convenience in it.  Home, and there find my wife come home and gone to
bed, of a cold got yesterday by water. At the office Bellamy come to me
again, and I am in hopes something may be got by his business.  So late
home to supper and bed.

18th.  Up and to the office, where all the morning.  At noon to the
'Change, and took Mr. Hill along with me to Mr. Povy's, where we dined,
and shewed him the house to his good content, and I expect when we meet we
shall laugh at it.  But I having business to stay, he went away, and Povy
and Creed and I to do some business upon Povy's accounts all the afternoon
till late at night, where, God help him!  never man was so confounded, and
all his people about him in this world as he and his are. After we had
done something [to the] purpose we broke up, and Povy acquainted me before
Creed (having said something of it also this morning at our office to me)
what he had done in speaking to the Duke and others about his making me
Treasurer, and has carried it a great way, so as I think it cannot well be
set back.  Creed, I perceive, envies me in it, but I think as that will do
me no hurte, so if it did I am at a great losse to think whether it were
not best for me to let it wholly alone, for it will much disquiett me and
my business of the Navy, which in this warr will certainly be worth all my
time to me.  Home, continuing in this doubtfull condition what to think of
it, but God Almighty do his will in it for the best.  To my office, where
late, and then home to supper and to bed.

19th (Lord's day).  Mr. Povy sent his coach for me betimes, and I to him,
and there to our great trouble do find that my Lord FitzHarding do appear
for Mr. Brunkard

     [Henry Brouncker, younger brother of William, Viscount Brouncker,
     President of the Royal Society.  He was Groom of the Bedchamber to
     the Duke of York, and succeeded to the office of Cofferer on the
     death of William Ashburnham in 1671.  His character was bad, and his
     conduct in the sea-fight of 1665 was impugned.  He was expelled from
     the House of Commons, but succeeded to his brother's title in 1684.
     He died in January, 1687.]

to be Paymaster upon Povy's going out, by a former promise of the Duke's,
and offering to give as much as any for it.  This put us all into a great
dumpe, and so we went to Creed's new lodging in the Mewes, and there we
found Creed with his parrot upon his shoulder, which struck Mr. Povy
coming by just by the eye, very deep, which, had it hit his eye, had put
it out.  This a while troubled us, but not proving very bad, we to our
business consulting what to do; at last resolved, and I to Mr. Coventry,
and there had his most friendly and ingenuous advice, advising me not to
decline the thing, it being that that will bring me to be known to great
persons, while now I am buried among three or four of us, says he, in the
Navy; but do not make a declared opposition to my Lord FitzHarding. Thence
I to Creed, and walked talking in the Park an hour with him, and then to
my Lord Sandwich's to dinner, and after dinner to Mr. Povy's, who hath
been with the Duke of Yorke, and, by the mediation of Mr. Coventry, the
Duke told him that the business shall go on, and he will take off
Brunkerd, and my Lord FitzHarding is quiett too.  But to see the mischief,
I hear that Sir G. Carteret did not seem pleased, but said nothing when he
heard me proposed to come in Povy's room, which may learn me to
distinguish between that man that is a man's true and false friend. Being
very glad of this news Mr. Povy and I in his coach to Hyde Parke, being
the first day of the tour there.  Where many brave ladies; among others,
Castlemayne lay impudently upon her back in her coach asleep, with her
mouth open.  There was also my Lady Kerneguy,

     [Daughter of William, Duke of Hamilton, wife of Lord Carnegy, who
     became Earl of Southesk on his father's death.  She is frequently
     mentioned in the "Memoires de Grammont," and in the letters of the
     second Earl of Chesterfield.--B.]

once my Lady Anne Hambleton, that is said to have given the Duke a clap
upon his first coming over.  Here I saw Sir J. Lawson's daughter and
husband, a fine couple, and also Mr. Southwell and his new lady, very
pretty.  Thence back, putting in at Dr. Whore's, where I saw his lady, a
very fine woman.  So home, and thither by my desire comes by and by Creed
and lay with me, very merry and full of discourse, what to do to-morrow,
and the conveniences that will attend my having of this place, and I do
think they may be very great.

20th.  Up, Creed and I, and had Mr. Povy's coach sent for us, and we to
his house; where we did some business in order to the work of this day.
Povy and I to my Lord Sandwich, who tells me that the Duke is not only a
friend to the business, but to me, in terms of the greatest love and
respect and value of me that can be thought, which overjoys me.  Thence to
St. James's, and there was in great doubt of Brunkerd, but at last I hear
that Brunkerd desists.  The Duke did direct Secretary Bennet, who was
there, to declare his mind to the Tangier Committee, that he approves of
me for Treasurer; and with a character of me to be a man whose industry
and discretion he would trust soon as any man's in England: and did the
like to my Lord Sandwich.  So to White Hall to the Committee of Tangier,
where there were present, my Lord of Albemarle, my Lord Peterborough,
Sandwich, Barkeley, FitzHarding, Secretary Bennet, Sir Thomas Ingram, Sir
John Lawson, Povy and I.  Where, after other business, Povy did declare
his business very handsomely; that he was sorry he had been so unhappy in
his accounts, as not to give their Lordships the satisfaction he intended,
and that he was sure his accounts are right, and continues to submit them
to examination, and is ready to lay down in ready money the fault of his
account; and that for the future, that the work might be better done and
with more quiet to him, he desired, by approbation of the Duke, he might
resign his place to Mr. Pepys. Whereupon, Secretary Bennet did deliver the
Duke's command, which was received with great content and allowance beyond
expectation; the Secretary repeating also the Duke's character of me.  And
I could discern my Lord FitzHarding was well pleased with me, and
signified full satisfaction, and whispered something seriously of me to
the Secretary. And there I received their constitution under all their
hands presently; so that I am already confirmed their Treasurer, and put
into a condition of striking of tallys;

     [The practice of striking tallies at the Exchequer was a curious
     survival of an ancient method of keeping accounts.  The method
     adopted is described in Hubert Hall's "Antiquities and Curiosities
     of the Exchequer," 1891.  The following account of the use of
     tallies, so frequently alluded to in the Diary, was supplied by Lord
     Braybrooke.  Formerly accounts were kept, and large sums of money
     paid and received, by the King's Exchequer, with little other form
     than the exchange or delivery of tallies, pieces of wood notched or
     scored, corresponding blocks being kept by the parties to the
     account; and from this usage one of the head officers of the
     Exchequer was called the tallier, or teller.  These tallies were
     often negotiable; Adam Smith, in his "Wealth of Nations," book ii.,
     ch. xi., says that "in 1696 tallies had been at forty, and fifty,
     and sixty per cent. discount, and bank-notes at twenty per cent."
     The system of tallies was discontinued in 1824; and the destruction
     of the old Houses of Parliament, in the night of October 16th, 1834,
     is thought to have been occasioned by the overheating of the flues,
     when the furnaces were employed to consume the tallies rendered
     useless by the alteration in the mode of keeping the Exchequer
     accounts.]

and all without one harsh word or word of dislike, but quite the contrary;
which is a good fortune beyond all imagination.  Here we rose, and Povy
and Creed and I, all full of joy, thence to dinner, they setting me down
at Sir J. Winter's, by promise, and dined with him; and a worthy fine man
he seems to be, and of good discourse, our business was to discourse of
supplying the King with iron for anchors, if it can be judged good enough,
and a fine thing it is to see myself come to the condition of being
received by persons of this rank, he being, and having long been,
Secretary to the Queene-Mother.  Thence to Povy's, and there sat and
considered of business a little and then home, where late at it, W. Howe
being with me about his business of accounts for his money laid out in the
fleet, and he gone, I home to supper and to bed.  Newes is this day come
of Captain Allen's being come home from the Straights, as far as Portland,
with eleven of the King's ships, and about twenty-two of merchantmen.

21st. Up, and my taylor coming to me, did consult all my wardrobe how to
order my clothes against next summer.  Then to the office, where busy all
the morning.  At noon to the 'Change, and brought home Mr. Andrews, and
there with Mr. Sheply dined and very merry, and a good dinner.  Thence to
Mr. Povy's to discourse about settling our business of Treasurer, and I
think all things will go very fayre between us and to my content, but the
more I see the more silly the man seems to me.  Thence by coach to the
Mewes, but Creed was not there.  In our way the coach drove through a lane
by Drury Lane, where abundance of loose women stood at the doors, which,
God forgive me, did put evil thoughts in me, but proceeded no further,
blessed be God.  So home, and late at my office, then home and there found
a couple of state cups, very large, coming, I suppose, each to about L6 a
piece, from Burrows the slopseller.

22nd.  Up, and to Mr. Povy's about our business, and thence I to see Sir
Ph. Warwicke, but could not meet with him.  So to Mr. Coventry, whose
profession of love and esteem for me to myself was so large and free that
I never could expect or wish for more, nor could have it from any man in
England, that I should value it more.  Thence to Mr. Povy's, and with
Creed to the 'Change and to my house, but, it being washing day, dined not
at home, but took him (I being invited) to Mr. Hubland's, the merchant,
where Sir William Petty, and abundance of most ingenious men, owners and
freighters of "The Experiment," now going with her two bodies to sea.
Most excellent discourse.  Among others, Sir William Petty did tell me
that in good earnest he hath in his will left such parts of his estate to
him that could invent such and such things.  As among others, that could
discover truly the way of milk coming into the breasts of a woman; and he
that could invent proper characters to express to another the mixture of
relishes and tastes.  And says, that to him that invents gold, he gives
nothing for the philosopher's stone; for (says he) they that find out
that, will be able to pay themselves.  But, says he, by this means it is
better than to give to a lecture; for here my executors, that must part
with this, will be sure to be well convinced of the invention before they
do part with their money.  After dinner Mr. Hill took me with Mrs.
Hubland, who is a fine gentlewoman, into another room, and there made her
sing, which she do very well, to my great content. Then to Gresham
College, and there did see a kitling killed almost quite, but that we
could not quite kill her, with such a way; the ayre out of a receiver,
wherein she was put, and then the ayre being let in upon her revives her
immediately;

     ["Two experiments were made for the finding out a way to breathe
     under water, useful for divers."  The first was on a bird and the
     second on "a kitling" (Birch's "History," vol. ii., p. 25).]

nay, and this ayre is to be made by putting together a liquor and some
body that ferments, the steam of that do do the work.  Thence home, and
thence to White Hall, where the house full of the Duke's going to-morrow,
and thence to St. James's, wherein these things fell out: (1) I saw the
Duke, kissed his hand, and had his most kind expressions of his value and
opinion of me, which comforted me above all things in the world, (2) the
like from Mr. Coventry most heartily and affectionately.  (3) Saw, among
other fine ladies, Mrs. Middleton,

     [Jane, daughter to Sir Robert Needham, is frequently mentioned in
     the "Grammont Memoirs," and Evelyn calls her "that famous and indeed
     incomparable beauty" ("Diary," August 2nd, 1683).  Her portrait is
     in the Royal Collection amongst the beauties of Charles II.'s Court.
     Sir Robert Needham was related to John Evelyn.]

a very great beauty I never knew or heard of before; (4) I saw Waller the
poet, whom I never saw before.  So, very late, by coach home with W. Pen,
who was there.  To supper and to bed, with my heart at rest, and my head
very busy thinking of my several matters now on foot, the new comfort of
my old navy business, and the new one of my employment on Tangier.

23rd.  Up and to my Lord Sandwich, who follows the Duke this day by water
down to the Hope, where "The Prince" lies.  He received me, busy as he
was, with mighty kindness and joy at my promotions; telling me most
largely how the Duke hath expressed on all occasions his good opinion of
my service and love for me.  I paid my thanks and acknowledgement to him;
and so back home, where at the office all the morning.  At noon to the
'Change.  Home, and Lewellin dined with me.  Thence abroad, carried my
wife to Westminster by coach, I to the Swan, Herbert's, and there had much
of the good company of Sarah and to my wish, and then to see Mrs. Martin,
who was very kind, three weeks of her month of lying in is over. So took
up my wife and home, and at my office a while, and thence to supper and to
bed.  Great talk of noises of guns heard at Deale, but nothing
particularly whether in earnest or not.

24th.  Up betimes, and by agreement to the Globe taverne in Fleet Street
to Mr. Clerke, my sollicitor, about the business of my uncle's accounts,
and we went with one Jefferys to one of the Barons (Spelman), and there my
accounts were declared and I sworn to the truth thereof to my knowledge,
and so I shall after a few formalities be cleared of all. Thence to
Povy's, and there delivered him his letters of greatest import to him that
is possible, yet dropped by young Bland, just come from Tangier, upon the
road by Sittingburne, taken up and sent to Mr. Pett, at Chatham.  Thus
everything done by Povy is done with a fatal folly and neglect.  Then to
our discourse with him, Creed, Mr. Viner, myself and Poyntz about the
business of the Workehouse at Clerkenwell, and after dinner went thither
and saw all the works there, and did also consult the Act concerning the
business and other papers in order to our coming in to undertake it with
Povy, the management of the House, but I do not think we can safely meddle
with it, at least I, unless I had time to look after it myself, but the
thing is very ingenious and laudable.  Thence to my Lady Sandwich's, where
my wife all this day, having kept Good Friday very strict with fasting.
Here we supped, and talked very merry.  My Lady alone with me, very
earnest about Sir G. Carteret's son, with whom I perceive they do desire
my Lady Jemimah may be matched.  Thence home and to my office, and then to
bed.

25th (Lady day).  Up betimes and to my office, where all the morning. At
noon dined alone with Sir W. Batten, where great discourse of Sir W. Pen,
Sir W. Batten being, I perceive, quite out of love with him, thinking him
too great and too high, and began to talk that the world do question his
courage, upon which I told him plainly I have been told that he was
articled against for it, and that Sir H. Vane was his great friend
therein.  This he was, I perceive, glad to hear.  Thence to the office,
and there very late, very busy, to my great content.  This afternoon of a
sudden is come home Sir W. Pen from the fleete, but upon what score I know
not.  Late home to supper and to bed.

26th (Lord's day and Easter day).  Up (and with my wife, who has not been
at church a month or two) to church.  At noon home to dinner, my wife and
I (Mercer staying to the Sacrament) alone.  This is the day seven years
which, by the blessing of God, I have survived of my being cut of the
stone, and am now in very perfect good health and have long been; and
though the last winter hath been as hard a winter as any have been these
many years, yet I never was better in my life, nor have not, these ten
years, gone colder in the summer than I have done all this winter, wearing
only a doublet, and a waistcoate cut open on the back; abroad, a cloake
and within doors a coate I slipped on.  Now I am at a losse to know
whether it be my hare's foot which is my preservative against wind, for I
never had a fit of the collique since I wore it, and nothing but wind
brings me pain, and the carrying away of wind takes away my pain, or my
keeping my back cool; for when I do lie longer than ordinary upon my back
in bed, my water the next morning is very hot, or whether it be my taking
of a pill of turpentine every morning, which keeps me always loose, or all
together, but this I know, with thanks to God Almighty, that I am now as
well as ever I can wish or desire to be, having now and then little
grudgings of wind, that brings me a little pain, but it is over presently,
only I do find that my backe grows very weak, that I cannot stoop to write
or tell money without sitting but I have pain for a good while after it.
Yet a week or two ago I had one day's great pain; but it was upon my
getting a bruise on one of my testicles, and then I did void two small
stones, without pain though, and, upon my going to bed and bearing up of
my testicles, I was well the next.  But I did observe that my sitting with
my back to the fire at the office did then, as it do at all times, make my
back ake, and my water hot, and brings me some pain.  I sent yesterday an
invitation to Mrs. Turner and her family to come to keep this day with me,
which she granted, but afterward sent me word that it being Sunday and
Easter day she desired to choose another and put off this.  Which I was
willing enough to do; and so put it off as to this day, and will leave it
to my own convenience when to choose another, and perhaps shall escape a
feast by it.  At my office all the afternoon drawing up my agreement with
Mr. Povy for me to sign to him tomorrow morning.  In the evening spent an
hour in the garden walking with Sir J. Minnes, talking of the Chest
business, wherein Sir W. Batten deals so unfairly, wherein the old man is
very hot for the present, but that zeal will not last nor is to be
trusted.  So home to supper, prayers, and to bed.

27th.  Up betimes to Mr. Povy's, and there did sign and seal my agreement
with him about my place of being Treasurer for Tangier, it being the
greatest part of it drawnout of a draught of his own drawing up, only I
have added something here and there in favour of myself.  Thence to the
Duke of Albemarle, the first time that we officers of the Navy have waited
upon him since the Duke of Yorke's going, who hath deputed him to be
Admirall in his absence.  And I find him a quiet heavy man, that will help
business when he can, and hinder nothing, and am very well pleased with
our attendance on him.  I did afterwards alone give him thanks for his
favour to me about my Tangier business, which he received kindly, and did
speak much of his esteem of me.  Thence, and did the same to Sir H.
Bennet, who did the like to me very fully, and did give me all his letters
lately come from hence for me to read, which I returned in the afternoon
to him.  Thence to Mrs. Martin, who, though her husband is gone away, as
he writes, like a fool into France, yet is as simple and wanton as ever
she was, with much I made myself merry and away.  So to my Lord
Peterborough's; where Povy, Creed, Williamson, Auditor Beale, and myself,
and mighty merry to see how plainly my Lord and Povy did abuse one another
about their accounts, each thinking the other a foole, and I thinking they
were not either of them, in that point, much in the wrong, though in
everything, and even in this manner of reproaching one another, very witty
and pleasant.  Among other things, we had here the genteelest dinner and
the neatest house that I have seen many a day, and the latter beyond
anything I ever saw in a nobleman's house.  Thence visited my Lord
Barkeley, and did sit discoursing with him in his chamber a good while,
and [he] mighty friendly to me about the same business of Tangier.  From
that to other discourse of the times and the want of money, and he said
that the Parliament must be called again soon, and more money raised, not
by tax, for he said he believed the people could not pay it, but he would
have either a general excise upon everything, or else that every city
incorporate should pay a toll into the King's revenue, as he says it is in
all the cities in the world; for here a citizen hath no more laid on them
than their neighbours in the country, whereas, as a city, it ought to pay
considerably to the King for their charter; but I fear this will breed ill
blood.  Thence to Povy, and after a little talk home to my office late.
Then to supper and to bed.

28th.  Up betimes and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and I
did most of the business there, God wot.  Then to the 'Change, and thence
to the Coffee-house with Sir W. Warren, where much good discourse for us
both till 9 o'clock with great pleasure and content, and then parted and I
home to dinner, having eat nothing, and so to my office.  At night supped
with my wife at Sir W. Pen's, who is to go back for good and all to the
fleete to-morrow.  Took leave and to my office, where till 12 at night,
and then home to bed.

29th.  Up betimes and to Povy's, where a good while talking about our
business; thence abroad into the City, but upon his tally could not get
any money in Lumbard Streete, through the disrepute which he suffers, I
perceive, upon his giving up his place, which people think was not choice,
but necessity, as indeed it was.  So back to his house, after we had been
at my house to taste my wine, but my wife being abroad nobody could come
at it, and so we were defeated.  To his house, and before dinner he and I
did discourse of the business of freight, wherein I am so much concerned,
above L100 for myself, and in my over hasty making a bill out for the rest
for him, but he resolves to move Creed in it.  Which troubled me much, and
Creed by and by comes, and after dinner he did, but in the most cunning
ingenious manner, do his business with Creed by bringing it in by the by,
that the most subtile man in the world could never have done it better,
and I must say that he is a most witty, cunning man and one that I (am)
most afeard of in my conversation, though in all serious matters of
business the eeriest foole that ever I met with.  The bill was produced
and a copy given Creed, whereupon he wrote his Intratur upon the
originall, and I hope it will pass, at least I am now put to it that I
must stand by it and justify it, but I pray God it may never come to that
test.  Thence between vexed and joyed, not knowing what yet to make of it,
home, calling for my Lord Cooke's 3 volumes at my bookseller's, and so
home, where I found a new cook mayd, her name is-----that promises very
little.  So to my office, where late about drawing up a proposal for
Captain Taylor, for him to deliver to the City about his building the new
ship, which I have done well, and I hope will do the business, and so home
to supper and to bed.

30th.  Up, and to my Lord Ashly, but did nothing, and to Sir Ph. Warwicke
and spoke with him about business, and so back to the office, where all
the morning.  At noon home to dinner, and thence to the Tangier Committee,
where, Lord! to see how they did run into the giving of Sir J. Lawson (who
is come to towne to-day to get this business done) L4000 about his Mole
business, and were going to give him 4s. per yarde more, which arises in
the whole Mole to L36,000, is a strange thing, but the latter by chance
was stopped, the former was given.  Thence to see Mrs. Martin, whose
husband being it seems gone away, and as she is informed he hath another
woman whom he uses, and has long done, as a wife, she is mighty reserved
and resolved to keep herself so till the return of her husband, which a
pleasant thing to think of her.  Thence home, and to my office, where
late, and to bed.

31st.  Up betimes and walked to my Lord Ashly, and there with Creed after
long waiting spoke with him, and was civilly used by him; thence to Sir
Ph. Warwicke, and then to visit my Lord of Falmouth, who did also receive
me pretty civilly, but not as I expected; he, I perceive, believing that I
had undertaken to justify Povy's accounts, taking them upon myself, but I
rectified him therein.  So to my Lady Sandwich's to dinner, and up to her
chamber after dinner, and there discoursed about Sir G. Carteret's son, in
proposition between us two for my Lady Jemimah.  So to Povy, and with him
spent the afternoon very busy, till I was weary of following this and
neglecting my navy business.  So at night called my wife at my Lady's, and
so home.  To my office and there made up my month's account, which, God be
praised! rose to L1300.  Which I bless God for.  So after 12 o'clock home
to supper and to bed.  I find Creed mightily transported by my Lord of
Falmouth's kind words to him, and saying that he hath a place in his
intention for him, which he believes will be considerable. A witty man he
is in every respect, but of no good nature, nor a man ordinarily to be
dealt with.  My Lady Castlemayne is sicke again, people think, slipping
her filly.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                 APRIL
                                 1665

April 1st.  All the morning very busy at the office preparing a last
half-year's account for my Lord Treasurer.  At noon eat a bit and stepped
to Sir Ph. Warwicke, by coach to my Lord Treasurer's, and after some
private conference and examining of my papers with him I did return into
the City and to Sir G. Carteret, whom I found with the Commissioners of
Prizes dining at Captain Cocke's, in Broad Streete, very merry.  Among
other tricks, there did come a blind fiddler to the doore, and Sir G.
Carteret did go to the doore and lead the blind fiddler by the hand in.
Thence with Sir G. Carteret to my Lord Treasurer, and by and by come Sir
W. Batten and Sir J. Minnes, and anon we come to my Lord, and there did
lay open the expence for the six months past, and an estimate of the seven
months to come, to November next: the first arising to above L500,000, and
the latter will, as we judge, come to above L1,000,000. But to see how my
Lord Treasurer did bless himself, crying he could do no more than he
could, nor give more money than he had, if the occasion and expence were
never so great, which is but a sad story.  And then to hear how like a
passionate and ignorant asse Sir G. Carteret did harangue upon the abuse
of Tickets did make me mad almost and yet was fain to hold my tongue.
Thence home, vexed mightily to see how simply our greatest ministers do
content themselves to understand and do things, while the King's service
in the meantime lies a-bleeding.  At my office late writing letters till
ready to drop down asleep with my late sitting up of late, and running up
and down a-days.  So to bed.

2nd (Lord's day).  At my office all the morning, renewing my vowes in
writing and then home to dinner.  All the afternoon, Mr. Tasborough, one
of Mr. Povy's clerks, with me about his master's accounts.  In the evening
Mr. Andrews and Hill sang, but supped not with me, then after supper to
bed.

3rd.  Up and to the Duke of Albemarle and White Hall, where much business.
Thence home and to dinner, and then with Creed, my wife, and Mercer to a
play at the Duke's, of my Lord Orrery's, called "Mustapha," which being
not good, made Betterton's part and Ianthe's but ordinary too, so that we
were not contented with it at all.  Thence home and to the office a while,
and then home to supper and to bed.  All the pleasure of the play was, the
King and my Lady Castlemayne were there; and pretty witty Nell,--[Nell
Gwynne]--at the King's house, and the younger Marshall sat next us; which
pleased me mightily.

4th.  All the morning at the office busy, at noon to the 'Change, and then
went up to the 'Change to buy a pair of cotton stockings, which I did at
the husband's shop of the most pretty woman there, who did also invite me
to buy some linnen of her, and I was glad of the occasion, and bespoke
some bands of her, intending to make her my seamstress, she being one of
the prettiest and most modest looked women that ever I did see. Dined at
home and to the office, where very late till I was ready to fall down
asleep, and did several times nod in the middle of my letters.

5th.  This day was kept publiquely by the King's command, as a fast day
against the Dutch warr, and I betimes with Mr. Tooker, whom I have brought
into the Navy to serve us as a husband to see goods timely shipped off
from hence to the Fleete and other places, and took him with me to
Woolwich and Deptford, where by business I have been hindered a great
while of going, did a very great deale of business, and home, and there by
promise find Creed, and he and my wife, Mercer and I by coach to take the
ayre; and, where we had formerly been, at Hackney, did there eat some
pullets we carried with us, and some things of the house; and after a game
or two at shuffle-board, home, and Creed lay with me; but, being sleepy,
he had no mind to talk about business, which indeed I intended, by
inviting him to lie with me, but I would not force it on him, and so to
bed, he and I, and to sleep, being the first time I have been so much at
my ease and taken so much fresh ayre these many weeks or months.

6th.  At the office sat all the morning, where, in the absence of Sir W.
Batten, Sir G. Carteret being angry about the business of tickets, spoke
of Sir W. Batten for speaking some words about the signing of tickets, and
called Sir W. Batten in his discourse at the table to us (the clerks being
withdrawn) "shitten foole," which vexed me.  At noon to the 'Change, and
there set my business of lighters' buying for the King, to Sir W. Warren,
and I think he will do it for me to very great advantage, at which I am
mightily rejoiced.  Home and after a mouthfull of dinner to the office,
where till 6 o'clock, and then to White Hall, and there with Sir G.
Carteret and my Lord Brunkerd attended the Duke of Albemarle about the
business of money.  I also went to Jervas's, my barber, for my periwigg
that was mending there, and there do hear that Jane is quite undone,
taking the idle fellow for her husband yet not married, and lay with him
several weeks that had another wife and child, and she is now going into
Ireland.  So called my wife at the 'Change and home, and at my office
writing letters till one o'clock in the morning, that I was ready to fall
down asleep again.  Great talke of a new Comett; and it is certain one do
now appear as bright as the late one at the best; but I have not seen it
myself.

7th.  Up betimes to the Duke of Albemarle about money to be got for the
Navy, or else we must shut up shop.  Thence to Westminster Hall and up and
down, doing not much; then to London, but to prevent Povy's dining with me
(who I see is at the 'Change) I went back again and to Herbert's at
Westminster, there sent for a bit of meat and dined, and then to my Lord
Treasurer's, and there with Sir Philip Warwicke, and thence to White Hall
in my Lord Treasurer's chamber with Sir Philip Warwicke till dark night,
about fower hours talking of the business of the Navy Charge, and how Sir
G. Carteret do order business, keeping us in ignorance what he do with his
money, and also Sir Philip did shew me nakedly the King's condition for
money for the Navy; and he do assure me, unless the King can get some
noblemen or rich money-gentlemen to lend him money, or to get the City to
do it, it is impossible to find money: we having already, as he says,
spent one year's share of the three-years' tax, which comes to L2,500,000.
Being very glad of this day's discourse in all but that I fear I shall
quite lose Sir G. Carteret, who knows that I have been privately here all
this day with Sir Ph. Warwicke.  However, I will order it so as to give
him as little offence as I can.  So home to my office, and then to supper
and to bed.

8th.  Up, and all the morning full of business at the office.  At noon
dined with Mr. Povy, and then to the getting some business looked over of
his, and then I to my Lord Chancellor's, where to have spoke with the Duke
of Albemarle, but the King and Council busy, I could not; then to the Old
Exchange and there of my new pretty seamstress bought four bands, and so
home, where I found my house mighty neat and clean.  Then to my office
late, till past 12, and so home to bed.  The French Embassadors

     [The French ambassadors were Henri de Bourbon, Duc de Verneuil,
     natural son of Henry IV. and brother of Henrietta Maria, and M. de
     Courtin.--B.]

are come incognito before their train, which will hereafter be very
pompous.  It is thought they come to get our King to joyne with the King
of France in helping him against Flanders, and they to do the like to us
against Holland.  We have laine a good while with a good fleete at
Harwich.  The Dutch not said yet to be out.  We, as high as we make our
shew, I am sure, are unable to set out another small fleete, if this
should be worsted.  Wherefore, God send us peace!  I cry.

9th (Lord's day).  To church with my wife in the morning, in her new
light-coloured silk gowne, which is, with her new point, very noble. Dined
at home, and in the afternoon to Fanchurch, the little church in the
middle of Fanchurch Streete, where a very few people and few of any rank.
Thence, after sermon, home, and in the evening walking in the garden, my
Lady Pen and her daughter walked with my wife and I, and so to my house to
eat with us, and very merry, and so broke up and to bed.

10th.  Up, and to the Duke of Albemarle's, and thence to White Hall to a
Committee for Tangier, where new disorder about Mr. Povy's accounts, that
I think I shall never be settled in my business of Treasurer for him. Here
Captain Cooke met me, and did seem discontented about my boy Tom's having
no time to mind his singing nor lute, which I answered him fully in, that
he desired me that I would baste his coate.  So home and to the 'Change,
and thence to the "Old James" to dine with Sir W. Rider, Cutler, and Mr.
Deering, upon the business of hemp, and so hence to White Hall to have
attended the King and Lord Chancellor about the debts of the navy and to
get some money, but the meeting failed.  So my Lord Brunkard took me and
Sir Thomas Harvy in his coach to the Parke, which is very troublesome with
the dust; and ne'er a great beauty there to-day but Mrs. Middleton, and so
home to my office, where Mr. Warren proposed my getting of L100 to get him
a protection for a ship to go out, which I think I shall do.  So home to
supper and to bed.

11th.  Up and betimes to Alderman Cheverton to treat with him about hempe,
and so back to the office.  At noon dined at the Sun, behind the 'Change,
with Sir Edward Deering and his brother and Commissioner Pett, we having
made a contract with Sir Edward this day about timber.  Thence to the
office, where late very busy, but with some trouble have also some hopes
of profit too.  So home to supper and to bed.

12th.  Up, and to White Hall to a Committee of Tangier, where, contrary to
all expectation, my Lord Ashly, being vexed with Povy's accounts, did
propose it as necessary that Povy should be still continued Treasurer of
Tangier till he had made up his accounts; and with such arguments as, I
confess, I was not prepared to answer, but by putting off of the
discourse, and so, I think, brought it right again; but it troubled me so
all the day after, and night too, that I was not quiet, though I think it
doubtfull whether I shall be much the worse for it or no, if it should
come to be so.  Dined at home and thence to White Hall again (where I lose
most of my time now-a-days to my great trouble, charge, and loss of time
and benefit), and there, after the Council rose, Sir G. Carteret, my Lord
Brunkard, Sir Thomas Harvy, and myself, down to my Lord Treasurer's
chamber to him and the Chancellor, and the Duke of Albemarle; and there I
did give them a large account of the charge of the Navy, and want of
money.  But strange to see how they held up their hands crying, "What
shall we do?" Says my Lord Treasurer, "Why, what means all this, Mr.
Pepys?  This is true, you say; but what would you have me to do?  I have
given all I can for my life.  Why will not people lend their money?  Why
will they not trust the King as well as Oliver?  Why do our prizes come to
nothing, that yielded so much heretofore?"  And this was all we could get,
and went away without other answer, which is one of the saddest things
that, at such a time as this, with the greatest action on foot that ever
was in England, nothing should be minded, but let things go on of
themselves do as well as they can.  So home, vexed, and going to my Lady
Batten's, there found a great many women with her, in her chamber merry,
my Lady Pen and her daughter, among others; where my Lady Pen flung me
down upon the bed, and herself and others, one after another, upon me, and
very merry we were, and thence I home and called my wife with my Lady Pen
to supper, and very merry as I could be, being vexed as I was.  So home to
bed.

13th.  Lay long in bed, troubled a little with wind, but not much.  So to
the office, and there all the morning.  At noon to Sheriff Waterman's to
dinner, all of us men of the office in towne, and our wives, my Lady
Carteret and daughters, and Ladies Batten, Pen, and my wife, &c., and very
good cheer we had and merry; musique at and after dinner, and a fellow
danced a jigg; but when the company begun to dance, I came away lest I
should be taken out; and God knows how my wife carried herself, but I left
her to try her fortune.  So home, and late at the office, and then home to
supper and to bed.

14th.  Up, and betimes to Mr. Povy, being desirous to have an end of my
trouble of mind touching my Tangier business, whether he hath any desire
of accepting what my Lord Ashly offered, of his becoming Treasurer again;
and there I did, with a seeming most generous spirit, offer him to take it
back again upon his owne terms; but he did answer to me that he would not
above all things in the world, at which I was for the present satisfied;
but, going away thence and speaking with Creed, he puts me in doubt that
the very nature of the thing will require that he be put in again; and did
give me the reasons of the auditors, which, I confess, are so plain, that
I know not how to withstand them.  But he did give me most ingenious
advice what to do in it, and anon, my Lord Barkeley and some of the
Commissioners coming together, though not in a meeting, I did procure that
they should order Povy's payment of his remain of accounts to me; which
order if it do pass will put a good stop to the fastening of the thing
upon me.  At noon Creed and I to a cook's shop at Charing Cross, and there
dined and had much discourse, and his very good upon my business, and upon
other things, among the rest upon Will Howe's dissembling with us, we
discovering one to another his carriage to us, present and absent, being a
very false fellow.  Thence to White Hall again, and there spent the
afternoon, and then home to fetch a letter for the Council, and so back to
White Hall, where walked an hour with Mr. Wren, of my Lord Chancellor's,
and Mr. Ager, and then to Unthanke's and called my wife, and with her
through the city to Mile-End Greene, and eat some creame and cakes and so
back home, and I a little at the office, and so home to supper and to bed.
This morning I was saluted with newes that the fleetes, ours and the
Dutch, were engaged, and that the guns were heard at Walthamstow to play
all yesterday, and that Captain Teddiman's legs were shot off in the
Royall Katherine.  But before night I hear the contrary, both by letters
of my owne and messengers thence, that they were all well of our side and
no enemy appears yet, and that the Royall Katherine is come to the fleete,
and likely to prove as good a ship as any the King hath, of which I am
heartily glad, both for Christopher Pett's sake and Captain Teddiman that
is in her.

15th.  Up, and to White Hall about several businesses, but chiefly to see
the proposals of my warrants about Tangier under Creed, but to my trouble
found them not finished.  So back to the office, where all the morning,
busy, then home to dinner, and then all the afternoon till very late at my
office, and then home to supper and to bed, weary.

16th (Lord's day).  Lay long in bed, then up and to my chamber and my
office, looking over some plates which I find necessary for me to
understand pretty well, because of the Dutch warr.  Then home to dinner,
where Creed dined with us, and so after dinner he and I walked to the
Rolls' Chappell, expecting to hear the great Stillingfleete preach, but he
did not; but a very sorry fellow, which vexed me.  The sermon done, we
parted, and I home, where I find Mr. Andrews, and by and by comes Captain
Taylor, my old acquaintance at Westminster, that understands musique very
well and composes mighty bravely; he brought us some things of two parts
to sing, very hard; but that that is the worst, he is very conceited of
them, and that though they are good makes them troublesome to one, to see
him every note commend and admire them.  He supped with me, and a good
understanding man he is and a good scholler, and, among other things, a
great antiquary, and among other things he can, as he says, show the very
originall Charter to Worcester, of King Edgar's, wherein he stiles
himself, Rex Marium Brittanniae, &c.; which is the great text that Mr.
Selden and others do quote, but imperfectly and upon trust.  But he hath
the very originall, which he says he will shew me.  He gone we to bed.
This night I am told that newes is come of our taking of three Dutch
men-of-warr, with the loss of one of our Captains.

17th.  Up and to the Duke of Albemarle's, where he shewed me Mr.
Coventry's letters, how three Dutch privateers are taken, in one whereof
Everson's' son is captaine.  But they have killed poor Captaine Golding in
The Diamond.  Two of them, one of 32 and the other of 20 odd guns, did
stand stoutly up against her, which hath 46, and the Yarmouth that hath 52
guns, and as many more men as they.  So that they did more than we could
expect, not yielding till many of their men were killed.  And Everson,
when he was brought before the Duke of Yorke, and was observed to be shot
through the hat, answered, that he wished it had gone through his head,
rather than been taken.  One thing more is written: that two of our ships
the other day appearing upon the coast of Holland, they presently fired
their beacons round the country to give notice.  And newes is brought the
King, that the Dutch Smyrna fleete is seen upon the back of Scotland; and
thereupon the King hath wrote to the Duke, that he do appoint a fleete to
go to the Northward to try to meet them coming home round: which God send!
Thence to White Hall; where the King seeing me, did come to me, and
calling me by name, did discourse with me about the ships in the River:
and this is the first time that ever I knew the King did know me
personally; so that hereafter I must not go thither, but with expectation
to be questioned, and to be ready to give good answers. So home, and
thence with Creed, who come to dine with me, to the Old James, where we
dined with Sir W. Rider and Cutler, and, by and by, being called by my
wife, we all to a play, "The Ghosts," at the Duke's house, but a very
simple play.  Thence up and down, with my wife with me, to look [for] Sir
Ph. Warwicke (Mr. Creed going from me), but missed of him and so home, and
late and busy at my office.  So home to supper and to bed.  This day was
left at my house a very neat silver watch, by one Briggs, a scrivener and
sollicitor, at which I was angry with my wife for receiving, or, at least,
for opening the box wherein it was, and so far witnessing our receipt of
it, as to give the messenger 5s. for bringing it; but it can't be helped,
and I will endeavour to do the man a kindnesse, he being a friend of my
uncle Wight's.

18th.  Up and to Sir Philip Warwicke, and walked with him an houre with
great delight in the Parke about Sir G. Carteret's accounts, and the
endeavours that he hath made to bring Sir G. Carteret to show his accounts
and let the world see what he receives and what he pays.  Thence home to
the office, where I find Sir J. Minnes come home from Chatham, and Sir W.
Batten both this morning from Harwich, where they have been these 7 or 8
days.  At noon with my wife and Mr. Moore by water to Chelsey about my
Privy Seale for Tangier, but my Lord Privy Seale was gone abroad, and so
we, without going out of the boat, forced to return, and found him not at
White Hall.  So I to Sir Philip Warwicke and with him to my Lord
Treasurer, who signed my commission for Tangier-Treasurer and the docquet
of my Privy Seale, for the monies to be paid to me. Thence to White Hall
to Mr. Moore again, and not finding my Lord I home, taking my wife and
woman up at Unthanke's.  Late at my office, then to supper and to bed.

19th.  Up by five o'clock, and by water to White Hall; and there took
coach, and with Mr. Moore to Chelsy; where, after all my fears what doubts
and difficulties my Lord Privy Seale would make at my Tangier Privy Seale,
he did pass it at first reading, without my speaking with him.  And then
called me in, and was very civil to me.  I passed my time in contemplating
(before I was called in) the picture of my Lord's son's lady, a most
beautiful woman, and most like to Mrs. Butler.  Thence very much joyed to
London back again, and found out Mr. Povy; told him this; and then went
and left my Privy Seale at my Lord Treasurer's; and so to the 'Change, and
thence to Trinity-House; where a great dinner of Captain Crisp, who is
made an Elder Brother.  And so, being very pleasant at dinner, away home,
Creed with me; and there met Povy; and we to Gresham College, where we saw
some experiments upon a hen, a dogg, and a cat, of the Florence poyson.

     ["Sir Robert Moray presented the Society from the King with a phial
     of Florentine poison sent for by his Majesty from Florence, on
     purpose to have those experiments related of the efficacy thereof,
     tried by the Society."  The poison had little effect upon the kitten
     (Birch's "History;" vol. ii., p. 31).]

The first it made for a time drunk, but it come to itself again quickly;
the second it made vomitt mightily, but no other hurt.  The third I did
not stay to see the effect of it, being taken out by Povy.  He and I
walked below together, he giving me most exceeding discouragements in the
getting of money (whether by design or no I know not, for I am now come to
think him a most cunning fellow in most things he do, but his accounts),
and made it plain to me that money will be hard to get, and that it is to
be feared Backewell hath a design in it to get the thing forced upon
himself.  This put me into a cruel melancholy to think I may lose what I
have had so near my hand; but yet something may be hoped for which
to-morrow will shew.  He gone, Creed and I together a great while
consulting what to do in this case, and after all I left him to do what he
thought fit in his discourse to-morrow with my Lord Ashly.  So home, and
in my way met with Mr. Warren, from whom my hopes I fear will fail of what
I hoped for, by my getting him a protection.  But all these troubles will
if not be over, yet we shall see the worst of there in a day or two. So to
my office, and thence to supper, and my head akeing, betimes, that is by
10 or 11 o'clock, to bed.

20th.  Up, and all the morning busy at the office.  At noon dined, and Mr.
Povy by agreement with me (where his boldness with Mercer, poor innocent
wench, did make both her and me blush, to think how he were able to
debauch a poor girl if he had opportunity) at a dish or two of plain meat
of his own choice.  After dinner comes Creed and then Andrews, where want
of money to Andrews the main discourse, and at last in confidence of
Creed's judgement I am resolved to spare him 4 or L500 of what lies by me
upon the security of some Tallys.  This went against my heart to begin,
but when obtaining Mr. Creed to joyne with me we do resolve to assist Mr.
Andrews.  Then anon we parted, and I to my office, where late, and then
home to supper and to bed.  This night I am told the first play is played
in White Hall noon-hall, which is now turned to a house of playing.  I had
a great mind, but could not go to see it.

21st.  Up and to my office about business.  Anon comes Creed and Povy, and
we treat about the business of our lending money, Creed and I, upon a
tally for the satisfying of Andrews, and did conclude it as in papers is
expressed, and as I am glad to have an opportunity of having 10 per cent.
for my money, so I am as glad that the sum I begin this trade with is no
more than L350.  We all dined at Andrews' charge at the Sun behind the
'Change, a good dinner the worst dressed that ever I eat any, then home,
and there found Kate Joyce and Harman come to see us.  With them, after
long talk, abroad by coach, a tour in the fields, and drunk at Islington,
it being very pleasant, the dust being laid by a little rain, and so home
very well pleased with this day's work.  So after a while at my office to
supper and to bed.  This day we hear that the Duke and the fleete are
sailed yesterday.  Pray God go along with them, that they have good speed
in the beginning of their worke.

22nd.  Up, and Mr. Caesar, my boy's lute-master, being come betimes to
teach him, I did speak with him seriously about the boy, what my mind was,
if he did not look after his lute and singing that I would turn him away;
which I hope will do some good upon the boy.  All the morning busy at the
office.  At noon dined at home, and then to the office again very busy
till very late, and so home to supper and to bed.  My wife making great
preparation to go to Court to Chappell to-morrow.  This day I have newes
from Mr. Coventry that the fleete is sailed yesterday from Harwich to the
coast of Holland to see what the Dutch will do.  God go along with them!

23rd (Lord's day).  Mr. Povy, according to promise, sent his coach
betimes, and I carried my wife and her woman to White Hall Chappell and
set them in the Organ Loft, and I having left to untruss went to the Harp
and Ball and there drank also, and entertained myself in talke with the
mayde of the house, a pretty mayde and very modest.  Thence to the
Chappell and heard the famous young Stillingfleete, whom I knew at
Cambridge, and is now newly admitted one of the King's chaplains; and was
presented, they say, to my Lord Treasurer for St. Andrew's, Holborne,
where he is now minister, with these words: that they (the Bishops of
Canterbury, London, and another) believed he is the ablest young man to
preach the Gospel of any since the Apostles.  He did make the most plain,
honest, good, grave sermon, in the most unconcerned and easy yet
substantial manner, that ever I heard in my life, upon the words of
Samuell to the people, "Fear the Lord in truth with all your heart, and
remember the great things that he hath done for you."  It being proper to
this day, the day of the King's Coronation.  Thence to Mr. Povy's, where
mightily treated, and Creed with us.  But Lord! to see how Povy overdoes
every thing in commending it, do make it nauseous to me, and was not (by
reason of my large praise of his house) over acceptable to my wife. Thence
after dinner Creed and we by coach took the ayre in the fields beyond St.
Pancras, it raining now and then, which it seems is most welcome weather,
and then all to my house, where comes Mr. Hill, Andrews, and Captain
Taylor, and good musique, but at supper to hear the arguments we had
against Taylor concerning a Corant, he saying that the law of a dancing
Corant is to have every barr to end in a pricked crochet and quaver, which
I did deny, was very strange.  It proceeded till I vexed him, but all
parted friends, for Creed and I to laugh at when he was gone.  After
supper, Creed and I together to bed, in Mercer's bed, and so to sleep.

24th.  Up and with Creed in Sir W. Batten's coach to White Hall.  Sir W.
Batten and I to the Duke of Albemarle, where very busy.  Then I to Creed's
chamber, where I received with much ado my two orders about receiving
Povy's monies and answering his credits, and it is strange how he will
preserve his constant humour of delaying all business that comes before
him.  Thence he and I to London to my office, and back again to my Lady
Sandwich's to dinner, where my wife by agreement.  After dinner alone, my
Lady told me, with the prettiest kind of doubtfullnesse, whether it would
be fit for her with respect to Creed to do it, that is, in the world, that
Creed had broke his desire to her of being a servant to Mrs. Betty
Pickering, and placed it upon encouragement which he had from some
discourse of her ladyship, commending of her virtues to him, which, poor
lady, she meant most innocently.  She did give him a cold answer, but not
so severe as it ought to have been; and, it seems, as the lady since to my
Lady confesses, he had wrote a letter to her, which she answered slightly,
and was resolved to contemn any motion of his therein. My Lady takes the
thing very ill, as it is fit she should; but I advise her to stop all
future occasions of the world's taking notice of his coming thither so
often as of late he hath done.  But to think that he should have this
devilish presumption to aime at a lady so near to my Lord is strange, both
for his modesty and discretion.  Thence to the Cockepitt, and there walked
an houre with my Lord Duke of Albemarle alone in his garden, where he
expressed in great words his opinion of me; that I was the right hand of
the Navy here, nobody but I taking any care of any thing therein; so that
he should not know what could be done without me.  At which I was (from
him) not a little proud.  Thence to a Committee of Tangier, where because
not a quorum little was done, and so away to my wife (Creed with me) at
Mrs. Pierce's, who continues very pretty and is now great with child.  I
had not seen her a great while.  Thence by coach to my Lord Treasurer's,
but could not speak with Sir Ph. Warwicke.  So by coach with my wife and
Mercer to the Parke; but the King being there, and I now-a-days being
doubtfull of being seen in any pleasure, did part from the tour, and away
out of the Parke to Knightsbridge, and there eat and drank in the coach,
and so home, and after a while at my office, home to supper and to bed,
having got a great cold I think by my pulling off my periwigg so often.

25th.  At the office all the morning, and the like after dinner, at home
all the afternoon till very late, and then to bed, being very hoarse with
a cold I did lately get with leaving off my periwigg.  This afternoon W.
Pen, lately come from his father in the fleete, did give me an account how
the fleete did sayle, about 103 in all, besides small catches, they being
in sight of six or seven Dutch scouts, and sent ships in chase of them.

26th.  Up very betimes, my cold continuing and my stomach sick with the
buttered ale that I did drink the last night in bed, which did lie upon me
till I did this morning vomitt it up.  So walked to Povy's, where Creed
met me, and there I did receive the first parcel of money as Treasurer of
Tangier, and did give him my receipt for it, which was about L2,800 value
in Tallys; we did also examine and settle several other things, and then I
away to White Hall, talking, with Povy alone, about my opinion of Creed's
indiscretion in looking after Mrs. Pickering, desiring him to make no more
a sport of it, but to correct him, if he finds that he continues to owne
any such thing.  This I did by my Lady's desire, and do intend to pursue
the stop of it.  So to the Carrier's by Cripplegate, to see whether my
mother be come to towne or no, I expecting her to-day, but she is not
come.  So to dinner to my Lady Sandwich's, and there after dinner above in
the diningroom did spend an houre or two with her talking again about
Creed's folly; but strange it is that he should dare to propose this
business himself of Mrs. Pickering to my Lady, and to tell my Lady that he
did it for her virtue sake, not minding her money, for he could have a
wife with more, but, for that, he did intend to depend upon her Ladyshipp
to get as much of her father and mother for her as she could; and that,
what he did, was by encouragement from discourse of her Ladyshipp's: he
also had wrote to Mrs. Pickering, but she did give him a slighting answer
back again.  But I do very much fear that Mrs. Pickering's honour, if the
world comes to take notice of it, may be wronged by it.  Thence home, and
all the afternoon till night at my office, then home to supper and to bed.

27th.  Up, and to my office, where all the morning, at noon Creed dined
with me; and, after dinner, walked in the garden, he telling me that my
Lord Treasurer now begins to be scrupulous, and will know what becomes of
the L26,000 saved by my Lord Peterborough, before he parts with any more
money, which puts us into new doubts, and me into a great fear, that all
my cake will be doe still.

     [An obsolete proverb, signifying to lose one's hopes, a cake coming
     out of the oven in a state of dough being considered spoiled.

         "My cake is dough; but I'll in among the rest;
          Out of hope of all, but my share in the feast."
               Shakespeare, Taming of the Shrew, act v., sc.  i.-M. B.]

But I am well prepared for it to bear it, being not clear whether it will
be more for my profit to have it, or go without it, as my profits of the
Navy are likely now to be.  All the afternoon till late hard at the
office.  Then to supper and to bed.  This night William Hewer is returned
from Harwich, where he hath been paying off of some ships this fortnight,
and went to sea a good way with the fleete, which was 96 in company then,
men of warr, besides some come in, and following them since, which makes
now above 100, whom God bless!

28th.  Up by 5 o'clock, and by appointment with Creed by 6 at his chamber,
expecting Povy, who come not.  Thence he and I out to Sir Philip
Warwicke's, but being not up we took a turn in the garden hard by, and
thither comes Povy to us.  After some discourse of the reason of the
difficulty that Sir Philip Warwicke makes in issuing a warrant for my
striking of tallys, namely, the having a clear account of the L26,000
saved by my Lord of Peterborough, we parted, and I to Sir P. Warwicke, who
did give me an account of his demurr, which I applied myself to remove by
taking Creed with me to my Lord Ashly, from whom, contrary to all
expectation, I received a very kind answer, just as we could have wished
it, that he would satisfy my Lord Treasurer.  Thence very well satisfied I
home, and down the River to visit the victualling-ships, where I find all
out of order.  And come home to dinner, and then to write a letter to the
Duke of Albemarle about the victualling-ships, and carried it myself to
the Council-chamber, where it was read; and when they rose, my Lord
Chancellor passing by stroked me on the head, and told me that the Board
had read my letter, and taken order for the punishing of the watermen for
not appearing on board the ships.

     [Among the State Papers are lists of watermen impressed and put on
     board the victualling ships.  Attached to one of these is a "note of
     their unfitness and refractory conduct; also that many go ashore to
     sleep, and are discontent that they, as masters of families, are
     pressed, while single men are excused on giving money to the
     pressmen" ("Calendar," Domestic, 1664-65, p. 323).]

And so did the King afterwards, who do now know me so well, that he never
sees me but he speaks to me about our Navy business.  Thence got my Lord
Ashly to my Lord Treasurer below in his chamber, and there removed the
scruple, and by and by brought Mr. Sherwin to Sir Philip Warwicke and did
the like, and so home, and after a while at my office, to bed.

29th.  All the morning busy at the office.  In the afternoon to my Lord
Treasurer's, and there got my Lord Treasurer to sign the warrant for my
striking of tallys, and so doing many jobbs in my way home, and there late
writeing letters, being troubled in my mind to hear that Sir W. Batten and
Sir J. Minnes do take notice that I am now-a-days much from the office
upon no office business, which vexes me, and will make me mind my business
the better, I hope in God; but what troubles me more is, that I do omit to
write, as I should do, to Mr. Coventry, which I must not do, though this
night I minded it so little as to sleep in the middle of my letter to him,
and committed forty blotts and blurrs in my letter to him, but of this I
hope never more to be guilty, if I have not already given him sufficient
offence.  So, late home, and to bed.

30th (Lord's day).  Up and to my office alone all the morning, making up
my monthly accounts, which though it hath been very intricate, and very
great disbursements and receipts and odd reckonings, yet I differed not
from the truth; viz.: between my first computing what my profit ought to
be and then what my cash and debts do really make me worth, not above
10s., which is very much, and I do much value myself upon the account, and
herein I with great joy find myself to have gained this month above L100
clear, and in the whole to be worth above L1400, the greatest sum I ever
yet was worth.  Thence home to dinner, and there find poor Mr. Spong
walking at my door, where he had knocked, and being told I was at the
office staid modestly there walking because of disturbing me, which
methinks was one of the most modest acts (of a man that hath no need of
being so to me) that ever I knew in my life.  He dined with me, and then
after dinner to my closet, where abundance of mighty pretty discourse,
wherein, in a word, I find him the man of the world that hath of his own
ingenuity obtained the most in most things, being withall no scholler. He
gone, I took boat and down to Woolwich and Deptford, and made it late
home, and so to supper and to bed.  Thus I end this month in great content
as to my estate and gettings: in much trouble as to the pains I have
taken, and the rubs I expect yet to meet with, about the business of
Tangier.  The fleete, with about 106 ships upon the coast of Holland, in
sight of the Dutch, within the Texel.  Great fears of the sickenesse here
in the City, it being said that two or three houses are already shut up.
God preserve as all!




     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     Castlemayne is sicke again, people think, slipping her filly
     Desired me that I would baste his coate
     Did put evil thoughts in me, but proceeded no further
     France, which is accounted the best place for bread
     How Povy overdoes every thing in commending it
     Never could man say worse himself nor have worse said
     Wanton as ever she was, with much I made myself merry and away





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Diary of Samuel Pepys, March/April
1664/65, by Samuel Pepys

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***

***** This file should be named 4155.txt or 4155.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/4/1/5/4155/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
