Project Gutenberg's Diary of Samuel Pepys, May/June 1665, by Samuel Pepys

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Diary of Samuel Pepys, May/June 1665

Author: Samuel Pepys

Release Date: November 30, 2004 [EBook #4156]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***




Produced by David Widger





                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A. F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                               MAY & JUNE
                                  1665

May 1st.  Up and to Mr. Povy's, and by his bedside talked a good while.
Among other things he do much insist I perceive upon the difficulty of
getting of money, and would fain have me to concur in the thinking of some
other way of disposing of the place of Treasurer to one Mr. Bell, but I
did seem slight of it, and resolved to try to do the best or to give it
up.  Thence to the Duke of Albemarle, where I was sorry to find myself to
come a little late, and so home, and at noon going to the 'Change I met my
Lord Brunkard, Sir Robert Murry, Deane Wilkins, and Mr. Hooke, going by
coach to Colonell Blunts to dinner.  So they stopped and took me with
them.  Landed at the Tower-wharf, and thence by water to Greenwich; and
there coaches met us; and to his house, a very stately sight for situation
and brave plantations; and among others, a vineyard, the first that ever I
did see.  No extraordinary dinner, nor any other entertainment good; but
only after dinner to the tryall of some experiments about making of
coaches easy.  And several we tried; but one did prove mighty easy (not
here for me to describe, but the whole body of the coach lies upon one
long spring), and we all, one after another, rid in it; and it is very
fine and likely to take.  These experiments were the intent of their
coming, and pretty they are.  Thence back by coach to Greenwich, and in
his pleasure boat to Deptford, and there stopped and in to Mr.
Evelyn's,--[Sayes Court, the well-known residence of John Evelyn.]--which
is a most beautiful place; but it being dark and late, I staid not; but
Deane Wilkins and Mr. Hooke and I walked to Redriffe; and noble discourse
all day long did please me, and it being late did take them to my house to
drink, and did give them some sweetmeats, and thence sent them with a
lanthorn home, two worthy persons as are in England, I think, or the
world.  So to my Lady Batten, where my wife is tonight, and so after some
merry talk home and to bed.

2nd.  Up and to the office all day, where sat late, and then to the office
again, and by and by Sir W. Batten and my Lady and my wife and I by
appointment yesterday (my Lady Pen failed us, who ought to have been with
us) to the Rhenish winehouse at the Steelyard, and there eat a couple of
lobsters and some prawns, and pretty merry, especially to see us four
together, while my wife and my Lady did never intend ever to be together
again after a year's distance between one another.  Hither by and by come
Sir Richard Ford and also Mrs. Esther, that lived formerly with my Lady
Batten, now well married to a priest, come to see my Lady. Thence toward
evening home, and to my office, where late, and then home to supper and to
bed.

3rd.  Up betimes and walked to Sir Ph. Warwicke's, where a long time with
him in his chamber alone talking of Sir G. Carteret's business, and the
abuses he puts on the nation by his bad payments to both our vexations,
but no hope of remedy for ought I see.  Thence to my Lord Ashly to a
Committee of Tangier for my Lord Rutherford's accounts, and that done we
to my Lord Treasurer's, where I did receive my Lord's warrant to Sir R.
Long for drawing a warrant for my striking of tallys.  So to the Inne
again by Cripplegate, expecting my mother's coming to towne, but she is
not come this weeke neither, the coach being too full.  So to the 'Change
and thence home to dinner, and so out to Gresham College, and saw a cat
killed with the Duke of Florence's poyson, and saw it proved that the oyle
of tobacco

     ["Mr. Daniel Coxe read an account of the effects of tobacco-oil
     distilled in a retort, by one drop of which given at the mouth he
     had killed a lusty cat, which being opened, smelled strongly of the
     oil, and the blood of the heart more strongly than the rest ....
     One drop of the Florentine 'oglio di tobacco' being again given to a
     dog, it proved stupefying and vomitive, as before" (Birch's "History
     of the Royal Society," vol, ii., pp. 42, 43).]

drawn by one of the Society do the same effect, and is judged to be the
same thing with the poyson both in colour and smell, and effect.  I saw
also an abortive child preserved fresh in spirits of salt.  Thence parted,
and to White Hall to the Councilchamber about an order touching the Navy
(our being empowered to commit seamen or Masters that do not, being hired
or pressed, follow their worke), but they could give us none. So a little
vexed at that, because I put in the memorial to the Duke of Albemarle
alone under my own hand, home, and after some time at the office home to
bed.  My Lord Chief Justice Hide did die suddenly this week, a day or two
ago, of an apoplexy.

4th.  Up, and to the office, where we sat busy all the morning.  At noon
home to dinner, and then to the office again all day till almost midnight,
and then, weary, home to supper and to bed.

5th.  Up betimes, and by water to Westminster, there to speak the first
time with Sir Robert Long, to give him my Privy Seal and my Lord
Treasurer's order for Tangier Tallys; he received me kindly enough. Thence
home by water, and presently down to Woolwich and back to Blackewall, and
there, viewed the Breach, in order to a Mast Docke, and so to Deptford to
the Globe, where my Lord Brunkard, Sir J. Minnes, Sir W. Batten, and
Commissioner Pett were at dinner, having been at the Breach also, but they
find it will be too great charge to make use of it. After dinner to Mr.
Evelyn's; he being abroad, we walked in his garden, and a lovely noble
ground he hath indeed.  And among other rarities, a hive of bees, so as
being hived in glass, you may see the bees making their honey and combs
mighty pleasantly.  Thence home, and I by and by to Mr. Povy's to see him,
who is yet in his chamber not well, and thence by his advice to one
Lovett's, a varnisher, to see his manner of new varnish, but found not him
at home, but his wife, a very beautiful woman, who shewed me much variety
of admirable work, and is in order to my having of some papers fitted with
his lines for my use for tables and the like.  I know not whether I was
more pleased with the thing, or that I was shewed it by her, but resolved
I am to have some made.  So home to my office late, and then to supper and
to bed.  My wife tells me that she hears that my poor aunt James hath had
her breast cut off here in town, her breast having long been out of order.
This day, after I had suffered my owne hayre to grow long, in order to
wearing it, I find the convenience of periwiggs is so great, that I have
cut off all short again, and will keep to periwiggs.

6th.  Up, and all day at the office, but a little at dinner, and there
late till past 12.  So home to bed, pleased as I always am after I have
rid a great deal of work, it being very satisfactory to me.

7th (Lord's day).  Up, and to church with my wife.  Home and dined. After
dinner come Mr. Andrews and spent the afternoon with me, about our Tangier
business of the victuals, and then parted, and after sermon comes Mr. Hill
and a gentleman, a friend of his, one Mr. Scott, that sings well also, and
then comes Mr. Andrews, and we all sung and supped, and then to sing again
and passed the Sunday very pleasantly and soberly, and so I to my office a
little, and then home to prayers and to bed.  Yesterday begun my wife to
learn to, limn of one Browne,

     [Alexander Browne, a printseller, who taught drawing, and practised
     it with success.  He published in 1669, "Ars Pictoria, or an Academy
     treating of Drawing, Painting, Limning and Etching."]

which Mr. Hill helps her to, and, by her beginning upon some eyes, I think
she will [do] very fine things, and I shall take great delight in it.

8th.  Up very betimes, and did much business before I went out with
several persons, among others Captain Taylor, who would leave the
management of most of his business now he is going to Harwich, upon me,
and if I can get money by it, which I believe it will, I shall take some
of it upon me.  Thence with Sir W. Batten to the Duke of Albemarle's and
there did much business, and then to the 'Change, and thence off with Sir
W. Warren to an ordinary, where we dined and sat talking of most usefull
discourse till 5 in the afternoon, and then home, and very busy till late,
and so home and to bed.

9th.  Up betimes, and to my business at the office, where all the morning.
At noon comes Mrs. The. Turner, and dines with us, and my wife's
painting-master staid and dined; and I take great pleasure in thinking
that my wife will really come to something in that business. Here dined
also Luellin.  So after dinner to my office, and there very busy till
almost midnight, and so home to supper and to bed.  This day we have newes
of eight ships being taken by some of ours going into the Texel, their two
men of warr, that convoyed them, running in.  They come from about
Ireland, round to the north.

10th.  Up betimes, and abroad to the Cocke-Pitt, where the Duke [of
Albemarle] did give Sir W. Batten and me an account of the late taking of
eight ships, and of his intent to come back to the Gunfleete--[The
Gunfleet Sand off the Essex coast.]--with the fleete presently; which
creates us much work and haste therein, against the fleete comes.  So to
Mr. Povy, and after discourse with him home, and thence to the Guard in
Southwarke, there to get some soldiers, by the Duke's order, to go keep
pressmen on board our ships.  So to the 'Change and did much business, and
then home to dinner, and there find my poor mother come out of the country
today in good health, and I am glad to see her, but my business, which I
am sorry for, keeps me from paying the respect I ought to her at her first
coming, she being grown very weak in her judgement, and doating again in
her discourse, through age and some trouble in her family.  I left her and
my wife to go abroad to buy something, and then I to my office.  In the
evening by appointment to Sir W. Warren and Mr. Deering at a taverne hard
by with intent to do some good upon their agreement in a great bargain of
planks.  So home to my office again, and then to supper and to bed, my
mother being in bed already.

11th.  Up betimes, and at the office all the morning.  At home dined, and
then to the office all day till late at night, and then home to supper,
weary with business, and to bed.

12th.  Up betimes, and find myself disappointed in my receiving presently
of my L50 I hoped for sure of Mr. Warren upon the benefit of my press
warrant, but he promises to make it good.  So by water to the Exchequer,
and there up and down through all the offices to strike my tallys for
L17,500, which methinks is so great a testimony of the goodness of God to
me, that I, from a mean clerke there, should come to strike tallys myself
for that sum, and in the authority that I do now, is a very stupendous
mercy to me.  I shall have them struck to-morrow.  But to see how every
little fellow looks after his fees, and to get what he can for everything,
is a strange consideration; the King's fees that he must pay himself for
this L17,500 coming to above L100.  Thence called my wife at Unthanke's to
the New Exchange and elsewhere to buy a lace band for me, but we did not
buy, but I find it so necessary to have some handsome clothes that I
cannot but lay out some money thereupon.  To the 'Change and thence to my
watchmaker, where he has put it [i.e. the watch] in order, and a good and
brave piece it is, and he tells me worth L14 which is a greater present
than I valued it.  So home to dinner, and after dinner comes several
people, among others my cozen, Thomas Pepys, of Hatcham,

     [Thomas Pepys, of Hatcham Barnes, Surrey, Master of the Jewel House
     to Charles II. and James II.]

to receive some money, of my Lord Sandwich's, and there I paid him what
was due to him upon my uncle's score, but, contrary to my expectation, did
get him to sign and seale to my sale of lands for payment of debts. So
that now I reckon myself in better condition by L100 in my content than I
was before, when I was liable to be called to an account and others after
me by my uncle Thomas or his children for every foot of land we had sold
before.  This I reckon a great good fortune in the getting of this done.
He gone, come Mr. Povy, Dr. Twisden, and Mr. Lawson about settling my
security in the paying of the L4000 ordered to Sir J. Lawson. So a little
abroad and then home, and late at my office and closet settling this day's
disordering of my papers, then to supper and to bed.

13th.  Up, and all day in some little gruntings of pain, as I used to have
from winde, arising I think from my fasting so long, and want of exercise,
and I think going so hot in clothes, the weather being hot, and the same
clothes I wore all winter.  To the 'Change after office, and received my
watch from the watchmaker, and a very fine [one] it is, given me by
Briggs, the Scrivener.  Home to dinner, and then I abroad to the Atturney
Generall, about advice upon the Act for Land Carriage, which he desired
not to give me before I had received the King's and Council's order
therein; going home bespoke the King's works, will cost me 50s., I
believe.  So home and late at my office.  But, Lord!  to see how much of
my old folly and childishnesse hangs upon me still that I cannot forbear
carrying my watch in my hand in the coach all this afternoon, and seeing
what o'clock it is one hundred times; and am apt to think with myself, how
could I be so long without one; though I remember since, I had one, and
found it a trouble, and resolved to carry one no more about me while I
lived.  So home to supper and to bed, being troubled at a letter from Mr.
Gholmly from Tangier, wherein he do advise me how people are at worke to
overthrow our Victualling business, by which I shall lose L300 per annum,
I am much obliged to him for this, secret kindnesse, and concerned to
repay it him in his own concernments and look after this.

14th (Lord's day).  Up, and with my wife to church, it being Whitsunday;
my wife very fine in a new yellow bird's-eye hood, as the fashion is now.
We had a most sorry sermon; so home to dinner, my mother having her new
suit brought home, which makes her very fine.  After dinner my wife and
she and Mercer to Thomas Pepys's wife's christening of his first child,
and I took a coach, and to Wanstead, the house where Sir H. Mildmay died,
and now Sir Robert Brookes lives, having bought it of the Duke of Yorke,
it being forfeited to him.  A fine seat, but an old-fashioned house; and
being not full of people looks desolately.  Thence to Walthamstow, where
(failing at the old place) Sir W. Batten by and by come home, I walking up
and down the house and garden with my Lady very pleasantly, then to supper
very merry, and then back by coach by dark night.  I all the afternoon in
the coach reading the treasonous book of the Court of King James, printed
a great while ago, and worth reading, though ill intended. As soon as I
come home, upon a letter from the Duke of Albemarle, I took boat at about
12 at night, and down the River in a gally, my boy and I, down to the Hope
and so up again, sleeping and waking, with great pleasure, my business to
call upon every one of

15th.  Our victualling ships to set them agoing, and so home, and after
dinner to the King's playhouse, all alone, and saw "Love's Maistresse."
Some pretty things and good variety in it, but no or little fancy in it.
Thence to the Duke of Albemarle to give him account of my day's works,
where he shewed me letters from Sir G. Downing, of four days' date, that
the Dutch are come out and joyned, well-manned, and resolved to board our
best ships, and fight for certain they will.  Thence to the Swan at
Herbert's, and there the company of Sarah a little while, and so away and
called at the Harp and Ball, where the mayde, Mary, is very
'formosa'--[handsome]--;  but, Lord! to see in what readiness I am, upon
the expiring of my vowes this day, to begin to run into all my pleasures
and neglect of business.  Thence home, and being sleepy to bed.

16th.  Up betimes, and to the Duke of Albemarle with an account of my
yesterday's actions in writing.  So back to the office, where all the
morning very busy.  After dinner by coach to see and speak with Mr. Povy,
and after little discourse back again home, where busy upon letters till
past 12 at night, and so home to supper and to bed, weary.

17th.  Up, and by appointment to a meeting of Sir John Lawson and Mr.
Cholmly's atturney and Mr. Povy at the Swan taverne at Westminster to
settle their business about my being secured in the payment of money to
Sir J. Lawson in the other's absence.  Thence at Langford's, where I never
was since my brother died there.  I find my wife and Mercer, having with
him agreed upon two rich silk suits for me, which is fit for me to have,
but yet the money is too much, I doubt, to lay out altogether; but it is
done, and so let it be, it being the expense of the world that I can the
best bear with and the worst spare.  Thence home, and after dinner to the
office, where late, and so home to supper and to bed.  Sir J. Minnes and I
had an angry bout this afternoon with Commissioner Pett about his
neglecting his duty and absenting himself, unknown to us, from his place
at Chatham, but a most false man I every day find him more and more, and
in this very full of equivocation.  The fleete we doubt not come to
Harwich by this time.  Sir W. Batten is gone down this day thither, and
the Duchesse of Yorke went down yesterday to meet the Duke.

18th.  Up, and with Sir J. Minnes to the Duke of Albemarle, where we did
much business, and I with good content to myself; among other things we
did examine Nixon and Stanesby, about their late running from two
Dutchmen;

     [Captain Edward Nixon, of the "Elizabeth," and Captain John
     Stanesby, of the "Eagle."  John Lanyon wrote to the Navy
     Commissioners from Plymouth, May 16th: "Understands from the seamen
     that the conduct of Captains Nixon and Stanesby in their late
     engagement with two Dutch capers was very foul; the night they left
     the Dutch, no lights were put out as formerly, and though in sight
     of them in the morning, they still kept on their way; the Eagle lay
     by some time, and both the enemy's ships plied on her, but finding
     the Elizabeth nearly out of sight she also made sail; it is true the
     wind and sea were high, but there were no sufficient reasons for
     such endeavours to get from them." ("Calendar of State Papers,"
     Domestic, 1664-65, p. 367).  Both captains were tried; Nixon was
     condemned to be shot but Stanesby was cleared, and Charnock asserts
     that he was commander the "Happy Return" in 1672.]

for which they are committed to a vessel to carry them to the fleete to be
tried.  A most fowle unhandsome thing as ever was heard, for plain
cowardice on Nixon's part.  Thence with the Duke of Albemarle in his coach
to my Lord Treasurer, and there was before the King (who ever now calls me
by my name) and Lord Chancellor, and many other great Lords, discoursing
about insuring of some of the King's goods, wherein the King accepted of
my motion that we should; and so away, well pleased.  To the office, and
dined, and then to the office again, and abroad to speak with Sir G.
Carteret; but, Lord! to see how fraile a man I am, subject to my vanities,
that can hardly forbear, though pressed with never so much business, my
pursuing of pleasure, but home I got, and there very busy very late.
Among other things consulting with Mr. Andrews about our Tangier business,
wherein we are like to meet with some trouble, and my Lord Bellasses's
endeavour to supplant us, which vexes my mind; but, however, our
undertaking is so honourable that we shall stand a tug for it I think.  So
home to supper and to bed.

19th.  Up, and to White Hall, where the Committee for Tangier met, and
there, though the case as to the merit of it was most plain and most of
the company favourable to our business, yet it was with much ado that I
got the business not carried fully against us, but put off to another day,
my Lord Arlington being the great man in it, and I was sorry to be found
arguing so greatly against him.  The business I believe will in the end be
carried against us, and the whole business fall; I must therefore
endeavour the most I can to get money another way.  It vexed me to see
Creed so hot against it, but I cannot much blame him, having never
declared to him my being concerned in it.  But that that troubles me most
is my Lord Arlington calls to me privately and asks me whether I had ever
said to any body that I desired to leave this employment, having not time
to look after it.  I told him, No, for that the thing being settled it
will not require much time to look after it.  He told me then he would do
me right to the King, for he had been told so, which I desired him to do,
and by and by he called me to him again and asked me whether I had no
friend about the Duke, asking me (I making a stand) whether Mr. Coventry
was not my friend.  I told him I had received many friendships from him.
He then advised me to procure that the Duke would in his next letter write
to him to continue me in my place and remove any obstruction; which I told
him I would, and thanked him.  So parted, vexed at the first and amazed at
this business of my Lord Arlington's.  Thence to the Exchequer, and there
got my tallys for L17,500, the first payment I ever had out of the
Exchequer, and at the Legg spent 14s. upon my old acquaintance, some of
them the clerks, and away home with my tallys in a coach, fearful every
step of having one of them fall out, or snatched from me.  Being come
home, I much troubled out again by coach (for company taking Sir W. Warren
with me), intending to have spoke to my Lord Arlington to have known the
bottom of it, but missed him, and afterwards discoursing the thing as a
confidant to Sir W. Warren, he did give me several good hints and
principles not to do anything suddenly, but consult my pillow upon that
and every great thing of my life, before I resolve anything in it. Away
back home, and not being fit for business I took my wife and Mercer down
by water to Greenwich at 8 at night, it being very fine and cool and
moonshine afterward.  Mighty pleasant passage it was; there eat a cake or
two, and so home by 10 or 11 at night, and then to bed, my mind not
settled what to think.

20th.  Up, and to my office, where busy all the morning.  At noon dined at
home, and to my office, very busy.

21st.  Till past one, Lord's day, in the morning writing letters to the
fleete and elsewhere, and my mind eased of much business, home to bed and
slept till 8.  So up, and this day is brought home one of my new silk
suits, the plain one, but very rich camelott and noble.  I tried it and it
pleases me, but did not wear it, being I would not go out today to church.
So laid it by, and my mind changed, thinking to go see my Lady Sandwich,
and I did go a little way, but stopped and returned home to dinner, after
dinner up to my chamber to settle my Tangier accounts, and then to my
office, there to do the like with other papers.  In the evening home to
supper and to bed.

22nd.  Up, and down to the ships, which now are hindered from going down
to the fleete (to our great sorrow and shame) with their provisions, the
wind being against them.  So to the Duke of Albemarle, and thence down by
water to Deptford, it being Trinity Monday, and so the day of choosing the
Master of Trinity House for the next yeare, where, to my great content, I
find that, contrary to the practice and design of Sir W. Batten, to breake
the rule and custom of the Company in choosing their Masters by
succession, he would have brought in Sir W. Rider or Sir W. Pen, over the
head of Hurleston (who is a knave too besides, I believe), the younger
brothers did all oppose it against the elder, and with great heat did
carry it for Hurleston, which I know will vex him to the heart. Thence,
the election being over, to church, where an idle sermon from that
conceited fellow, Dr. Britton, saving that his advice to unity, and laying
aside all envy and enmity among them was very apposite.  Thence walked to
Redriffe, and so to the Trinity House, and a great dinner, as is usual,
and so to my office, where busy all the afternoon till late, and then home
to bed, being much troubled in mind for several things, first, for the
condition of the fleete for lacke of provisions, the blame this office
lies under and the shame that they deserve to have brought upon them for
the ships not being gone out of the River, and then for my business of
Tangier which is not settled, and lastly for fear that I am not observed
to have attended the office business of late as much as I ought to do,
though there has been nothing but my attendance on Tangier that has
occasioned my absence, and that of late not much.

23rd.  Up, and at the office busy all the morning.  At noon dined alone,
my wife and mother being gone by invitation to dine with my mother's old
servant Mr. Cordery, who made them very welcome.  So to Mr. Povy's, where
after a little discourse about his business I home again, and late at the
office busy.  Late comes Sir Arthur Ingram to my office, to tell me that,
by letters from Amsterdam of the 28th of this month (their style),

     [The new style was adopted by most of the countries of Europe long
     before it was legalized in England, although Russia still retains
     the old style.]

the Dutch fleete, being about 100 men-of-war, besides fire-ships, &c., did
set out upon the 23rd and 24th inst.  Being divided into seven squadrons;
viz., 1.  Generall Opdam.  2.  Cottenar, of Rotterdam. 3.  Trump.  4.
Schram, of Horne.  5.  Stillingworth, of Freezland. 6.  Everson.   7.  One
other, not named, of Zealand.

24th.  Up, and by 4 o'clock in the morning, and with W. Hewer, there till
12 without intermission putting some papers in order.  Thence to the
Coffee-house with Creed, where I have not been a great while, where all
the newes is of the Dutch being gone out, and of the plague growing upon
us in this towne; and of remedies against it: some saying one thing, some
another.  So home to dinner, and after dinner Creed and I to Colvill's,
thinking to shew him all the respect we could by obliging him in carrying
him 5 tallys of L5000 to secure him for so much credit he has formerly
given Povy to Tangier, but he, like an impertinent fool, cavills at it,
but most ignorantly that ever I heard man in my life.  At last Mr. Viner
by chance comes, who I find a very moderate man, but could not persuade
the fool to reason, but brought away the tallys again, and so vexed to my
office, where late, and then home to my supper and to bed.

25th.  Up, and to the office, where all the morning.  At noon dined at
home, and then to the office all the afternoon, busy till almost 12 at
night, and then home to supper and to bed.

26th.  Up at 4 o'clock, and all the morning in my office with W. Hewer
finishing my papers that were so long out of order, and at noon to my
bookseller's, and there bespoke a book or two, and so home to dinner,
where Creed dined with me, and he and I afterwards to Alderman Backewell's
to try him about supplying us with money, which he denied at first and
last also, saving that he spoke a little fairer at the end than before.
But the truth is I do fear I shall have a great deale of trouble in
getting of money.  Thence home, and in the evening by water to the Duke of
Albemarle, whom I found mightily off the hooks, that the ships are not
gone out of the River; which vexed me to see, insomuch that I am afeard
that we must expect some change or addition of new officers brought upon
us, so that I must from this time forward resolve to make myself appear
eminently serviceable in attending at my office duly and no where else,
which makes me wish with all my heart that I had never anything to do with
this business of Tangier.  After a while at my office, home to supper
vexed, and to bed.

27th.  Up, and to the office, where all the morning; at noon dined at
home, and then to my office again,, where late, and so to bed, with my
mind full of fears for the business of this office and troubled with that
of Tangier, concerning which Mr. Povy was with me, but do give me little
help, but more reason of being troubled.  So that were it not for our
Plymouth business I would be glad to be rid of it.

28th (Lord's day).  By water to the Duke of Albemarle, where I hear that
Nixon is condemned to be shot to death, for his cowardice, by a Council of
War.  Went to chapel and heard a little musique, and there met with Creed,
and with him a little while walking, and to Wilkinson's for me to drink,
being troubled with winde, and at noon to Sir Philip Warwicke's to dinner,
where abundance of company come in unexpectedly; and here I saw one pretty
piece of household stuff, as the company increaseth, to put a larger leaf
upon an oval table.  After dinner much good discourse with Sir Philip, who
I find, I think, a most pious, good man, and a professor of a
philosophical manner of life and principles like Epictetus, whom he cites
in many things.  Thence to my Lady Sandwich's, where, to my shame, I had
not been a great while before.  Here, upon my telling her a story of my
Lord Rochester's running away on Friday night last with Mrs. Mallett, the
great beauty and fortune of the North, who had supped at White Hall with
Mrs. Stewart, and was going home to her lodgings with her grandfather, my
Lord Haly, by coach; and was at Charing Cross seized on by both horse and
foot men, and forcibly taken from him, and put into a coach with six
horses, and two women provided to receive her, and carried away.  Upon
immediate pursuit, my Lord of Rochester (for whom the King had spoke to
the lady often, but with no successe) was taken at Uxbridge; but the lady
is not yet heard of, and the King mighty angry, and the Lord sent to the
Tower.  Hereupon my Lady did confess to me, as a great secret, her being
concerned in this story.  For if this match breaks between my Lord
Rochester and her, then, by the consent of all her friends, my Lord
Hinchingbroke stands fair, and is invited for her.  She is worth, and will
be at her mother's death (who keeps but a little from her), L2500 per
annum.  Pray God give a good success to it!  But my poor Lady, who is
afeard of the sickness, and resolved to be gone into the country, is
forced to stay in towne a day or two, or three about it, to see the event
of it.  Thence home and to see my Lady Pen, where my wife and I were shown
a fine rarity: of fishes kept in a glass of water, that will live so for
ever; and finely marked they are, being foreign.--[Gold-fish introduced
from China.]--So to supper at home and to bed, after many people being
with me about business, among others the two Bellamys about their old debt
due to them from the King for their victualling business, out of which I
hope to get some money.

29th.  Lay long in bed, being in some little pain of the wind collique,
then up and to the Duke of Albemarle, and so to the Swan, and there drank
at Herbert's, and so by coach home, it being kept a great holiday through
the City, for the birth and restoration of the King.  To my office, where
I stood by and saw Symson the joyner do several things, little jobbs, to
the rendering of my closet handsome and the setting up of some neat plates
that Burston has for my money made me, and so home to dinner, and then
with my wife, mother, and Mercer in one boat, and I in another, down to
Woolwich.  I walking from Greenwich, the others going to and fro upon the
water till my coming back, having done but little business.  So home and
to supper, and, weary, to bed.  We have every where taken some prizes.
Our merchants have good luck to come home safe: Colliers from the North,
and some Streights men just now.  And our Hambrough ships, of whom we were
so much afeard, are safe in Hambrough.  Our fleete resolved to sail out
again from Harwich in a day or two.

30th.  Lay long, and very busy all the morning, at noon to the 'Change,
and thence to dinner to Sir G. Carteret's, to talk upon the business of
insuring our goods upon the Hambrough [ships].  Here a very fine, neat
French dinner, without much cost, we being all alone with my Lady and one
of the house with her; thence home and wrote letters, and then in the
evening, by coach, with my wife and mother and Mercer, our usual tour by
coach, and eat at the old house at Islington; but, Lord! to see how my
mother found herself talk upon every object to think of old stories. Here
I met with one that tells me that Jack Cole, my old schoolefellow, is dead
and buried lately of a consumption, who was a great crony of mine.  So
back again home, and there to my closet to write letters.  Hear to my
great trouble that our Hambrough ships,

     [On May 29th Sir William Coventry wrote to Lord Arlington: "Capt.
     Langhorne has arrived with seven ships, and reports the taking of
     the Hamburg fleet with the man of war their convoy; mistaking the
     Dutch fleet for the English, he fell into it" ("Calendar of State
     Papers," Domestic, 1664-65, p. 393)]

valued of the King's goods and the merchants' (though but little of the
former) to L200,000 [are lost].  By and by, about 11 at night, called into
the garden by my Lady Pen and daughter, and there walked with them and my
wife till almost twelve, and so in and closed my letters, and home to bed.

31st.  Up, and to my office, and to Westminster, doing business till noon,
and then to the 'Change, where great the noise and trouble of having our
Hambrough ships lost; and that very much placed upon Mr. Coventry's
forgetting to give notice to them of the going away of our fleete from the
coast of Holland.  But all without reason, for he did; but the merchants
not being ready, staid longer than the time ordered for the convoy to
stay, which was ten days.  Thence home with Creed and Mr. Moore to dinner.
Anon we broke up, and Creed and I to discourse about our Tangier matters
of money, which vex me.  So to Gresham College, staid a very little while,
and away and I home busy, and busy late, at the end of the month, about my
month's accounts, but by the addition of Tangier it is rendered more
intricate, and so (which I have not done these 12 months, nor would
willingly have done now) failed of having it done, but I will do it as
soon as I can.  So weary and sleepy to bed.  I endeavoured but missed of
seeing Sir Thomas Ingram at Westminster, so went to Houseman's the
Painter, who I intend shall draw my wife, but he was not within, but I saw
several very good pictures.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                  JUNE
                                  1665

June 1st.  Up and to the office, where sat all the morning, at noon to the
'Change, and there did some business, and home to dinner, whither Creed
comes, and after dinner I put on my new silke camelott sute; the best that
ever I wore in my life, the sute costing me above L24.  In this I went
with Creed to Goldsmiths' Hall, to the burial of Sir Thomas Viner; which
Hall, and Haberdashers also, was so full of people, that we were fain for
ease and coolness to go forth to Pater Noster Row, to choose a silke to
make me a plain ordinary suit.  That done, we walked to Cornehill, and
there at Mr. Cade's' stood in the balcon and saw all the funeral, which
was with the blue-coat boys and old men, all the Aldermen, and Lord Mayor,
&c., and the number of the company very great; the greatest I ever did see
for a taverne.  Hither come up to us Dr. Allen, and then Mr. Povy and Mr.
Fox.  The show being over, and my discourse with Mr. Povy, I took coach
and to Westminster Hall, where I took the fairest flower, and by coach to
Tothill Fields for the ayre till it was dark.  I 'light, and in with the
fairest flower to eat a cake, and there did do as much as was safe with my
flower, and that was enough on my part.  Broke up, and away without any
notice, and, after delivering the rose where it should be, I to the Temple
and 'light, and come to the middle door, and there took another coach, and
so home to write letters, but very few, God knows, being by my pleasure
made to forget everything that is.  The coachman that carried [us] cannot
know me again, nor the people at the house where we were.  Home to bed,
certain news being come that our fleete is in sight of the Dutch ships.

2nd.  Lay troubled in mind abed a good while, thinking of my Tangier and
victualling business, which I doubt will fall.  Up and to the Duke of
Albemarle, but missed him.  Thence to the Harp and Ball and to Westminster
Hall, where I visited "the flowers" in each place, and so met with Mr.
Creed, and he and I to Mrs. Croft's to drink and did, but saw not her
daughter Borroughes.  I away home, and there dined and did business.  In
the afternoon went with my tallys, made a fair end with Colvill and Viner,
delivering them L5000 tallys to each and very quietly had credit given me
upon other tallys of Mr. Colvill for L2000 and good words for more, and of
Mr. Viner too.  Thence to visit the Duke of Albemarle, and thence my Lady
Sandwich and Lord Crew.  Thence home, and there met an expresse from Sir
W. Batten at Harwich, that the fleete is all sailed from Solebay, having
spied the Dutch fleete at sea, and that, if the calmes hinder not, they
must needs now be engaged with them. Another letter also come to me from
Mr. Hater, committed by the Council this afternoon to the Gate House, upon
the misfortune of having his name used by one, without his knowledge or
privity, for the receiving of some powder that he had bought.  Up to Court
about these two, and for the former was led up to my Lady Castlemayne's
lodgings, where the King and she and others were at supper, and there I
read the letter and returned; and then to Sir G. Carteret about Hater, and
shall have him released to-morrow, upon my giving bail for his appearance,
which I have promised to do.  Sir G. Carteret did go on purpose to the
King to ask this, and it was granted.  So home at past 12, almost one
o'clock in the morning.  To my office till past two, and then home to
supper and to bed.

3rd.  Up and to White Hall, where Sir G. Carteret did go with me to
Secretary Morris, and prevailed with him to let Mr. Hater be released upon
bail for his appearance.  So I at a loss how to get another besides
myself, and got Mr. Hunt, who did patiently stay with me all the morning
at Secretary Morris's chamber, Mr. Hater being sent for with his keeper,
and at noon comes in the Secretary, and upon entering [into]
recognizances, he for L200, and Mr. Hunt and I for L100 each for his
appearance upon demand, he was released, it costing him, I think, above
L3.  I thence home, vexed to be kept from the office all the morning,
which I had not been in many months before, if not some years.  At home to
dinner, and all the afternoon at the office, where late at night, and much
business done, then home to supper and to bed.  All this day by all people
upon the River, and almost every where else hereabout were heard the guns,
our two fleets for certain being engaged; which was confirmed by letters
from Harwich, but nothing particular: and all our hearts full of
concernment for the Duke, and I particularly for my Lord Sandwich and Mr.
Coventry after his Royall Highnesse.

4th (Sunday).  Up and at my chamber all the forenoon, at evening my
accounts, which I could not do sooner, for the last month, and, blessed be
God!  am worth L1400 odd money, something more than ever I was yet in the
world.  Dined very well at noon, and then to my office, and there and in
the garden discoursed with several people about business, among others Mr.
Howell, the turner, who did give me so good a discourse about the
practices of the Paymaster J. Fenn that I thought fit to recollect all
when he was gone, and have entered it down to be for ever remembered.
Thence to my chamber again to settle my Tangier accounts against tomorrow
and some other things, and with great joy ended them, and so to supper,
where a good fowl and tansy, and so to bed.  Newes being come that our
fleete is pursuing the Dutch, who, either by cunning, or by being worsted,
do give ground, but nothing more for certain.  Late to bed upon my papers
being quite finished.

5th.  Up very betimes to look some other papers, and then to White Hall to
a Committee of Tangier, where I offered my accounts with great
acceptation, and so had some good words and honour by it, and one or two
things done to my content in my business of Treasurer, but I do clearly
see that we shall lose our business of victualling, Sir Thomas Ingram
undertaking that it shall be done by persons there as cheap as we do it,
and give the seamen their full allowance and themselves give good security
here for performance of contract, upon which terms there is no opposing
it.  This would trouble me, but that I hope when that fails to spend my
time to some good advantage other ways, and so shall permit it all to God
Almighty's pleasure.  Thence home to dinner, after 'Change, where great
talke of the Dutch being fled and we in pursuit of them, and that our ship
Charity

     [Sir William Coventry and Sir William Penn to the Navy
     Commissioners, June 4th: "Engaged yesterday with the Dutch; they
     began to stand away at 3 p.m.  Chased them all the rest of the day
     and night; 20 considerable ships are destroyed and taken; we have
     only lost the Great Charity.  The Earl of Marlborough, Rear-Admiral
     Sansum, and Captain Kirby are slain, and Sir John Lawson wounded"
     ("Calendar of State Papers," Domestic, 1664-65, p. 406).]

is lost upon our Captain's, Wilkinson, and Lieutenant's yielding, but of
this there is no certainty, save the report of some of the sicke men of
the Charity, turned adrift in a boat out of the Charity and taken up and
brought on shore yesterday to Sole Bay, and the newes hereof brought by
Sir Henry Felton. Home to dinner, and Creed with me.  Then he and I down
to Deptford, did some business, and back again at night.  He home, and I
to my office, and so to supper and to bed.  This morning I had great
discourse with my Lord Barkeley about Mr. Hater, towards whom from a great
passion reproaching him with being a fanatique and dangerous for me to
keepe, I did bring him to be mighty calme and to ask me pardons for what
he had thought of him and to desire me to ask his pardon of Hater himself
for the ill words he did give him the other day alone at White Hall (which
was, that he had always thought him a man that was no good friend to the
King, but did never think it would breake out in a thing of this nature),
and did advise him to declare his innocence to the Council and pray for
his examination and vindication.  Of which I shall consider and say no
more, but remember one compliment that in great kindness to me he did give
me, extolling my care and diligence, that he did love me heartily for my
owne sake, and more that he did will me whatsoever I thought for Mr.
Coventry's sake, for though the world did think them enemies, and to have
an ill aspect, one to another, yet he did love him with all his heart,
which was a strange manner of noble compliment, confessing his owning me
as a confidant and favourite of Mr. Coventry's.

6th.  Waked in the morning before 4 o'clock with great pain to piss, and
great pain in pissing by having, I think, drank too great a draught of
cold drink before going to bed.  But by and by to sleep again, and then
rose and to the office, where very busy all the morning, and at noon to
dinner with Sir G. Carteret to his house with all our Board, where a good
pasty and brave discourse.  But our great fear was some fresh news of the
fleete, but not from the fleete, all being said to be well and beaten the
Dutch, but I do not give much belief to it, and indeed the news come from
Sir W. Batten at Harwich, and writ so simply that we all made good mirth
of it.  Thence to the office, where upon Sir G. Carteret's accounts, to my
great vexation there being nothing done by the Controller to right the
King therein.  I thence to my office and wrote letters all the afternoon,
and in the evening by coach to Sir Ph. Warwicke's about my Tangier
business to get money, and so to my Lady Sandwich's, who, poor lady,
expects every hour to hear of my Lord; but in the best temper, neither
confident nor troubled with fear, that I ever did see in my life.  She
tells me my Lord Rochester is now declaredly out of hopes of Mrs. Mallett,
and now she is to receive notice in a day or two how the King stands
inclined to the giving leave for my Lord Hinchingbroke to look after her,
and that being done to bring it to an end shortly.  Thence by coach home,
and to my office a little, and so before 12 o'clock home and to bed.

7th.  This morning my wife and mother rose about two o'clock; and with
Mercer, Mary, the boy, and W. Hewer, as they had designed, took boat and
down to refresh themselves on the water to Gravesend.  Lay till 7 o'clock,
then up and to the office upon Sir G. Carteret's accounts again, where
very busy; thence abroad and to the 'Change, no news of certainty being
yet come from the fleete.  Thence to the Dolphin Taverne, where Sir J.
Minnes, Lord Brunkard, Sir Thomas Harvy, and myself dined, upon Sir G.
Carteret's charge, and very merry we were, Sir Thomas Harvy being a very
drolle.  Thence to the office, and meeting Creed away with him to my Lord
Treasurer's, there thinking to have met the goldsmiths, at White Hall, but
did not, and so appointed another time for my Lord to speak to them to
advance us some money.  Thence, it being the hottest day that ever I felt
in my life, and it is confessed so by all other people the hottest they
ever knew in England in the beginning of June, we to the New Exchange, and
there drunk whey, with much entreaty getting it for our money, and [they]
would not be entreated to let us have one glasse more. So took water and
to Fox-Hall, to the Spring garden, and there walked an houre or two with
great pleasure, saving our minds ill at ease concerning the fleete and my
Lord Sandwich, that we have no newes of them, and ill reports run up and
down of his being killed, but without ground.  Here staid pleasantly
walking and spending but 6d. till nine at night, and then by water to
White Hall, and there I stopped to hear news of the fleete, but none come,
which is strange, and so by water home, where, weary with walking and with
the mighty heat of the weather, and for my wife's not coming home, I
staying walking in the garden till twelve at night, when it begun to
lighten exceedingly, through the greatness of the heat.  Then despairing
of her coming home, I to bed.  This day, much against my will, I did in
Drury Lane see two or three houses marked with a red cross upon the doors,
and "Lord have mercy upon us" writ there; which was a sad sight to me,
being the first of the kind that, to my remembrance, I ever saw.  It put
me into an ill conception of myself and my smell, so that I was forced to
buy some roll-tobacco to smell to and chaw, which took away the
apprehension.

8th.  About five o'clock my wife come home, it having lightened all night
hard, and one great shower of rain.  She come and lay upon the bed; I up
and to the office, where all the morning.  Alone at home to dinner, my
wife, mother, and Mercer dining at W. Joyce's; I giving her a caution to
go round by the Half Moone to his house, because of the plague.  I to my
Lord Treasurer's by appointment of Sir Thomas Ingram's, to meet the
Goldsmiths; where I met with the great news at last newly come, brought by
Bab May' from the Duke of Yorke, that we have totally routed the Dutch;
that the Duke himself, the Prince, my Lord Sandwich, and Mr. Coventry are
all well: which did put me into such joy, that I forgot almost all other
thoughts.  The particulars I shall set down by and by. By and by comes
Alderman Maynell and Mr. Viner, and there my Lord Treasurer did intreat
them to furnish me with money upon my tallys, Sir Philip Warwicke before
my Lord declaring the King's changing of the hand from Mr. Povy to me,
whom he called a very sober person, and one whom the Lord Treasurer would
owne in all things that I should concern myself with them in the business
of money.  They did at present declare they could not part with money at
present.  My Lord did press them very hard, and I hope upon their
considering we shall get some of them.  Thence with great joy to the
Cocke-pitt; where the Duke of Albemarle, like a man out of himself with
content, new-told me all; and by and by comes a letter from Mr. Coventry's
own hand to him, which he never opened (which was a strange thing), but
did give it me to open and read, and consider what was fit for our office
to do in it, and leave the letter with Sir W. Clerke; which upon such a
time and occasion was a strange piece of indifference, hardly pardonable.
I copied out the letter, and did also take minutes out of Sir W. Clerke's
other letters; and the sum of the newes is:

                 VICTORY OVER THE DUTCH, JUNE 3RD, 1665.

This day they engaged; the Dutch neglecting greatly the opportunity of the
wind they had of us, by which they lost the benefit of their fire-ships.
The Earl of Falmouth, Muskerry, and Mr. Richard Boyle killed on board the
Duke's ship, the Royall Charles, with one shot: their blood and brains
flying in the Duke's face; and the head of Mr. Boyle striking down the
Duke, as some say.  Earle of Marlborough, Portland, Rear-Admirall Sansum
(to Prince Rupert) killed, and Capt. Kirby and Ableson.  Sir John Lawson
wounded on the knee; hath had some bones taken out, and is likely to be
well again.  Upon receiving the hurt, he sent to the Duke for another to
command the Royall Oake.  The Duke sent Jordan

     [Afterwards Sir Joseph Jordan, commander of the "Royal Sovereign,"
     and Vice-Admiral of the Red, 1672.  He was knighted on July 1st,
     1665.--B.]

out of the St. George, who did brave things in her.  Capt. Jer. Smith of
the Mary was second to the Duke, and stepped between him and Captain
Seaton of the Urania (76 guns and 400 men), who had sworn to board the
Duke; killed him, 200 men, and took the ship; himself losing 99 men, and
never an officer saved but himself and lieutenant.  His master indeed is
saved, with his leg cut off: Admirall Opdam blown up, Trump killed, and
said by Holmes; all the rest of their admiralls, as they say, but Everson
(whom they dare not trust for his affection to the Prince of Orange), are
killed: we having taken and sunk, as is believed, about 24 of their best
ships; killed and taken near 8 or 10,000 men, and lost, we think, not
above 700.  A great[er] victory never known in the world.  They are all
fled, some 43 got into the Texell, and others elsewhere, and we in pursuit
of the rest.  Thence, with my heart full of joy; home, and to my office a
little; then to my Lady Pen's, where they are all joyed and not a little
puffed up at the good successe of their father;

     [In the royal charter granted by Charles II. in 1680 to William Penn
     for the government of his American province, to be styled
     Pennsylvania, special reference is made to "the memory and merits of
     Sir William Penn in divers services, and particularly his conduct,
     courage, and discretion under our dearest brother, James, Duke of
     York, in that signal battle and victory fought and obtained against
     the Dutch fleet commanded by Heer van Opdam in 1665" ("Penn's
     Memorials of Sir W. Penn," vol. ii., p. 359).]

and good service indeed is said to have been done by him.  Had a great
bonefire at the gate; and I with my Lady Pen's people and others to Mrs.
Turner's great room, and then down into the streete.  I did give the boys
4s. among them, and mighty merry.  So home to bed, with my heart at great
rest and quiett, saving that the consideration of the victory is too great
for me presently to comprehend.

     [Mrs. Ady (Julia Cartwright), in her fascinating life of Henrietta,
     Duchess of Orleans, gives an account of the receipt of the news of
     the great sea-fight in Paris, and quotes a letter of Charles II. to
     his sister, dated, "Whitehall, June 8th, 1665"  The first report
     that reached Paris was that "the Duke of York's ship had been blown
     up, and he himself had been drowned."  "The shock was too much for
     Madame .  .  .  she was seized with convulsions, and became so
     dangerously ill that Lord Hollis wrote to the king, 'If things had
     gone ill at sea I really believe Madame would have died.'"  Charles
     wrote: "I thanke God we have now the certayne newes of a very
     considerable victory over the Duch; you will see most of the
     particulars by the relation my Lord Hopis will shew you, though I
     have had as great a losse as 'tis possible in a good frinde, poore
     C. Barckely.  It troubles me so much, as I hope you will excuse the
     shortnesse of this letter, haveing receaved the newes of it but two
     houres agoe" ("Madame," 1894, pp.  215, 216).]

9th.  Lay long in bed, my head akeing with too much thoughts I think last
night.  Up and to White Hall, and my Lord Treasurer's to Sir Ph. Warwicke,
about Tangier business, and in my way met with Mr. Moore, who eases me in
one point wherein I was troubled; which was, that I heard of nothing said
or done by my Lord Sandwich: but he tells me that Mr. Cowling, my Lord
Chamberlain's secretary, did hear the King say that my Lord Sandwich had
done nobly and worthily.  The King, it seems, is much troubled at the fall
of my Lord of Falmouth; but I do not meet with any man else that so much
as wishes him alive again, the world conceiving him a man of too much
pleasure to do the King any good, or offer any good office to him.  But I
hear of all hands he is confessed to have been a man of great honour, that
did show it in this his going with the Duke, the most that ever any man
did.  Home, where my people busy to make ready a supper against night for
some guests, in lieu of my stonefeast. At noon eat a small dinner at home,
and so abroad to buy several things, and among others with my taylor to
buy a silke suit, which though I had one lately, yet I do, for joy of the
good newes we have lately had of our victory over the Dutch, which makes
me willing to spare myself something extraordinary in clothes; and after
long resolution of having nothing but black, I did buy a coloured silk
ferrandin.  So to the Old Exchange, and there at my pretty seamstresses
bought a pair of stockings of her husband, and so home, where by and by
comes Mr. Honiwood and Mrs. Wilde, and Roger Pepys and, after long time
spent, Mrs. Turner, The. and Joyce. We had a very good venison pasty, this
being instead of my stone-feast the last March, and very merry we were,
and the more I know the more I like Mr. Honiwood's conversation.  So after
a good supper they parted, walking to the 'Change for a coach, and I with
them to see them there. So home and to bed, glad it was over.

10th.  Lay long in bed, and then up and at the office all the morning. At
noon dined at home, and then to the office busy all the afternoon.  In the
evening home to supper; and there, to my great trouble, hear that the
plague is come into the City (though it hath these three or four weeks
since its beginning been wholly out of the City); but where should it
begin but in my good friend and neighbour's, Dr. Burnett, in Fanchurch
Street: which in both points troubles me mightily.  To the office to
finish my letters and then home to bed, being troubled at the sicknesse,
and my head filled also with other business enough, and particularly how
to put my things and estate in order, in case it should please God to call
me away, which God dispose of to his glory!

11th (Lord's day).  Up, and expected long a new suit; but, coming not,
dressed myself in my late new black silke camelott suit; and, when fully
ready, comes my new one of coloured ferrandin, which my wife puts me out
of love with, which vexes me, but I think it is only my not being used to
wear colours which makes it look a little unusual upon me.  To my chamber
and there spent the morning reading.  At noon, by invitation, comes my two
cozen Joyces and their wives, my aunt James and he-cozen Harman, his wife
being ill.  I had a good dinner for them, and as merry as I could be in
such company.  They being gone, I out of doors a little, to shew,
forsooth, my new suit, and back again, and in going I saw poor Dr.
Burnett's door shut; but he hath, I hear, gained great goodwill among his
neighbours; for he discovered it himself first, and caused himself to be
shut up of his own accord: which was very handsome.  In the evening comes
Mr. Andrews and his wife and Mr. Hill, and staid and played, and sung and
supped, most excellent pretty company, so pleasant, ingenious, and
harmless, I cannot desire better.  They gone we to bed, my mind in great
present ease.

12th.  Up, and in my yesterday's new suit to the Duke of Albemarle, and
after a turne in White Hall, and then in Westminster Hall, returned, and
with my taylor bought some gold lace for my sleeve hands in Pater Noster
Row.  So home to dinner, and then to the office, and down the River to
Deptford, and then back again and to my Lord Treasurer's, and up and down
to look after my Tangier business, and so home to my office, then to
supper and to bed.  The Duke of Yorke is sent for last night and expected
to be here to-morrow.

13th.  Up and to the office, where all the morning doing business.  At
noon with Sir G. Carteret to my Lord Mayor's to dinner, where much company
in a little room, and though a good, yet no extraordinary table. His name,
Sir John Lawrence, whose father, a very ordinary old man, sat there at
table, but it seems a very rich man.  Here were at table three Sir Richard
Brownes, viz.: he of the Councill, a clerk, and the Alderman, and his son;
and there was a little grandson also Richard, who will hereafter be Sir
Richard Browne.  The Alderman did here openly tell in boasting how he had,
only upon suspicion of disturbances, if there had been any bad newes from
sea, clapped up several persons that he was afeard of; and that he had
several times done the like and would do, and take no bail where he saw it
unsafe for the King.  But by and by he said that he was now sued in the
Exchequer by a man for false imprisonment, that he had, upon the same
score, imprisoned while he was Mayor four years ago, and asked advice upon
it.  I told him I believed there was none, and told my story of Field, at
which he was troubled, and said that it was then unsafe for any man to
serve the King, and, I believed, knows not what to do therein; but that
Sir Richard Browne, of the Councill, advised him to speak with my Lord
Chancellor about it.  My Lord Mayor very respectfull to me; and so I after
dinner away and found Sir J. Minnes ready with his coach and four horses
at our office gate, for him and me to go out of towne to meet the Duke of
Yorke coming from Harwich to-night, and so as far as Ilford, and there
'light.  By and by comes to us Sir John Shaw and Mr. Neale, that married
the rich widow Gold, upon the same errand.  After eating a dish of creame,
we took coach again, hearing nothing of the Duke, and away home, a most
pleasant evening and road.  And so to my office, where, after my letters
wrote, to supper and to bed.  All our discourse in our way was Sir J.
Minnes's telling me passages of the late King's and his father's, which I
was mightily pleased to hear for information, though the pride of some
persons and vice of most was but a sad story to tell how that brought the
whole kingdom and King to ruine.

14th.  Up, and to Sir Ph. Warwicke's and other places, about Tangier
business, but to little purpose.  Among others to my Lord Treasurer's,
there to speak with him, and waited in the lobby three long hours for to
speake with him, to the trial of my utmost patience, but missed him at
last, and forced to go home without it, which may teach me how I make
others wait.  Home to dinner and staid Mr. Hater with me, and after dinner
drew up a petition for Mr. Hater to present to the Councill about his
troublesome business of powder, desiring a trial that his absence may be
vindicated, and so to White Hall, but it was not proper to present it
to-day.  Here I met with Mr. Cowling, who observed to me how he finds
every body silent in the praise of my Lord Sandwich, to set up the Duke
and the Prince; but that the Duke did both to the King and my Lord
Chancellor write abundantly of my Lord's courage and service.

     [Charles II.'s letter of thanks to Lord Sandwich, dated "Whitehall,
     June 9th, 1665," written entirely in the king's hand, is printed in
     Ellis's "Original Letters," 1st series, vol. iii., p. 327.]

And I this day met with a letter of Captain Ferrers, wherein he tells [us]
my Lord was with his ship in all the heat of the day, and did most
worthily.  Met with Creed, and he and I to Westminster; and there saw my
Lord Marlborough

     [Of the four distinguished men who died after the late action with
     the Dutch and were buried in Westminster Abbey, the Earl of
     Marlborough was interred on June 14th, Viscount Muskerry on the
     19th, the Earl of Falmouth on the 22nd, and Sir Edward Broughton on
     the 26th.  After the entries in the Abbey Registers is this note:
     "These four last Honble Persons dyed in his Majy's service against
     the Dutch, excepting only that ST Ed Br received his death's wound
     at sea, but dyed here at home" (Chester's "Westminster Abbey
     Registers," p. 162).]

brought to be buried, several Lords of the Council carrying him, and with
the herald in some state.  Thence, vexed in my mind to think that I do so
little in my Tangier business, and so home, and after supper to bed.

15th.  Up, and put on my new stuff suit with close knees, which becomes me
most nobly, as my wife says.  At the office all day.  At noon, put on my
first laced band, all lace; and to Kate Joyce's to dinner, where my
mother, wife, and abundance of their friends, and good usage.  Thence,
wife and Mercer and I to the Old Exchange, and there bought two lace bands
more, one of my semstresse, whom my wife concurs with me to be a pretty
woman.  So down to Deptford and Woolwich, my boy and I.  At Woolwich,
discoursed with Mr. Sheldon about my bringing my wife down for a month or
two to his house, which he approves of, and, I think, will be very
convenient.  So late back, and to the office, wrote letters, and so home
to supper and to bed.  This day the Newes book upon Mr. Moore's showing
L'Estrange

     ["The Public Intelligencer," published by Roger L'Estrange, the
     predecessor of the "London Gazette."]

(Captain Ferrers's letter) did do my Lord Sandwich great right as to the
late victory.  The Duke of Yorke not yet come to towne.  The towne grows
very sickly, and people to be afeard of it; there dying this last week of
the plague 112, from 43 the week before, whereof but [one] in
Fanchurch-streete, and one in Broad-streete, by the Treasurer's office.

16th.  Up and to the office, where I set hard to business, but was
informed that the Duke of Yorke is come, and hath appointed us to attend
him this afternoon.  So after dinner, and doing some business at the
office, I to White Hall, where the Court is full of the Duke and his
courtiers returned from sea.  All fat and lusty, and ruddy by being in the
sun.  I kissed his hands, and we waited all the afternoon.  By and by saw
Mr. Coventry, which rejoiced my very heart.  Anon he and I, from all the
rest of the company, walked into the Matted Gallery; where after many
expressions of love, we fell to talk of business.  Among other things, how
my Lord Sandwich, both in his counsells and personal service, hath done
most honourably and serviceably.  Sir J. Lawson is come to Greenwich; but
his wound in his knee yet very bad.  Jonas Poole, in the Vantguard, did
basely, so as to be, or will be, turned out of his ship. Captain Holmes

     [Captain Robert Holmes (afterwards knighted).  Sir William Coventry,
     in a letter to Lord Arlington (dated from "The Royal Charles,"
     Southwold Bay, June 13th), writes: "Capt. Holmes asked to be rear
     admiral of the white squadron in place of Sansum who was killed, but
     the Duke gave the place to Captain Harman, on which he delivered up
     his commission, which the Duke received, and put Captain Langhorne
     in his stead" ("Calendar of State Papers," Domestic, 1664-65, p.
     423).]

expecting upon Sansum's death to be made Rear-admirall to the Prince (but
Harman is

     [John Harman, afterwards knighted.  He had served with great
     reputation in several naval fights, and was desperately wounded in
     1673, while]

put in) hath delivered up to the Duke his commission, which the Duke took
and tore.  He, it seems, had bid the Prince, who first told him of
Holmes's intention, that he should dissuade him from it; for that he was
resolved to take it if he offered it.  Yet Holmes would do it, like a
rash, proud coxcombe.  But he is rich, and hath, it seems, sought an
occasion of leaving the service.  Several of our captains have done ill.
The great ships are the ships do the business, they quite deadening the
enemy.  They run away upon sight of "The Prince."

     ["The Prince" was Lord Sandwich's ship; the captain was Roger
     Cuttance.  It was put up at Chatham for repair at this date.]

It is strange to see how people do already slight Sir William Barkeley,

     [Sir William Berkeley, see note, vol.  iii., p.  334.  His behaviour
     after the death of his brother, Lord Falmouth, is severely commented
     on in "Poems on State Affairs," vol. i., p. 29

              "Berkeley had heard it soon, and thought not good
               To venture more of royal Harding's blood;
               To be immortal he was not of age,
               And did e'en now the Indian Prize presage;
               And judged it safe and decent, cost what cost,
               To lose the day, since his dear brother's lost.
               With his whole squadron straight away he bore,
               And, like good boy, promised to fight no more."--B.]

my Lord FitzHarding's brother, who, three months since, was the delight of
the Court.  Captain Smith of "The Mary" the Duke talks mightily of; and
some great thing will be done for him.  Strange to hear how the Dutch do
relate, as the Duke says, that they are the conquerors; and bonefires are
made in Dunkirke in their behalf; though a clearer victory can never be
expected.  Mr. Coventry thinks they cannot have lost less than 6000 men,
and we not dead above 200, and wounded about 400; in all about 600. Thence
home and to my office till past twelve, and then home to supper and to
bed, my wife and mother not being yet come home from W. Hewer's chamber,
who treats my mother tonight.  Captain Grovel the Duke told us this day,
hath done the basest thing at Lowestoffe, in hearing of the guns, and
could not (as others) be got out, but staid there; for which he will be
tried; and is reckoned a prating coxcombe, and of no courage.

17th.  My wife come to bed about one in the morning.  I up and abroad
about Tangier business, then back to the office, where we sat, and at noon
home to dinner, and then abroad to Mr. Povy's, after I and Mr. Andrews had
been with Mr. Ball and one Major Strange, who looks after the getting of
money for tallys and is helping Mr. Andrews.  I had much discourse with
Ball, and it may be he may prove a necessary man for our turns.  With Mr.
Povy I spoke very freely my indifference as to my place of Treasurer,
being so much troubled in it, which he took with much seeming trouble,
that I should think of letting go so lightly the place, but if the place
can't be held I will.  So hearing that my Lord Treasurer was gone out of
town with his family because of the sicknesse, I returned home without
staying there, and at the office find Sir W. Pen come home, who looks very
well; and I am gladder to see him than otherwise I should be because of my
hearing so well of him for his serviceablenesse in this late great action.
To the office late, and then home to bed.  It struck me very deep this
afternoon going with a hackney coach from my Lord Treasurer's down
Holborne, the coachman I found to drive easily and easily, at last stood
still, and come down hardly able to stand, and told me that he was
suddenly struck very sicke, and almost blind, he could not see; so I
'light and went into another coach, with a sad heart for the poor man and
trouble for myself, lest he should have been struck with the plague, being
at the end of the towne that I took him up; but God have mercy upon us
all!  Sir John Lawson, I hear, is worse than yesterday: the King went to
see him to-day most kindly.  It seems his wound is not very bad; but he
hath a fever, a thrush, and a hickup, all three together, which are, it
seems, very bad symptoms.

18th (Lord's day).  Up, and to church, where Sir W. Pen was the first time
[since he] come from sea, after the battle.  Mr. Mills made a sorry sermon
to prove that there was a world to come after this.  Home and dined and
then to my chamber, where all the afternoon.  Anon comes Mr. Andrews to
see and sing with me, but Mr. Hill not coming, and having business, we
soon parted, there coming Mr. Povy and Creed to discourse about our
Tangier business of money.  They gone, I hear Sir W. Batten and my Lady
are returned from Harwich.  I went to see them, and it is pretty to see
how we appear kind one to another, though neither of us care 2d. one for
another.  Home to supper, and there coming a hasty letter from
Commissioner Pett for pressing of some calkers (as I would ever on his
Majesty's service), with all speed, I made a warrant presently and issued
it.  So to my office a little, and then home to bed.

19th.  Up, and to White Hall with Sir W. Batten (calling at my Lord
Ashly's, but to no purpose, by the way, he being not up), and there had
our usual meeting before the Duke with the officers of the Ordnance with
us, which in some respects I think will be the better for us, for despatch
sake.  Thence home to the 'Change and dined alone (my wife gone to her
mother's), after dinner to my little new goldsmith's,

     [John Colvill of Lombard Street, see ante, May 24th.  He lost
     L85,832  17s. 2d.  by the closing of the Exchequer in 1672, and he
     died between 1672 and 1677 (Price's "Handbook of London Bankers ").]

whose wife indeed is one of the prettiest, modest black women that ever I
saw.  I paid for a dozen of silver salts L6 14s. 6d.  Thence with Sir W.
Pen from the office down to Greenwich to see Sir J. Lawson, who is better,
but continues ill; his hickupp not being yet gone, could have little
discourse with him.  So thence home and to supper, a while to the office,
my head and mind mightily vexed to see the multitude of papers and
business before [me] and so little time to do it in.  So to bed.

20th.  Thankes-giving-day for victory over ye Dutch.  Up, and to the
office, where very busy alone all the morning till church time, and there
heard a mean sorry sermon of Mr. Mills.  Then to the Dolphin Taverne,
where all we officers of the Navy met with the Commissioners of the
Ordnance by agreement, and dined: where good musique at my direction. Our
club--[share]

             ["Next these a sort of Sots there are,
               Who crave more wine than they can bear,
               Yet hate, when drunk, to pay or spend
               Their equal Club or Dividend,
               But wrangle, when the Bill is brought,
               And think they're cheated when they're not."

     The Delights of the Bottle, or the Compleat Vintner, 3rd ed., 1721,
     p. 29.]

--come to 34s. a man, nine of us.  Thence after dinner, to White Hall with
Sir W. Berkely in his coach, and so walked to Herbert's and there spent a
little time .  .  .  .  Thence by water to Fox-hall, and there walked an
hour alone, observing the several humours of the citizens that were there
this holyday, pulling of cherries,--[The game of bob-cherry]--and God
knows what, and so home to my office, where late, my wife not being come
home with my mother, who have been this day all abroad upon the water, my
mother being to go out of town speedily.  So I home and to supper and to
bed, my wife come home when I come from the office.  This day I informed
myself that there died four or five at Westminster of the plague in one
alley in several houses upon Sunday last, Bell Alley, over against the
Palace-gate; yet people do think that the number will be fewer in the
towne than it was the last weeke!  The Dutch are come out again with 20
sail under Bankert; supposed gone to the Northward to meete their East
India fleete.

21st.  Up, and very busy all the morning.  At noon with Creed to the
Excise Office, where I find our tallys will not be money in less than
sixteen months, which is a sad thing for the King to pay all that interest
for every penny he spends; and, which is strange, the goldsmiths with whom
I spoke, do declare that they will not be moved to part with money upon
the increase of their consideration of ten per cent. which they have, and
therefore desire I would not move in it, and indeed the consequence would
be very ill to the King, and have its ill consequences follow us through
all the King's revenue.  Home, and my uncle Wight and aunt James dined
with me, my mother being to go away to-morrow.  So to White Hall, and
there before and after Council discoursed with Sir Thomas Ingram about our
ill case as to Tangier for money.  He hath got the King to appoint a
meeting on Friday, which I hope will put an end one way or other to my
pain.  So homewards and to the Cross Keys at Cripplegate, where I find all
the towne almost going out of towne, the coaches and waggons being all
full of people going into the country.  Here I had some of the company of
the tapster's wife a while, and so home to my office, and then home to
supper and to bed.

22nd.  Up pretty betimes, and in great pain whether to send my another
into the country to-day or no, I hearing, by my people, that she, poor
wretch, hath a mind to stay a little longer, and I cannot blame her,
considering what a life she will through her own folly lead when she comes
home again, unlike the pleasure and liberty she hath had here.  At last I
resolved to put it to her, and she agreed to go, so I would not oppose it,
because of the sicknesse in the towne, and my intentions of removing my
wife.  So I did give her money and took a kind leave of her, she, poor
wretch, desiring that I would forgive my brother John, but I refused it to
her, which troubled her, poor soul, but I did it in kind words and so let
the discourse go off, she leaving me though in a great deal of sorrow.  So
I to my office and left my wife and people to see her out of town, and I
at the office all the morning.  At noon my wife tells me that she is with
much ado gone, and I pray God bless her, but it seems she was to the last
unwilling to go, but would not say so, but put it off till she lost her
place in the coach, and was fain to ride in the waggon part.  After dinner
to the office again till night, very busy, and so home not very late to
supper and to bed.

23rd.  Up and to White Hall to a Committee for Tangier, where his Royal
Highness was.  Our great design was to state to them the true condition of
this Committee for want of money, the want whereof was so great as to need
some sudden help, and it was with some content resolved to see it supplied
and means proposed towards the doing of it.  At this Committee, unknown to
me, comes my Lord of Sandwich, who, it seems, come to towne last night.
After the Committee was up, my Lord Sandwich did take me aside, and we
walked an hour alone together in the robe-chamber, the door shut, telling
me how much the Duke and Mr. Coventry did, both in the fleete and here,
make of him, and that in some opposition to the Prince; and as a more
private message, he told me that he hath been with them both when they
have made sport of the Prince and laughed at him: yet that all the
discourse of the towne, and the printed relation, should not give him one
word of honour my Lord thinks mighty strange; he assuring me, that though
by accident the Prince was in the van the beginning of the fight for the
first pass, yet all the rest of the day my Lord was in the van, and
continued so.  That notwithstanding all this noise of the Prince, he had
hardly a shot in his side nor a man killed, whereas he hath above 30 in
her hull, and not one mast whole nor yard; but the most battered ship of
the fleet, and lost most men, saving Captain Smith of "The Mary."  That
the most the Duke did was almost out of gun-shot; but that, indeed, the
Duke did come up to my Lord's rescue after he had a great while fought
with four of them.  How poorly Sir John Lawson performed, notwithstanding
all that was said of him; and how his ship turned out of the way, while
Sir J. Lawson himself was upon the deck, to the endangering of the whole
fleete.  It therefore troubles my Lord that Mr. Coventry should not
mention a word of him in his relation.  I did, in answer, offer that I was
sure the relation was not compiled by Mr. Coventry, but by L'Estrange, out
of several letters, as I could witness; and that Mr. Coventry's letter
that he did give the Duke of Albemarle did give him as much right as the
Prince, for I myself read it first and then copied it out, which I
promised to show my Lord, with which he was somewhat satisfied.  From that
discourse my Lord did begin to tell me how much he was concerned to
dispose of his children, and would have my advice and help; and propounded
to match my Lady Jemimah to Sir G. Carteret's eldest son, which I approved
of, and did undertake the speaking with him about it as from myself, which
my Lord liked.  So parted, with my head full of care about this business.
Thence home to the 'Change, and so to dinner, and thence by coach to Mr.
Povy's.  Thence by appointment with him and Creed to one Mr. Finch; one of
the Commissioners for the Excise, to be informed about some things of the
Excise, in order to our settling matters therein better for us for our
Tangier business.  I find him a very discreet, grave person.  Thence well
satisfied I and Creed to Mr. Fox at White Hall to speak with him about the
same matter, and having some pretty satisfaction from him also, he and I
took boat and to Fox Hall, where we spent two or three hours talking of
several matters very soberly and contentfully to me, which, with the ayre
and pleasure of the garden, was a great refreshment to me, and, 'methinks,
that which we ought to joy ourselves in.  Thence back to White Hall, where
we parted, and I to find my Lord to receive his farther direction about
his proposal this morning.  Wherein I did that I should first by another
hand break my intentions to Sir G. Carteret.  I pitched upon Dr. Clerke,
which my Lord liked, and so I endeavoured but in vain to find him out
to-night.  So home by hackney-coach, which is become a very dangerous
passage now-a-days, the sickness increasing mightily, and to bed.

24th (Midsummer-day).  Up very betimes, by six, and at Dr. Clerke's at
Westminster by 7 of the clock, having over night by a note acquainted him
with my intention of coming, and there I, in the best manner I could,
broke my errand about a match between Sir G. Carteret's eldest son and my
Lord Sandwich's eldest daughter, which he (as I knew he would) took with
great content: and we both agreed that my Lord and he, being both men
relating to the sea, under a kind aspect of His Majesty, already good
friends, and both virtuous and good familys, their allyance might be of
good use to us; and he did undertake to find out Sir George this morning,
and put the business in execution.  So being both well pleased with the
proposition, I saw his niece there and made her sing me two or three songs
very prettily, and so home to the office, where to my great trouble I
found Mr. Coventry and the board met before I come.  I excused my late
coming by having been on the River about office business.  So to business
all the morning.  At noon Captain Ferrers and Mr. Moore dined with me, the
former of them the first time I saw him since his corning from sea, who do
give me the best conversation in general, and as good an account of the
particular service of the Prince and my Lord of Sandwich in the late
sea-fight that I could desire.  After dinner they parted.  So I to White
Hall, where I with Creed and Povy attended my Lord Treasurer, and did
prevail with him to let us have an assignment for 15 or L20,000, which, I
hope, will do our business for Tangier.  So to Dr. Clerke, and there found
that he had broke the business to Sir G. Carteret, and that he takes the
thing mighty well.  Thence I to Sir G. Carteret at his chamber, and in the
best manner I could, and most obligingly, moved the business: he received
it with great respect and content, and thanks to me, and promised that he
would do what he could possibly for his son, to render him fit for my
Lord's daughter, and shewed great kindness to me, and sense of my kindness
to him herein.  Sir William Pen told me this day that Mr. Coventry is to
be sworn a Privy Counsellor, at which my soul is glad.  So home and to my
letters by the post, and so home to supper and bed.

25th (Lord's day).  Up, and several people about business come to me by
appointment relating to the office.  Thence I to my closet about my
Tangier papers.  At noon dined, and then I abroad by water, it raining
hard, thinking to have gone down to Woolwich, but I did not, but back
through bridge to White Hall, where, after I had again visited Sir G.
Carteret, and received his (and now his Lady's) full content in my
proposal, I went to my Lord Sandwich, and having told him how Sir G.
Carteret received it, he did direct me to return to Sir G. Carteret, and
give him thanks for his kind reception of this offer, and that he would
the next day be willing to enter discourse with him about the business.
Which message I did presently do, and so left the business with great joy
to both sides.  My Lord, I perceive, intends to give L5000 with her, and
expects about L800 per annum joynture.  So by water home and to supper and
bed, being weary with long walking at Court, but had a Psalm or two with
my boy and Mercer before bed, which pleased me mightily.  This night Sir
G. Carteret told me with great kindnesse that the order of the Council did
run for the making of Hater and Whitfield incapable of any serving the
King again, but that he had stopped the entry of it, which he told me with
great kindnesse, but the thing troubles me.  After dinner, before I went
to White Hall, I went down to Greenwich by water, thinking to have visited
Sir J. Lawson, where, when I come, I find that he is dead, and died this
morning, at which I was much surprized; and indeed the nation hath a great
loss; though I cannot, without dissembling, say that I am sorry for it,
for he was a man never kind to me at all.  Being at White Hall, I visited
Mr. Coventry, who, among other talk, entered about the great question now
in the House about the Duke's going to sea again; about which the whole
House is divided.  He did concur with me that, for the Duke's honour and
safety, it were best, after so great a service and victory and danger, not
to go again; and, above all, that the life of the Duke cannot but be a
security to the Crowne; if he were away, it being more easy to attempt
anything upon the King; but how the fleete will be governed without him,
the Prince--[Rupert]--being a man of no government and severe in council,
that no ordinary man can offer any advice against his; saying truly that
it had been better he had gone to Guinny, and that were he away, it were
easy to say how matters might be ordered, my Lord Sandwich being a man of
temper and judgment as much as any man he ever knew, and that upon good
observation he said this, and that his temper must correct the Prince's.
But I perceive he is much troubled what will be the event of the question.
And so I left him.

26th.  Up and to White Hall with Sir J. Minnes, and to the Committee of
Tangier, where my Lord Treasurer was, the first and only time he ever was
there, and did promise us L15,000 for Tangier and no more, which will be
short.  But if I can pay Mr. Andrews all his money I care for no more, and
the bills of Exchange.  Thence with Mr. Povy and Creed below to a new
chamber of Mr. Povy's, very pretty, and there discourse about his
business, not to his content, but with the most advantage I could to him,
and Creed also did the like.  Thence with Creed to the King's Head, and
there dined with him at the ordinary, and good sport with one Mr.
Nicholls, a prating coxcombe, that would be thought a poet, but would not
be got to repeat any of his verses.  Thence I home, and there find my
wife's brother and his wife, a pretty little modest woman, where they
dined with my wife.  He did come to desire my assistance for a living,
and, upon his good promises of care, and that it should be no burden to
me, I did say and promise I would think of finding something for him, and
the rather because his wife seems a pretty discreet young thing, and
humble, and he, above all things, desirous to do something to maintain
her, telling me sad stories of what she endured with him in Holland, and I
hope it will not be burdensome.  So down by water to Woolwich, walking to
and again from Greenwich thither and back again, my business being to
speak again with Sheldon, who desires and expects my wife coming thither
to spend the summer, and upon second thoughts I do agree that it will be a
good place for her and me too.  So, weary, home, and to my office a while,
till almost midnight, and so to bed.  The plague encreases mightily, I
this day seeing a house, at a bitt-maker's over against St. Clement's
Church, in the open street, shut up; which is a sad sight.

27th.  Up and to the office, where all the morning.  At noon dined by
chance at my Lady Batten's, and they sent for my wife, and there was my
Lady Pen and Pegg.  Very merry, and so I to my office again, where till 12
o'clock at night, and so home to supper and to bed.

28th.  Sir J. Minnes carried me and my wife to White Hall, and thence his
coach along with my wife where she would.  There after attending the Duke
to discourse of the navy.  We did not kiss his hand, nor do I think, for
all their pretence, of going away to-morrow.  Yet I believe they will not
go for good and all, but I did take my leave of Sir William Coventry, who,
it seems, was knighted and sworn a Privy-Counsellor two days since; who
with his old kindness treated me, and I believe I shall ever find [him] a
noble friend.  Thence by water to Blackfriars, and so to Paul's churchyard
and bespoke severall books, and so home and there dined, my man William
giving me a lobster sent him by my old maid Sarah.  This morning I met
with Sir G. Carteret, who tells me how all things proceed between my Lord
Sandwich and himself to full content, and both sides depend upon having
the match finished presently, and professed great kindnesse to me, and
said that now we were something akin.  I am mightily, both with respect to
myself and much more of my Lord's family, glad of this alliance.  After
dinner to White Hall, thinking to speak with my Lord Ashly, but failed,
and I whiled away some time in Westminster Hall against he did come, in my
way observing several plague houses in King's Street and [near] the
Palace.  Here I hear Mrs. Martin is gone out of town, and that her
husband, an idle fellow, is since come out of France, as he pretends, but
I believe not that he hath been.  I was fearful of going to any house, but
I did to the Swan, and thence to White Hall, giving the waterman a
shilling, because a young fellow and belonging to the Plymouth.  Thence by
coach to several places, and so home, and all the evening with Sir J.
Minnes and all the women of the house (excepting my Lady Batten) late in
the garden chatting.  At 12 o'clock home to supper and to bed.  My Lord
Sandwich is gone towards the sea to-day, it being a sudden resolution, I
having taken no leave of him.

29th.  Up and by water to White Hall, where the Court full of waggons and
people ready to go out of towne.  To the Harp and Ball, and there drank
and talked with Mary, she telling me in discourse that she lived lately at
my neighbour's, Mr. Knightly, which made me forbear further discourse.
This end of the towne every day grows very bad of the plague.  The
Mortality Bill is come to 267;

     [According to the Bills of Mortality, the total number of deaths in
     London for the week ending June 27th was 684, of which number 267
     were deaths from the plague.  The number of deaths rose week by week
     until September 19th, when the total was 8,297, and the deaths from
     the plague 7,165.  On September 26th the total had fallen to 6,460,
     and deaths from the plague to 5,533 The number fell gradually, week
     by week, till October 31st, when the total was 1,388, and deaths
     from the plague 1,031.  On November 7th there was a rise to 1,787
     and 1,414 respectively.  On November 14th the numbers had gone down
     to 1,359 and 1,050 respectively.  On December 12th the total had
     fallen to 442, and deaths from the plague to 243.  On December 19th
     there was a rise to 525 and 281 respectively.  The total of burials
     in 1665 was 97,506, of which number the plague claimed 68,596
     victims.]

which is about ninety more than the last: and of these but four in the
City, which is a great blessing to us.  Thence to Creed, and with him up
and down about Tangier business, to no purpose.  Took leave again of Mr.
Coventry; though I hope the Duke has not gone to stay, and so do others
too.  So home, calling at Somersett House, where all are packing up too:
the Queene-Mother setting out for France this day to drink Bourbon waters
this year, she being in a consumption; and intends not to come till winter
come twelvemonths.

     [The Queen-Mother never came to England again.  She retired to her
     chateau at Colombes, near Paris, where she died in August, 1669,
     after a long illness; the immediate cause of her death being an
     opiate ordered by her physicians.  She was buried, September 12th,
     in the church of St. Denis.  Her funeral sermon was preached by
     Bossuet.  Sir John Reresby speaks of Queen Henrietta Maria in high
     terms.  He says that in the winter, 1659-60, although the Court of
     France was very splendid, there was a greater resort to the Palais
     Royal, "the good humour and wit of our Queen Mother, and the beauty
     of the Princess [Henrietta] her daughter, giving greater invitation
     than the more particular humour of the French Queen, being a
     Spaniard."  In another place he says: "Her majesty had a great
     affection for England, notwithstanding the severe usage she and hers
     had received from it.  Her discourse was much with the great men and
     ladies of France in praise of the people and of the country; of
     their courage, generosity, good nature; and would excuse all their
     miscarriages in relation to unfortunate effects of the late war, as
     if it were a convulsion of some desperate and infatuated persons,
     rather than from the genius and temper of the kingdom" ("Memoirs of
     Sir John Reresby," ed.  Cartwright, pp. 43, 45).]

So by coach home, where at the office all the morning, and at noon Mrs.
Hunt dined with us.  Very merry, and she a very good woman.  To the
office, where busy a while putting some things in my office in order, and
then to letters till night.  About 10 a'clock home, the days being
sensibly shorter before I have once kept a summer's day by shutting up
office by daylight; but my life hath been still as it was in winter
almost.  But I will for a month try what I can do by daylight.  So home to
supper and to bed.

30th.  Up and to White Hall, to the Duke of Albemarle, who I find at
Secretary Bennet's, there being now no other great Statesman, I think, but
my Lord Chancellor, in towne.  I received several commands from them;
among others, to provide some bread and cheese for the garrison at
Guernsey, which they promised to see me paid for.  So to the 'Change, and
home to dinner.  In the afternoon I down to Woolwich and after me my wife
and Mercer, whom I led to Mr. Sheldon's to see his house, and I find it a
very pretty place for them to be at.  So I back again, walking both
forward and backward, and left my wife to come by water.  I straight to
White Hall, late, to Secretary Bennet's to give him an account of the
business I received from him to-day, and there staid weary and sleepy till
past 12 at night.  Then writ my mind to him, and so back by water and in
the dark and against tide shot the bridge, groping with their pole for the
way, which troubled me before I got through.  So home, about one or two
o'clock in the morning, my family at a great losse what was become of me.
To supper, and to bed.  Thus this book of two years ends.  Myself and
family in good health, consisting of myself and wife, Mercer, her woman,
Mary, Alice, and Susan our maids, and Tom my boy.  In a sickly time of the
plague growing on.  Having upon my hands the troublesome care of the
Treasury of Tangier, with great sums drawn upon me, and nothing to pay
them with: also the business of the office great.  Consideration of
removing my wife to Woolwich; she lately busy in learning to paint, with
great pleasure and successe.  All other things well; especially a new
interest I am making, by a match in hand between the eldest son of Sir G.
Carteret, and my Lady Jemimah Montage.  The Duke of Yorke gone down to the
fleete, but all suppose not with intent to stay there, as it is not fit,
all men conceive, he should.




     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     A vineyard, the first that ever I did see
     All the towne almost going out of towne (Plague panic)
     Buy some roll-tobacco to smell to and chaw
     Consult my pillow upon that and every great thing of my life
     Convenience of periwiggs is so great
     Dying this last week of the plague 112, from 43 the week before
     Hear that the plague is come into the City
     Houses marked with a red cross upon the doors
     My old folly and childishnesse hangs upon me still
     Plague claimed 68,596 victims (in 1665)
     Pride of some persons and vice of most was but a sad story
     The coachman that carried [us] cannot know me again
     Though neither of us care 2d. one for another
     Which may teach me how I make others wait





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Diary of Samuel Pepys, May/June 1665
by Samuel Pepys

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***

***** This file should be named 4156.txt or 4156.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/4/1/5/4156/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
