Project Gutenberg's Diary of Samuel Pepys, July 1665, by Samuel Pepys

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Diary of Samuel Pepys, July 1665

Author: Samuel Pepys

Release Date: November 30, 2004 [EBook #4157]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, JULY 1665 ***




Produced by David Widger





                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A. F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                  JULY
                                  1665

July 1st, 1665.   Called up betimes, though weary and sleepy, by
appointment by Mr. Povy and Colonell Norwood to discourse about some
payments of Tangier.  They gone, I to the office and there sat all the
morning.  At noon dined at home, and then to the Duke of Albemarle's, by
appointment, to give him an account of some disorder in the Yarde at
Portsmouth, by workmen's going away of their owne accord, for lacke of
money, to get work of hay-making, or any thing else to earne themselves
bread.

     [There are several letters among the State Papers from Commissioner
     Thomas Middleton relating to the want of workmen at Portsmouth
     Dockyard.  On June 29th Middleton wrote to Pepys, "The ropemakers
     have discharged themselves for want of money, and gone into the
     country to make hay."  The blockmakers, the joiners, and the sawyers
     all refused to work longer without money ("Calendar," 1664-65, p.
     453).]

Thence to Westminster, where I hear the sicknesse encreases greatly, and
to the Harp and Ball with Mary talking, who tells me simply her losing of
her first love in the country in Wales, and coming up hither unknown to
her friends, and it seems Dr. Williams do pretend love to her, and I have
found him there several times.  Thence by coach and late at the office,
and so to bed.  Sad at the newes that seven or eight houses in Bazing Hall
street, are shut up of the plague.

2nd (Sunday).  Up, and all the morning dressing my closet at the office
with my plates, very neatly, and a fine place now it is, and will be a
pleasure to sit in, though I thank God I needed none before.  At noon
dined at home, and after dinner to my accounts and cast them up, and find
that though I have spent above L90 this month yet I have saved L17, and am
worth in all above L1450, for which the Lord be praised!  In the evening
my Lady Pen and daughter come to see, and supped with us, then a messenger
about business of the office from Sir G. Carteret at Chatham, and by word
of mouth did send me word that the business between my Lord and him is
fully agreed on,

     [The arrangements for the marriage of Lady Jemimah Montagu to Philip
     Carteret were soon settled, for the wedding took place on July 31st]

and is mightily liked of by the King and the Duke of Yorke, and that he
sent me this word with great joy; they gone, we to bed.  I hear this night
that Sir J. Lawson was buried late last night at St. Dunstan's by us,
without any company at all, and that the condition of his family is but
very poor, which I could be contented to be sorry for, though he never was
the man that ever obliged me by word or deed.

3rd.  Up and by water with Sir W. Batten and Sir J. Minnes to White Hall
to the Duke of Albemarle, where, after a little business, we parted, and I
to the Harp and Ball, and there staid a while talking to Mary, and so home
to dinner.  After dinner to the Duke of Albemarle's again, and so to the
Swan, and there 'demeurais un peu'de temps con la fille', and so to the
Harp and Ball, and alone 'demeurais un peu de temps baisant la', and so
away home and late at the office about letters, and so home, resolving
from this night forwards to close all my letters, if possible, and end all
my business at the office by daylight, and I shall go near to do it and
put all my affairs in the world in good order, the season growing so
sickly, that it is much to be feared how a man can escape having a share
with others in it, for which the good Lord God bless me, or to be fitted
to receive it.  So after supper to bed, and mightily troubled in my sleep
all night with dreams of Jacke Cole, my old schoolfellow, lately dead, who
was born at the same time with me, and we reckoned our fortunes pretty
equal.  God fit me for his condition!

4th.  Up, and sat at the office all the morning.  At noon to the 'Change
and thence to the Dolphin, where a good dinner at the cost of one Mr.
Osbaston, who lost a wager to Sir W. Batten, Sir W. Rider, and Sir R.
Ford, a good while since and now it is spent.  The wager was that ten of
our ships should not have a fight with ten of the enemy's before
Michaelmas.  Here was other very good company, and merry, and at last in
come Mr. Buckeworth, a very fine gentleman, and proves to be a
Huntingdonshire man.  Thence to my office and there all the afternoon till
night, and so home to settle some accounts of Tangier and other papers.  I
hear this day the Duke and Prince Rupert are both come back from sea, and
neither of them go back again.  The latter I much wonder at, but it seems
the towne reports so, and I am very glad of it.  This morning I did a good
piece of work with Sir W. Warren, ending the business of the lotterys,
wherein honestly I think I shall get above L100.  Bankert, it seems, is
come home with the little fleete he hath been abroad with, without doing
any thing, so that there is nobody of an enemy at sea.  We are in great
hopes of meeting with the Dutch East India fleete, which is mighty rich,
or with De Ruyter, who is so also.  Sir Richard Ford told me this day, at
table, a fine account, how the Dutch were like to have been mastered by
the present Prince of Orange

     [The period alluded to is 1650, when the States-General disbanded
     part of the forces which the Prince of Orange (William) wished to
     retain.  The prince attempted, but unsuccessfully, to possess
     himself of Amsterdam.  In the same year he died, at the early age of
     twenty-four; some say of the small-pox; others, with Sir Richard
     Ford, say of poison.--B.]

his father to be besieged in Amsterdam, having drawn an army of foot into
the towne, and horse near to the towne by night, within three miles of the
towne, and they never knew of it; but by chance the Hamburgh post in the
night fell among the horse, and heard their design, and knowing the way,
it being very dark and rainy, better than they, went from them, and did
give notice to the towne before the others could reach the towne, and so
were saved.  It seems this De Witt and another family, the Beckarts, were
among the chief of the familys that were enemys to the Prince, and were
afterwards suppressed by the Prince, and continued so till he was, as they
say, poysoned; and then they turned all again, as it was, against the
young Prince, and have so carried it to this day, it being about 12 and 14
years, and De Witt in the head of them.

5th.  Up, and advised about sending of my wife's bedding and things to
Woolwich, in order to her removal thither.  So to the office, where all
the morning till noon, and so to the 'Change, and thence home to dinner.
In the afternoon I abroad to St. James's, and there with Mr. Coventry a
good while, and understand how matters are ordered in the fleete: that is,
my Lord Sandwich goes Admiral; under him Sir G. Ascue, and Sir T.
Teddiman; Vice-Admiral, Sir W. Pen; and under him Sir W. Barkeley, and Sir
Jos. Jordan: Reere-Admiral, Sir Thomas Allen; and under him Sir
Christopher Mings,

     [The son of a shoemaker, bred to the sea-service; he rose to the
     rank of an admiral, and was killed in the fight with the Dutch,
     June, 1666.--B.  See post, June 10th, 1666.]

and Captain Harman.  We talked in general of business of the Navy, among
others how he had lately spoken to Sir G. Carteret, and professed great
resolution of friendship with him and reconciliation, and resolves to make
it good as well as he can, though it troubles him, he tells me, that
something will come before him wherein he must give him offence, but I do
find upon the whole that Mr. Coventry do not listen to these complaints of
money with the readiness and resolvedness to remedy that he used to do,
and I think if he begins to draw in it is high time for me to do so too.
From thence walked round to White Hall, the Parke being quite locked up;
and I observed a house shut up this day in the Pell Mell, where heretofore
in Cromwell's time we young men used to keep our weekly clubs.  And so to
White Hall to Sir G. Carteret, who is come this day from Chatham, and
mighty glad he is to see me, and begun to talk of our great business of
the match, which goes on as fast as possible, but for convenience we took
water and over to his coach to Lambeth, by which we went to Deptford, all
the way talking, first, how matters are quite concluded with all possible
content between my Lord and him and signed and sealed, so that my Lady
Sandwich is to come thither to-morrow or next day, and the young lady is
sent for, and all likely to be ended between them in a very little while,
with mighty joy on both sides, and the King, Duke, Lord Chancellor, and
all mightily pleased.  Thence to newes, wherein I find that Sir G.
Carteret do now take all my Lord Sandwich's business to heart, and makes
it the same with his owne.  He tells me how at Chatham it was proposed to
my Lord Sandwich to be joined with the Prince in the command of the
fleete, which he was most willing to; but when it come to the Prince, he
was quite against it; saying, there could be no government, but that it
would be better to have two fleetes, and neither under the command of the
other, which he would not agree to.  So the King was not pleased; but,
without any unkindnesse, did order the fleete to be ordered as above, as
to the Admirals and commands: so the Prince is come up; and Sir G.
Carteret, I remember, had this word thence, that, says he, by this means,
though the King told him that it would be but for this expedition, yet I
believe we shall keepe him out for altogether.  He tells me how my Lord
was much troubled at Sir W. Pen's being ordered forth (as it seems he is,
to go to Solebay, and with the best fleete he can, to go forth), and no
notice taken of my Lord Sandwich going after him, and having the command
over him.  But after some discourse Mr. Coventry did satisfy, as he says,
my Lord, so as they parted friends both in that point and upon the other
wherein I know my Lord was troubled, and which Mr. Coventry did speak to
him of first thinking that my Lord might justly take offence at, his not
being mentioned in the relation of the fight in the news book, and did
clear all to my Lord how little he was concerned in it, and therewith my
Lord also satisfied, which I am mightily glad of, because I should take it
a very great misfortune to me to have them two to differ above all the
persons in the world.  Being come to Deptford, my Lady not being within,
we parted, and I by water to Woolwich, where I found my wife come, and her
two mayds, and very prettily accommodated they will be; and I left them
going to supper, grieved in my heart to part with my wife, being worse by
much without her, though some trouble there is in having the care of a
family at home in this plague time, and so took leave, and I in one boat
and W. Hewer in another home very late, first against tide, we having
walked in the dark to Greenwich.  Late home and to bed, very lonely.

6th.  Up and forth to give order to my pretty grocer's wife's house, who,
her husband tells me, is going this day for the summer into the country. I
bespoke some sugar, &c., for my father, and so home to the office, where
all the morning.  At noon dined at home, and then by water to White Hall
to Sir G. Carteret about money for the office, a sad thought, for in a
little while all must go to wracke, winter coming on apace, when a great
sum must be ready to pay part of the fleete, and so far we are from it
that we have not enough to stop the mouths of poor people and their hands
from falling about our eares here almost in the office.  God give a good
end to it!  Sir G. Carteret told me one considerable thing: Alderman
Backewell is ordered abroad upon some private score with a great sum of
money; wherein I was instrumental the other day in shipping him away.  It
seems some of his creditors have taken notice of it, and he was like to be
broke yesterday in his absence; Sir G. Carteret telling me that the King
and the kingdom must as good as fall with that man at this time; and that
he was forced to get L4000 himself to answer Backewell's people's
occasions, or he must have broke; but committed this to me as a great
secret and which I am heartily sorry to hear.  Thence, after a little
merry discourse of our marrying business, I parted, and by coach to
several places, among others to see my Lord Brunkerd, who is not well, but
was at rest when I come.  I could not see him, nor had much mind, one of
the great houses within two doors of him being shut up: and, Lord! the
number of houses visited, which this day I observed through the town quite
round in my way by Long Lane and London Wall.  So home to the office, and
thence to Sir W. Batten, and spent the evening at supper; and, among other
discourse, the rashness of Sir John Lawson, for breeding up his daughter
so high and proud, refusing a man of great interest, Sir W. Barkeley, to
match her with a melancholy fellow, Colonell Norton's' son, of no interest
nor good nature nor generosity at all, giving her L6000, when the other
would have taken her with two; when he himself knew that he was not worth
the money himself in all the world, he did give her that portion, and is
since dead, and left his wife and two daughters beggars, and the other
gone away with L6000, and no content in it, through the ill qualities of
her father-in-law and husband, who, it seems, though a pretty woman,
contracted for her as if he had been buying a horse; and, worst of all, is
now of no use to serve the mother and two little sisters in any stead at
Court, whereas the other might have done what he would for her: so here is
an end of this family's pride, which, with good care, might have been what
they would, and done well.  Thence, weary of this discourse, as the act of
the greatest rashness that ever I heard of in all my little conversation,
we parted, and I home to bed. Sir W. Pen, it seems, sailed last night from
Solebay with, about sixty sail of ship, and my Lord Sandwich in "The
Prince" and some others, it seems, going after them to overtake them, for
I am sure my Lord Sandwich will do all possible to overtake them, and will
be troubled to the heart if he do it not.

7th.  Up, and having set my neighbour, Mr. Hudson, wine coopers, at work
drawing out a tierce of wine for the sending of some of it to my wife, I
abroad, only taking notice to what a condition it hath pleased God to
bring me that at this time I have two tierces of Claret, two quarter casks
of Canary, and a smaller vessel of Sack; a vessel of Tent, another of
Malaga, and another of white wine, all in my wine cellar together; which,
I believe, none of my friends of my name now alive ever had of his owne at
one time.  To Westminster, and there with Mr. Povy and Creed talking of
our Tangier business, and by and by I drew Creed aside and acquainted him
with what Sir G. Carteret did tell me about Backewell the other day,
because he hath money of his in his hands.  So home, taking some new
books, L5 worth, home to my great content.  At home all the day after
busy.  Some excellent discourse and advice of Sir W. Warren's in the
afternoon, at night home to look over my new books, and so late to bed.

8th.  All day very diligent at the office, ended my letters by 9 at night,
and then fitted myself to go down to Woolwich to my wife, which I did,
calling at Sir G. Carteret's at Deptford, and there hear that my Lady
Sandwich is come, but not very well.  By 12 o'clock to Woolwich, found my
wife asleep in bed, but strange to think what a fine night I had down, but
before I had been one minute on shore, the mightiest storm come of wind
and rain that almost could be for a quarter of an houre and so left.  I to
bed, being the first time I come to her lodgings, and there lodged well.

9th (Lord's day).  Very pleasant with her and among my people, while she
made her ready, and, about 10 o'clock, by water to Sir G. Carteret, and
there find my Lady [Sandwich] in her chamber, not very well, but looks the
worst almost that ever I did see her in my life.  It seems her drinking of
the water at Tunbridge did almost kill her before she could with most
violent physique get it out of her body again.  We are received with most
extraordinary kindnesse by my Lady Carteret and her children, and dined
most nobly.  Sir G. Carteret went to Court this morning.  After dinner I
took occasion to have much discourse with Mr. Ph. Carteret, and find him a
very modest man; and I think verily of mighty good nature, and pretty
understanding.  He did give me a good account of the fight with the Dutch.
My Lady Sandwich dined in her chamber.  About three o'clock I, leaving my
wife there, took boat and home, and there shifted myself into my black
silke suit, and having promised Harman yesterday, I to his house, which I
find very mean, and mean company.  His wife very ill; I could not see her.
Here I, with her father and Kate Joyce, who was also very ill, were
godfathers and godmother to his boy, and was christened Will.  Mr. Meriton
christened him.  The most observable thing I found there to my content,
was to hear him and his clerk tell me that in this parish of Michell's,
Cornhill, one of the middlemost parishes and a great one of the towne,
there hath, notwithstanding this sickliness, been buried of any disease,
man, woman, or child, not one for thirteen months last past; which [is]
very strange.  And the like in a good degree in most other parishes, I
hear, saving only of the plague in them, but in this neither the plague
nor any other disease.  So back again home and reshifted myself, and so
down to my Lady Carteret's, where mighty merry and great pleasantnesse
between my Lady Sandwich and the young ladies and me, and all of us mighty
merry, there never having been in the world sure a greater business of
general content than this match proposed between Mr. Carteret and my Lady
Jemimah.  But withal it is mighty pretty to think how my poor Lady
Sandwich, between her and me, is doubtfull whether her daughter will like
of it or no, and how troubled she is for fear of it, which I do not fear
at all, and desire her not to do it, but her fear is the most discreet and
pretty that ever I did see.  Late here, and then my wife and I, with most
hearty kindnesse from my Lady Carteret by boat to Woolwich, come thither
about 12 at night, and so to bed.

10th.  Up, and with great pleasure looking over a nest of puppies of Mr.
Shelden's, with which my wife is most extraordinary pleased, and one of
them is promised her.  Anon I took my leave, and away by water to the Duke
of Albemarle's, where he tells me that I must be at Hampton Court anon.
So I home to look over my Tangier papers, and having a coach of Mr. Povy's
attending me, by appointment, in order to my coming to dine at his country
house at Brainford, where he and his family is, I went and Mr. Tasbrough
with me therein, it being a pretty chariot, but most inconvenient as to
the horses throwing dust and dirt into one's eyes and upon one's clothes.
There I staid a quarter of an houre, Creed being there, and being able to
do little business (but the less the better). Creed rode before, and Mr.
Povy and I after him in the chariot; and I was set down by him at the
Parke pale, where one of his saddle horses was ready for me, he himself
not daring to come into the house or be seen, because that a servant of
his, out of his horse, happened to be sicke, but is not yet dead, but was
never suffered to come into his house after he was ill.  But this
opportunity was taken to injure Povy, and most horribly he is abused by
some persons hereupon, and his fortune, I believe, quite broke; but that
he hath a good heart to bear, or a cunning one to conceal his evil.  There
I met with Sir W. Coventry, and by and by was heard by my Lord Chancellor
and Treasurer about our Tangier money, and my Lord Treasurer had ordered
me to forbear meddling with the L15,000 he offered me the other day, but,
upon opening the case to them, they did offer it again, and so I think I
shall have it, but my Lord General must give his consent in it, this money
having been promised to him, and he very angry at the proposal.  Here
though I have not been in many years, yet I lacke time to stay, besides
that it is, I perceive, an unpleasing thing to be at Court, everybody
being fearful one of another, and all so sad, enquiring after the plague,
so that I stole away by my horse to Kingston, and there with trouble was
forced, to press two sturdy rogues to carry me to London, and met at the
waterside with Mr. Charnocke, Sir Philip Warwicke's clerke, who had been
in company and was quite foxed. I took him with me in my boat, and so away
to Richmond, and there, by night, walked with him to Moreclacke, a very
pretty walk, and there staid a good while, now and then talking and
sporting with Nan the servant, who says she is a seaman's wife, and at
last bade good night.

11th.  And so all night down by water, a most pleasant passage, and come
thither by two o'clock, and so walked from the Old Swan home, and there to
bed to my Will, being very weary, and he lodging at my desire in my house.
At 6 o'clock up and to Westminster (where and all the towne besides, I
hear, the plague encreases), and, it being too soon to go to the Duke of
Albemarle, I to the Harp and Ball, and there made a bargain with Mary to
go forth with me in the afternoon, which she with much ado consented to.
So I to the Duke of Albemarle's, and there with much ado did get his
consent in part to my having the money promised for Tangier, and the other
part did not concur.  So being displeased with this, I back to the office
and there sat alone a while doing business, and then by a solemn
invitation to the Trinity House, where a great dinner and company, Captain
Dobbin's feast for Elder Brother.  But I broke up before the dinner half
over and by water to the Harp and Ball, and thence had Mary meet me at the
New Exchange, and there took coach and I with great pleasure took the ayre
to Highgate, and thence to Hampstead, much pleased with her company,
pretty and innocent, and had what pleasure almost I would with her, and so
at night, weary and sweaty, it being very hot beyond bearing, we back
again, and I set her down in St. Martin's Lane, and so I to the evening
'Change, and there hear all the towne full that Ostend is delivered to us,
and that Alderman Backewell

     [Among the State Papers is a letter from the king to the Lord
     General (dated August 8th, 1665): "Alderman Backwell being in great
     straits for the second payment he has to make for the service in
     Flanders, as much tin is to be transmitted to him as will raise the
     sum.  Has authorized him and Sir George Carteret to treat with the
     tin farmers for 500 tons of tin to be speedily transported under
     good convoy; but if, on consulting with Alderman Backwell, this plan
     of the tin seems insufficient, then without further difficulty he is
     to dispose for that purpose of the L10,000 assigned for pay of the
     Guards, not doubting that before that comes due, other ways will be
     found for supplying it; the payment in Flanders is of such
     importance that some means must be found of providing for it"
     ("Calendar," Domestic, 1664-65, pp. 508, 509)]

did go with L50,000 to that purpose.  But the truth of it I do not know,
but something I believe there is extraordinary in his going.  So to the
office, where I did what I could as to letters, and so away to bed,
shifting myself, and taking some Venice treakle, feeling myself out of
order, and thence to bed to sleep.

12th.  After doing what business I could in the morning, it being a solemn
fast-day

     ["A form of Common Prayer; together with an order for fasting for
     the averting of God's heavy visitation upon many places of this
     realm.  The fast to be observed within the cities of London and
     Westminster and places adjacent, on Wednesday the twelfth of this
     instant July, and both there and in all parts of this realm on the
     first Wednesday in every month during the visitation" ("Calendar of
     State Papers," Domestic, 1664-65, p. 466).]

for the plague growing upon us, I took boat and down to Deptford, where I
stood with great pleasure an houre or two by my Lady Sandwich's bedside,
talking to her (she lying prettily in bed) of my Lady Jemimah's being from
my Lady Pickering's when our letters come to that place; she being at my
Lord Montagu's, at Boughton.  The truth is, I had received letters of it
two days ago, but had dropped them, and was in a very extraordinary
straite what to do for them, or what account to give my Lady, but sent to
every place; I sent to Moreclacke, where I had been the night before, and
there they were found, which with mighty joy come safe to me; but all
ending with satisfaction to my Lady and me, though I find my Lady Carteret
not much pleased with this delay, and principally because of the plague,
which renders it unsafe to stay long at Deptford.  I eat a bit (my Lady
Carteret being the most kind lady in the world), and so took boat, and a
fresh boat at the Tower, and so up the river, against tide all the way, I
having lost it by staying prating to and with my Lady, and, from before
one, made it seven ere we got to Hampton Court; and when I come there all
business was over, saving my finding Mr. Coventry at his chamber, and with
him a good while about several businesses at his chamber, and so took
leave, and away to my boat, and all night upon the water, staying a while
with Nan at Moreclacke, very much pleased and merry with her, and so on
homeward, and come home by two o'clock, shooting the bridge at that time
of night, and so to bed, where I find Will is not, he staying at Woolwich
to come with my wife to dinner tomorrow to my Lady Carteret's.  Heard Mr.
Williamson repeat at Hampton Court to-day how the King of France hath
lately set out a most high arrest against the Pope, which is reckoned very
lofty and high.

     [Arret.  The rupture between Alexander VII. and Louis XIV. was
     healed in 1664, by the treaty signed at Pisa, on February 12th.  On
     August 9th, the pope's nephew, Cardinal Chigi, made his entry into
     Paris, as legate, to give the king satisfaction for the insult
     offered at Rome by the Corsican guard to the Duc de Crequi, the
     French ambassador; (see January 25th, 1662-63).  Cardinal Imperiali,
     Governor of Rome, asked pardon of the king in person, and all the
     hard conditions of the treaty were fulfilled.  But no arret against
     the pope was set forth in 1665.  On the contrary, Alexander, now
     wishing to please the king, issued a constitution on February 2nd,
     1665, ordering all the clergy of France, without any exception, to
     sign a formulary condemning the famous five propositions extracted
     from the works of Jansenius; and on April 29th, the king in person
     ordered the parliament to register the bull.  The Jansenist party,
     of course, demurred to this proceeding; the Bishops of Alais,
     Angers, Beauvais, and Pamiers, issuing mandates calling upon their
     clergy to refuse.  It was against these mandates, as being contrary
     to the king's declaration and the pope's intentions, that the arret
     was directed.--B.]

13th.  Lay long, being sleepy, and then up to the office, my Lord Brunker
(after his sickness) being come to the office, and did what business there
was, and so I by water, at night late, to Sir G. Carteret's, but there
being no oars to carry me, I was fain to call a skuller that had a
gentleman already in it, and he proved a man of love to musique, and he
and I sung together the way down with great pleasure, and an incident
extraordinary to be met with.  There come to dinner, they haveing dined,
but my Lady caused something to be brought for me, and I dined well and
mighty merry, especially my Lady Slaning and I about eating of creame and
brown bread, which she loves as much as I.  Thence after long discourse
with them and my Lady alone, I and [my] wife, who by agreement met here,
took leave, and I saw my wife a little way down (it troubling me that this
absence makes us a little strange instead of more fond), and so parted,
and I home to some letters, and then home to bed.  Above 700 died of the
plague this week.

14th.  Up, and all the morning at the Exchequer endeavouring to strike
tallys for money for Tangier, and mightily vexed to see how people attend
there, some out of towne, and others drowsy, and to others it was late, so
that the King's business suffers ten times more than all their service is
worth.  So I am put off to to-morrow. Thence to the Old Exchange, by
water, and there bespoke two fine shirts of my pretty seamstress, who, she
tells me, serves Jacke Fenn.  Upon the 'Change all the news is that guns
have been heard and that news is come by a Dane that my Lord was in view
of De Ruyter, and that since his parting from my Lord of Sandwich he hath
heard guns, but little of it do I think true.  So home to dinner, where
Povy by agreement, and after dinner we to talk of our Tangier matters,
about keeping our profit at the pay and victualling of the garrison, if
the present undertakers should leave it, wherein I did [not] nor will do
any thing unworthy me and any just man, but they being resolved to quit
it, it is fit I should suffer Mr. Povy to do what he can with Mr. Gauden
about it to our profit.  Thence to the discoursing of putting some sums of
money in order and tallys, which we did pretty well.  So he in the evening
gone, I by water to Sir G. Carteret's, and there find my Lady Sandwich and
her buying things for my Lady Jem.'s wedding; and my Lady Jem. is beyond
expectation come to Dagenhams, where Mr. Carteret is to go to visit her
to-morrow; and my proposal of waiting on him, he being to go alone to all
persons strangers to him, was well accepted, and so I go with him.  But,
Lord! to see how kind my Lady Carteret is to her!  Sends her most rich
jewells, and provides bedding and things of all sorts most richly for her,
which makes my Lady and me out of our wits almost to see the kindnesse she
treats us all with, as if they would buy the young lady.  Thence away home
and, foreseeing my being abroad two days, did sit up late making of
letters ready against tomorrow, and other things, and so to bed, to be up
betimes by the helpe of a larum watch, which by chance I borrowed of my
watchmaker to-day, while my owne is mending.

15th.  Up, and after all business done, though late, I to Deptford, but
before I went out of the office saw there young Bagwell's wife returned,
but could not stay to speak to her, though I had a great mind to it, and
also another great lady, as to fine clothes, did attend there to have a
ticket signed; which I did do, taking her through the garden to my office,
where I signed it and had a salute--[kiss]--of her, and so I away by boat
to Redriffe, and thence walked, and after dinner, at Sir G. Carteret's,
where they stayed till almost three o'clock for me, and anon took boat,
Mr. Carteret and I to the ferry-place at Greenwich, and there staid an
hour crossing the water to and again to get our coach and horses over; and
by and by set out, and so toward Dagenhams.  But, Lord! what silly
discourse we had by the way as to love-matters, he being the most awkerd
man I ever met with in my life as to that business.  Thither we come, by
that time it begun to be dark, and were kindly received by Lady Wright and
my Lord Crew.  And to discourse they went, my Lord discoursing with him,
asking of him questions of travell, which he answered well enough in a few
words; but nothing to the lady from him at all.  To supper, and after
supper to talk again, he yet taking no notice of the lady.  My Lord would
have had me have consented to leaving the young people together to-night,
to begin their amours, his staying being but to be little.  But I advised
against it, lest the lady might be too much surprised.  So they led him up
to his chamber, where I staid a little, to know how he liked the lady,
which he told me he did mightily; but, Lord! in the dullest insipid manner
that ever lover did.  So I bid him good night, and down to prayers with my
Lord Crew's family, and after prayers, my Lord, and Lady Wright, and I, to
consult what to do; and it was agreed at last to have them go to church
together, as the family used to do, though his lameness was a great
objection against it.  But at last my Lady Jem. sent me word by my Lady
Wright that it would be better to do just as they used to do before his
coming; and therefore she desired to go to church, which was yielded then
to.

16th (Lord's day).  I up, having lain with Mr. Moore in the chaplin's
chamber.  And having trimmed myself, down to Mr. Carteret; and he being
ready we down and walked in the gallery an hour or two, it being a most
noble and pretty house that ever, for the bigness, I saw.  Here I taught
him what to do: to take the lady always by the hand to lead her, and
telling him that I would find opportunity to leave them two together, he
should make these and these compliments, and also take a time to do the
like to Lord Crew and Lady Wright.  After I had instructed him, which he
thanked me for, owning that he needed my teaching him, my Lord Crew come
down and family, the young lady among the rest; and so by coaches to
church four miles off; where a pretty good sermon, and a declaration of
penitence of a man that had undergone the Churches censure for his wicked
life.  Thence back again by coach, Mr. Carteret having not had the
confidence to take his lady once by the hand, coming or going, which I
told him of when we come home, and he will hereafter do it.  So to dinner.
My Lord excellent discourse.  Then to walk in the gallery, and to sit
down.  By and by my Lady Wright and I go out (and then my Lord Crew, he
not by design), and lastly my Lady Crew come out, and left the young
people together.  And a little pretty daughter of my Lady Wright's most
innocently come out afterward, and shut the door to, as if she had done
it, poor child, by inspiration; which made us without, have good sport to
laugh at.  They together an hour, and by and by church-time, whither he
led her into the coach and into the church, and so at church all the
afternoon, several handsome ladies at church.  But it was most
extraordinary hot that ever I knew it.  So home again and to walk in the
gardens, where we left the young couple a second time; and my Lady Wright
and I to walk together, who to my trouble tells me that my Lady Jem. must
have something done to her body by Scott before she can be married, and
therefore care must be had to send him, also that some more new clothes
must of necessity be made her, which and other things I took care of.
Anon to supper, and excellent discourse and dispute between my Lord Crew
and the chaplin, who is a good scholler, but a nonconformist.  Here this
evening I spoke with Mrs. Carter, my old acquaintance, that hath lived
with my Lady these twelve or thirteen years, the sum of all whose
discourse and others for her, is, that I would get her a good husband;
which I have promised, but know not when I shall perform.  After Mr.
Carteret was carried to his chamber, we to prayers again and then to bed.

17th.  Up all of us, and to billiards; my Lady Wright, Mr. Carteret,
myself, and every body.  By and by the young couple left together.  Anon
to dinner; and after dinner Mr. Carteret took my advice about giving to
the servants, and I led him to give L10 among them, which he did, by
leaving it to the chief man-servant, Mr. Medows, to do for him.  Before we
went, I took my Lady Jem. apart, and would know how she liked this
gentleman, and whether she was under any difficulty concerning him.  She
blushed, and hid her face awhile; but at last I forced her to tell me. She
answered that she could readily obey what her father and mother had done;
which was all she could say, or I expect.  So anon I took leave, and for
London.  But, Lord! to see, among other things, how all these great people
here are afeard of London, being doubtfull of anything that comes from
thence, or that hath lately been there, that I was forced to say that I
lived wholly at Woolwich.  In our way Mr. Carteret did give me mighty
thanks for my care and pains for him, and is mightily pleased, though the
truth is, my Lady Jem. hath carried herself with mighty discretion and
gravity, not being forward at all in any degree, but mighty serious in her
answers to him, as by what he says and I observed, I collect.  To London
to my office, and there took letters from the office, where all well, and
so to the Bridge, and there he and I took boat and to Deptford, where
mighty welcome, and brought the good newes of all being pleased to them.
Mighty mirth at my giving them an account of all; but the young man could
not be got to say one word before me or my Lady Sandwich of his
adventures, but, by what he afterwards related to his father and mother
and sisters, he gives an account that pleases them mightily.  Here Sir G.
Carteret would have me lie all night, which I did most nobly, better than
ever I did in my life, Sir G. Carteret being mighty kind to me, leading me
to my chamber; and all their care now is, to have the business ended, and
they have reason, because the sicknesse puts all out of order, and they
cannot safely stay where they are.

18th.  Up and to the office, where all the morning, and so to my house and
eat a bit of victuals, and so to the 'Change, where a little business and
a very thin Exchange; and so walked through London to the Temple, where I
took water for Westminster to the Duke of Albemarle, to wait on him, and
so to Westminster Hall, and there paid for my newes-books, and did give
Mrs. Michell, who is going out of towne because of the sicknesse, and her
husband, a pint of wine, and so Sir W. Warren coming to me by appointment
we away by water home, by the way discoursing about the project I have of
getting some money and doing the King good service too about the mast
docke at Woolwich, which I fear will never be done if I do not go about
it.  After dispatching letters at the office, I by water down to Deptford,
where I staid a little while, and by water to my wife, whom I have not
seen 6 or 5 days, and there supped with her, and mighty pleasant, and saw
with content her drawings, and so to bed mighty merry.  I was much
troubled this day to hear at Westminster how the officers do bury the dead
in the open Tuttle-fields, pretending want of room elsewhere; whereas the
New Chappell churchyard was walled-in at the publick charge in the last
plague time, merely for want of room and now none, but such as are able to
pay dear for it, can be buried there.

19th.  Up and to the office, and thence presently to the Exchequer, and
there with much trouble got my tallys, and afterwards took Mr. Falconer,
Spicer, and another or two to the Leg and there give them a dinner, and so
with my tallys and about 30 dozen of bags, which it seems are my due,
having paid the fees as if I had received the money I away home, and after
a little stay down by water to Deptford, where I find all full of joy, and
preparing to go to Dagenhams to-morrow.  To supper, and after supper to
talk without end.  Very late I went away, it raining, but I had a design
'pour aller a la femme de Bagwell' and did so .  .  .  .  So away about
12, and it raining hard I back to Sir G. Carteret and there called up the
page, and to bed there, being all in a most violent sweat.

20th.  Up, in a boat among other people to the Tower, and there to the
office, where we sat all the morning.  So down to Deptford and there
dined, and after dinner saw my Lady Sandwich and Mr. Carteret and his two
sisters over the water, going to Dagenhams, and my Lady Carteret towards
Cranburne.

     [The royal lodge of that name in Windsor Forest, occupied by Sir
     George Carteret as Vice-Chamberlain to the King.--B.]

So all the company broke up in most extraordinary joy, wherein I am mighty
contented that I have had the good fortune to be so instrumental, and I
think it will be of good use to me.  So walked to Redriffe, where I hear
the sickness is, and indeed is scattered almost every where, there dying
1089 of the plague this week.  My Lady Carteret did this day give me a
bottle of plague-water home with me.  So home to write letters late, and
then home to bed, where I have not lain these 3 or 4 nights.  I received
yesterday a letter from my Lord Sandwich, giving me thanks for my care
about their marriage business, and desiring it to be dispatched, that no
disappointment may happen therein, which I will help on all I can.  This
afternoon I waited on the Duke of Albemarle, and so to Mrs. Croft's, where
I found and saluted Mrs. Burrows, who is a very pretty woman for a mother
of so many children. But, Lord! to see how the plague spreads.  It being
now all over King's Streete, at the Axe, and next door to it, and in other
places.

21st.  Up and abroad to the goldsmiths, to see what money I could get upon
my present tallys upon the advance of the Excise, and I hope I shall get
L10,000.  I went also and had them entered at the Excise Office. Alderman
Backewell is at sea.  Sir R. Viner come to towne but this morning.  So
Colvill was the only man I could yet speak withal to get any money of.
Met with Mr. Povy, and I with him and dined at the Custom House Taverne,
there to talk of our Tangier business, and Stockedale and Hewet with us.
So abroad to several places, among others to Anthony Joyce's, and there
broke to him my desire to have Pall married to Harman, whose wife, poor
woman, is lately dead, to my trouble, I loving her very much, and he will
consider it.  So home and late at my chamber, setting some papers in
order; the plague growing very raging, and my apprehensions of it great.
So very late to bed.

22nd.  As soon as up I among my goldsmiths, Sir Robert Viner and Colvill,
and there got L10,000 of my new tallys accepted, and so I made it my work
to find out Mr. Mervin and sent for others to come with their bills of
Exchange, as Captain Hewett, &c., and sent for Mr. Jackson, but he was not
in town.  So all the morning at the office, and after dinner, which was
very late, I to Sir R. Viner's, by his invitation in the morning, and got
near L5000 more accepted, and so from this day the whole, or near,
L15,000, lies upon interest.  Thence I by water to Westminster, and the
Duke of Albemarle being gone to dinner to my Lord of Canterbury's, I
thither, and there walked and viewed the new hall, a new old-fashion hall
as much as possible.  Begun, and means left for the ending of it, by
Bishop Juxon.  Not coming proper to speak with him, I to Fox-hall, where
to the Spring garden; but I do not see one guest there, the town being so
empty of any body to come thither.  Only, while I was there, a poor woman
come to scold with the master of the house that a kinswoman, I think, of
hers, that was newly dead of the plague, might be buried in the
church-yard; for, for her part, she should not be buried in the commons,
as they said she should.  Back to White Hall, and by and by comes the Duke
of Albemarle, and there, after a little discourse, I by coach home, not
meeting with but two coaches, and but two carts from White Hall to my own
house, that I could observe; and the streets mighty thin of people.  I met
this noon with Dr. Burnett, who told me, and I find in the newsbook this
week that he posted upon the 'Change, that whoever did spread the report
that, instead of the plague, his servant was by him killed, it was
forgery, and shewed me the acknowledgment of the master of the pest-house,
that his servant died of a bubo on his right groine, and two spots on his
right thigh, which is the plague.  To my office, where late writing
letters, and getting myself prepared with business for Hampton Court
to-morrow, and so having caused a good pullet to be got for my supper, all
alone, I very late to bed.  All the news is great: that we must of
necessity fall out with France, for He will side with the Dutch against
us.  That Alderman Backewell is gone over (which indeed he is) with money,
and that Ostend is in our present possession.  But it is strange to see
how poor Alderman Backewell is like to be put to it in his absence, Mr.
Shaw his right hand being ill.  And the Alderman's absence gives doubts to
people, and I perceive they are in great straits for money, besides what
Sir G. Carteret told me about fourteen days ago. Our fleet under my Lord
Sandwich being about the latitude 55 (which is a great secret) to the
Northward of the Texell.  So to bed very late.  In my way I called upon
Sir W. Turner, and at Mr. Shelcrosse's (but he was not at home, having
left his bill with Sir W. Turner), that so I may prove I did what I could
as soon as I had money to answer all bills.

23rd (Lord's day).  Up very betimes, called by Mr. Cutler, by appointment,
and with him in his coach and four horses over London Bridge to Kingston,
a very pleasant journey, and at Hampton Court by nine o'clock, and in our
way very good and various discourse, as he is a man, that though I think
he be a knave, as the world thinks him, yet a man of great experience and
worthy to be heard discourse.  When we come there, we to Sir W. Coventry's
chamber, and there discoursed long with him, he and I alone, the others
being gone away, and so walked together through the garden to the house,
where we parted, I observing with a little trouble that he is too great
now to expect too much familiarity with, and I find he do not mind me as
he used to do, but when I reflect upon him and his business I cannot think
much of it, for I do not observe anything but the same great kindness from
him.  I followed the King to chappell, and there hear a good sermon; and
after sermon with my Lord Arlington, Sir Thomas Ingram and others, spoke
to the Duke about Tangier, but not to much purpose.  I was not invited any
whither to dinner, though a stranger, which did also trouble me; but yet I
must remember it is a Court, and indeed where most are strangers; but,
however, Cutler carried me to Mr. Marriott's the house-keeper, and there
we had a very good dinner and good company, among others Lilly, the
painter.  Thence to the councill-chamber, where in a back room I sat all
the afternoon, but the councill begun late to sit, and spent most of the
time upon Morisco's Tarr businesse.  They sat long, and I forced to follow
Sir Thomas Ingram, the Duke, and others, so that when I got free and come
to look for Cutler, he was gone with his coach, without leaving any word
with any body to tell me so; so that I was forced with great trouble to
walk up and down looking of him, and at last forced to get a boat to carry
me to Kingston, and there, after eating a bit at a neat inne, which
pleased me well, I took boat, and slept all the way, without intermission,
from thence to Queenhive, where, it being about two o'clock, too late and
too soon to go home to bed, I lay and slept till about four,

24th.  And then up and home, and there dressed myself, and by appointment
to Deptford, to Sir G. Carteret's, between six and seven o'clock, where I
found him and my Lady almost ready, and by and by went over to the ferry,
and took coach and six horses nobly for Dagenhams, himself and lady and
their little daughter, Louisonne, and myself in the coach; where, when we
come, we were bravely entertained and spent the day most pleasantly with
the young ladies, and I so merry as never more.  Only for want of sleep,
and drinking of strong beer had a rheum in one of my eyes, which troubled
me much.  Here with great content all the day, as I think I ever passed a
day in my life, because of the contentfulnesse of our errand, and the
noblenesse of the company and our manner of going.  But I find Mr.
Carteret yet as backward almost in his caresses, as he was the first day.
At night, about seven o'clock, took coach again; but, Lord! to see in what
a pleasant humour Sir G. Carteret hath been both coming and going; so
light, so fond, so merry, so boyish (so much content he takes in this
business), it is one of the greatest wonders I ever saw in my mind.  But
once in serious discourse he did say that, if he knew his son to be a
debauchee, as many and, most are now-a-days about the Court, he would tell
it, and my Lady Jem. should not have him; and so enlarged both he and she
about the baseness and looseness of the Court, and told several stories of
the Duke of Monmouth, and Richmond, and some great person, my Lord of
Ormond's second son, married to a lady of extraordinary quality (fit and
that might have been made a wife for the King himself), about six months
since, that this great person hath given the pox to------; and discoursed
how much this would oblige the Kingdom if the King would banish some of
these great persons publiquely from the Court, and wished it with all
their hearts.  We set out so late that it grew dark, so as we doubted the
losing of our way; and a long time it was, or seemed, before we could get
to the water-side, and that about eleven at night, where, when we come,
all merry (only my eye troubled me, as I said), we found no ferryboat was
there, nor no oares to carry us to Deptford.  However, afterwards oares
was called from the other side at Greenwich; but, when it come, a
frolique, being mighty merry, took us, and there we would sleep all night
in the coach in the Isle of Doggs.  So we did, there being now with us my
Lady Scott, and with great pleasure drew up the glasses, and slept till
daylight, and then some victuals and wine being brought us, we ate a bit,
and so up and took boat, merry as might be; and when come to Sir G.
Carteret's, there all to bed.

25th.  Our good humour in every body continuing, and there I slept till
seven o'clock.  Then up and to the office, well refreshed, my eye only
troubling me, which by keeping a little covered with my handkercher and
washing now and then with cold water grew better by night.  At noon to the
'Change, which was very thin, and thence homeward, and was called in by
Mr. Rawlinson, with whom I dined and some good company very harmlessly
merry.  But sad the story of the plague in the City, it growing mightily.
This day my Lord Brunker did give me Mr. Grant's' book upon the Bills of
Mortality, new printed and enlarged.  Thence to my office awhile, full of
business, and thence by coach to the Duke of Albemarle's, not meeting one
coach going nor coming from my house thither and back again, which is very
strange.  One of my chief errands was to speak to Sir W. Clerke about my
wife's brother, who importunes me, and I doubt he do want mightily, but I
can do little for him there as to employment in the army, and out of my
purse I dare not for fear of a precedent, and letting him come often to me
is troublesome and dangerous too, he living in the dangerous part of the
town, but I will do what I can possibly for him and as soon as I can.
Mightily troubled all this afternoon with masters coming to me about Bills
of Exchange and my signing them upon my Goldsmiths, but I did send for
them all and hope to ease myself this weeke of all the clamour.  These two
or three days Mr. Shaw at Alderman Backewell's hath lain sick, like to
die, and is feared will not live a day to an end.  At night home and to
bed, my head full of business, and among others, this day come a letter to
me from Paris from my Lord Hinchingbroke, about his coming over; and I
have sent this night an order from the Duke of Albemarle for a ship of 36
guns to [go] to Calais to fetch him.

26th.  Up, and after doing a little business, down to Deptford with Sir W.
Batten, and there left him, and I to Greenwich to the Park, where I hear
the King and Duke are come by water this morn from Hampton Court. They
asked me several questions.  The King mightily pleased with his new
buildings there.  I followed them to Castle's ship in building, and there,
met Sir W. Batten, and thence to Sir G. Carteret's, where all the morning
with them; they not having any but the Duke of Monmouth, and Sir W.
Killigrew, and one gentleman, and a page more.  Great variety of talk, and
was often led to speak to the King and Duke.  By and by they to dinner,
and all to dinner and sat down to the King saving myself, which, though I
could not in modesty expect, yet, God forgive my pride!  I was sorry I was
there, that Sir W. Batten should say that he could sit down where I could
not, though he had twenty times more reason than I, but this was my pride
and folly.  I down and walked with Mr. Castle, who told me the design of
Ford and Rider to oppose and do all the hurt they can to Captain Taylor in
his new ship "The London," and how it comes, and that they are a couple of
false persons, which I believe, and withal that he himself is a knave too.
He and I by and by to dinner mighty nobly, and the King having dined, he
come down, and I went in the barge with him, I sitting at the door.  Down
to Woolwich (and there I just saw and kissed my wife, and saw some of her
painting, which is very curious; and away again to the King) and back
again with him in the barge, hearing him and the Duke talk, and seeing and
observing their manner of discourse.  And God forgive me! though I admire
them with all the duty possible, yet the more a man considers and observes
them, the less he finds of difference between them and other men, though
(blessed be God!) they are both princes of great nobleness and spirits.
The barge put me into another boat that come to our side, Mr. Holder with
a bag of gold to the Duke, and so they away and I home to the office.  The
Duke of Monmouth is the most skittish leaping gallant that ever I saw,
always in action, vaulting or leaping, or clambering.  Thence mighty full
of the honour of this day, I took coach and to Kate Joyce's, but she not
within, but spoke with Anthony, who tells me he likes well of my proposal
for Pall to Harman, but I fear that less than L500 will not be taken, and
that I shall not be able to give, though I did not say so to him.  After a
little other discourse and the sad news of the death of so many in the
parish of the plague, forty last night, the bell always going, I back to
the Exchange, where I went up and sat talking with my beauty, Mrs.
Batelier, a great while, who is indeed one of the finest women I ever saw
in my life. After buying some small matter, I home, and there to the
office and saw Sir J. Minnes now come from Portsmouth, I home to set my
Journall for these four days in order, they being four days of as great
content and honour and pleasure to me as ever I hope to live or desire, or
think any body else can live.  For methinks if a man would but reflect
upon this, and think that all these things are ordered by God Almighty to
make me contented, and even this very marriage now on foot is one of the
things intended to find me content in, in my life and matter of mirth,
methinks it should make one mightily more satisfied in the world than he
is.  This day poor Robin Shaw at Backewell's died, and Backewell himself
now in Flanders.  The King himself asked about Shaw, and being told he was
dead, said he was very sorry for it.  The sicknesse is got into our parish
this week, and is got, indeed, every where; so that I begin to think of
setting things in order, which I pray God enable me to put both as to soul
and body.

27th.  Called up at 4 o'clock.  Up and to my preparing some papers for
Hampton Court, and so by water to Fox Hall, and there Mr. Gauden's coach
took me up, and by and by I took up him, and so both thither, a brave
morning to ride in and good discourse with him.  Among others he begun
with me to speak of the Tangier Victuallers resigning their employment,
and his willingness to come on.  Of which I was glad, and took the
opportunity to answer him with all kindness and promise of assistance. He
told me a while since my Lord Berkeley did speak of it to him, and
yesterday a message from Sir Thomas Ingram.  When I come to Hampton Court
I find Sir T. Ingram and Creed ready with papers signed for the putting of
Mr. Gawden in, upon a resignation signed to by Lanyon and sent to Sir
Thos. Ingram.  At this I was surprized but yet was glad, and so it passed
but with respect enough to those that are in, at least without any thing
ill taken from it.  I got another order signed about the boats, which I
think I shall get something by.  So dispatched all my business, having
assurance of continuance of all hearty love from Sir W. Coventry, and so
we staid and saw the King and Queene set out toward Salisbury, and after
them the Duke and Duchesse, whose hands I did kiss.  And it was the first
time I did ever, or did see any body else, kiss her hand, and it was a
most fine white and fat hand.  But it was pretty to see the young pretty
ladies dressed like men, in velvet coats, caps with ribbands, and with
laced bands, just like men.  Only the Duchesse herself it did not become.
They gone, we with great content took coach again, and hungry come to
Clapham about one o'clock, and Creed there too before us, where a good
dinner, the house having dined, and so to walk up and down in the gardens,
mighty pleasant.  By and by comes by promise to me Sir G. Carteret, and
viewed the house above and below, and sat and drank there, and I had a
little opportunity to kiss and spend some time with the ladies above, his
daughter, a buxom lass, and his sister Fissant, a serious lady, and a
little daughter of hers, that begins to sing prettily.  Thence, with
mighty pleasure, with Sir G. Carteret by coach, with great discourse of
kindnesse with him to my Lord Sandwich, and to me also; and I every day
see more good by the alliance.  Almost at Deptford I 'light and walked
over to Half-way House, and so home, in my way being shown my cozen
Patience's house, which seems, at distance, a pretty house.  At home met
the weekly Bill, where above 1000 encreased in the Bill, and of them, in
all about 1,700 of the plague, which hath made the officers this day
resolve of sitting at Deptford, which puts me to some consideration what
to do.  Therefore home to think and consider of every thing about it, and
without determining any thing eat a little supper and to bed, full of the
pleasure of these 6 or 7 last days.

28th.  Up betimes, and down to Deptford, where, after a little discourse
with Sir G. Carteret, who is much displeased with the order of our
officers yesterday to remove the office to Deptford, pretending other
things, but to be sure it is with regard to his own house (which is much
because his family is going away).  I am glad I was not at the order
making, and so I will endeavour to alter it.  Set out with my Lady all
alone with her with six horses to Dagenhams; going by water to the Ferry.
And a pleasant going, and good discourse; and when there, very merry, and
the young couple now well acquainted.  But, Lord! to see in what fear all
the people here do live would make one mad, they are afeard of us that
come to them, insomuch that I am troubled at it, and wish myself away. But
some cause they have; for the chaplin, with whom but a week or two ago we
were here mighty high disputing, is since fallen into a fever and dead,
being gone hence to a friend's a good way off.  A sober and a healthful
man.  These considerations make us all hasten the marriage, and resolve it
upon Monday next, which is three days before we intended it. Mighty merry
all of us, and in the evening with full content took coach again and home
by daylight with great pleasure, and thence I down to Woolwich, where find
my wife well, and after drinking and talking a little we to bed.

29th.  Up betimes, and after viewing some of my wife's pictures, which now
she is come to do very finely to my great satisfaction beyond what I could
ever look for, I went away and by water to the office, where nobody to
meet me, but busy all the morning.  At noon to dinner, where I hear that
my Will is come in thither and laid down upon my bed, ill of the headake,
which put me into extraordinary fear; and I studied all I could to get him
out of the house, and set my people to work to do it without discouraging
him, and myself went forth to the Old Exchange to pay my fair Batelier for
some linnen, and took leave of her, they breaking up shop for a while; and
so by coach to Kate Joyce's, and there used all the vehemence and
rhetorique I could to get her husband to let her go down to Brampton, but
I could not prevail with him; he urging some simple reasons, but most that
of profit, minding the house, and the distance, if either of them should
be ill.  However, I did my best, and more than I had a mind to do, but
that I saw him so resolved against it, while she was mightily troubled at
it.  At last he yielded she should go to Windsor, to some friends there.
So I took my leave of them, believing that it is great odds that we ever
all see one another again; for I dare not go any more to that end of the
towne.  So home, and to writing of letters--hard, and then at night home,
and fell to my Tangier papers till late, and then to bed, in some ease of
mind that Will is gone to his lodging, and that he is likely to do well,
it being only the headake.

30th (Lord's day).  Up, and in my night gowne, cap and neckcloth,
undressed all day long, lost not a minute, but in my chamber, setting my
Tangier accounts to rights.  Which I did by night to my very heart's
content, not only that it is done, but I find every thing right, and even
beyond what, after so long neglecting them, I did hope for.  The Lord of
Heaven be praised for it!  Will was with me to-day, and is very well
again.  It was a sad noise to hear our bell to toll and ring so often
to-day, either for deaths or burials; I think five or six times.  At night
weary with my day's work, but full of joy at my having done it, I to bed,
being to rise betimes tomorrow to go to the wedding at Dagenhams. So to
bed, fearing I have got some cold sitting in my loose garments all this
day.

31st.  Up, and very betimes by six o'clock at Deptford, and there find Sir
G. Carteret, and my Lady ready to go: I being in my new coloured silk
suit, and coat trimmed with gold buttons and gold broad lace round my
hands, very rich and fine.  By water to the Ferry, where, when we come, no
coach there; and tide of ebb so far spent as the horse-boat could not get
off on the other side the river to bring away the coach.  So we were fain
to stay there in the unlucky Isle of Doggs, in a chill place, the morning
cool, and wind fresh, above two if not three hours to our great
discontent.  Yet being upon a pleasant errand, and seeing that it could
not be helped, we did bear it very patiently; and it was worth my
observing, I thought, as ever any thing, to see how upon these two scores,
Sir G. Carteret, the most passionate man in the world, and that was in
greatest haste to be gone, did bear with it, and very pleasant all the
while, at least not troubled much so as to fret and storm at it. Anon the
coach comes: in the mean time there coming a News thither with his horse
to go over, that told us he did come from Islington this morning; and that
Proctor the vintner of the Miter in Wood-street, and his son, are dead
this morning there, of the plague; he having laid out abundance of money
there, and was the greatest vintner for some time in London for great
entertainments.  We, fearing the canonicall hour would be past before we
got thither, did with a great deal of unwillingness send away the license
and wedding ring.  So that when we come, though we drove hard with six
horses, yet we found them gone from home; and going towards the church,
met them coming from church, which troubled us. But, however, that trouble
was soon over; hearing it was well done: they being both in their old
cloaths; my Lord Crew giving her, there being three coach fulls of them.
The young lady mighty sad, which troubled me; but yet I think it was only
her gravity in a little greater degree than usual.  All saluted her, but I
did not till my Lady Sandwich did ask me whether I had saluted her or no.
So to dinner, and very merry we were; but yet in such a sober way as never
almost any wedding was in so great families: but it was much better.
After dinner company divided, some to cards, others to talk.  My Lady
Sandwich and I up to settle accounts, and pay her some money.  And mighty
kind she is to me, and would fain have had me gone down for company with
her to Hinchingbroke; but for my life I cannot.  At night to supper, and
so to talk; and which, methought, was the most extraordinary thing, all of
us to prayers as usual, and the young bride and bridegroom too and so
after prayers, soberly to bed; only I got into the bridegroom's chamber
while he undressed himself, and there was very merry, till he was called
to the bride's chamber, and into bed they went.  I kissed the bride in
bed, and so the curtaines drawne with the greatest gravity that could be,
and so good night.  But the modesty and gravity of this business was so
decent, that it was to me indeed ten times more delightfull than if it had
been twenty times more merry and joviall.  Whereas I feared I must have
sat up all night, we did here all get good beds, and I lay in the same I
did before with Mr. Brisband, who is a good scholler and sober man; and we
lay in bed, getting him to give me an account of home, which is the most
delightfull talke a man can have of any traveller: and so to sleep.  My
eyes much troubled already with the change of my drink.  Thus I ended this
month with the greatest joy that ever I did any in my life, because I have
spent the greatest part of it with abundance of joy, and honour, and
pleasant journeys, and brave entertainments, and without cost of money;
and at last live to see the business ended with great content on all
sides.  This evening with Mr. Brisband, speaking of enchantments and
spells; I telling him some of my charms; he told me this of his owne
knowledge, at Bourdeaux, in France. The words these:

                         Voyci un Corps mort,
                         Royde come un Baston,
                         Froid comme Marbre,
                         Leger come un esprit,
                         Levons to au nom de Jesus Christ.

He saw four little girles, very young ones, all kneeling, each of them,
upon one knee; and one begun the first line, whispering in the eare of the
next, and the second to the third, and the third to the fourth, and she to
the first.  Then the first begun the second line, and so round quite
through, and, putting each one finger only to a boy that lay flat upon his
back on the ground, as if he was dead; at the end of the words, they did
with their four fingers raise this boy as high as they could reach, and he
[Mr. Brisband] being there, and wondering at it, as also being afeard to
see it, for they would have had him to have bore a part in saying the
words, in the roome of one of the little girles that was so young that
they could hardly make her learn to repeat the words, did, for feare there
might be some sleight used in it by the boy, or that the boy might be
light, call the cook of the house, a very lusty fellow, as Sir G.
Carteret's cook, who is very big, and they did raise him in just the same
manner.  This is one of the strangest things I ever heard, but he tells it
me of his owne knowledge, and I do heartily believe it to be true.  I
enquired of him whether they were Protestant or Catholique girles; and he
told me they were Protestant, which made it the more strange to me.  Thus
we end this month, as I said, after the greatest glut of content that ever
I had; only under some difficulty because of the plague, which grows
mightily upon us, the last week being about 1700 or 1800 of the plague.
My Lord Sandwich at sea with a fleet of about 100 sail, to the Northward,
expecting De Ruyter, or the Dutch East India fleet.  My Lord Hinchingbroke
coming over from France, and will meet his sister at Scott's-hall.  Myself
having obliged both these families in this business very much; as both my
Lady, and Sir G. Carteret and his Lady do confess exceedingly, and the
latter do also now call me cozen, which I am glad of.  So God preserve us
all friends long, and continue health among us.




     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     About two o'clock, too late and too soon to go home to bed
     And all to dinner and sat down to the King saving myself
     Baseness and looseness of the Court
     Being able to do little business (but the less the better)
     Contracted for her as if he had been buying a horse
     Did bear with it, and very pleasant all the while
     Doubtfull whether her daughter will like of it or no
     Endeavouring to strike tallys for money for Tangier
     For, for her part, she should not be buried in the commons
     Had what pleasure almost I would with her
     Hath a good heart to bear, or a cunning one to conceal his evil
     I have promised, but know not when I shall perform
     I kissed the bride in bed, and so the curtaines drawne
     Less he finds of difference between them and other men
     Lord! in the dullest insipid manner that ever lover did
     Nan at Moreclacke, very much pleased and merry with her
     Not had the confidence to take his lady once by the hand
     Out of my purse I dare not for fear of a precedent
     Plague, forty last night, the bell always going
     Pretty to see the young pretty ladies dressed like men
     So to bed, to be up betimes by the helpe of a larum watch
     This absence makes us a little strange instead of more fond
     What silly discourse we had by the way as to love-matters





End of Project Gutenberg's Diary of Samuel Pepys, July 1665, by Samuel Pepys

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, JULY 1665 ***

***** This file should be named 4157.txt or 4157.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/4/1/5/4157/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
