Project Gutenberg's Diary of Samuel Pepys, October 1665, by Samuel Pepys

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Diary of Samuel Pepys, October 1665

Author: Samuel Pepys

Release Date: November 30, 2004 [EBook #4160]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***




Produced by David Widger





                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A. F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                 OCTOBER
                                  1665

October 1st (Lord's day).  Called up about 4 of the clock and so dressed
myself and so on board the Bezan, and there finding all my company asleep
I would not wake them, but it beginning to be break of day I did stay upon
the decke walking, and then into the Maister's cabbin and there laid and
slept a little, and so at last was waked by Captain Cocke's calling of me,
and so I turned out, and then to chat and talk and laugh, and mighty
merry.  We spent most of the morning talking and reading of "The Siege of
Rhodes," which is certainly (the more I read it the more I think so) the
best poem that ever was wrote.  We breakfasted betimes and come to the
fleete about two of the clock in the afternoon, having a fine day and a
fine winde.  My Lord received us mighty kindly, and after discourse with
us in general left us to our business, and he to his officers, having
called a council of wary, we in the meantime settling of papers with Mr.
Pierce and everybody else, and by and by with Captain Cuttance. Anon
called down to my Lord, and there with him till supper talking and
discourse; among other things, to my great joy, he did assure me that he
had wrote to the King and Duke about these prize-goods, and told me that
they did approve of what he had done, and that he would owne what he had
done, and would have me to tell all the world so, and did, under his hand,
give Cocke and me his certificate of our bargains, and giving us full
power of disposal of what we have so bought.  This do ease my mind of all
my fear, and makes my heart lighter by L100 than it was before. He did
discourse to us of the Dutch fleete being abroad, eighty-five of them
still, and are now at the Texell, he believes, in expectation of our
Eastland ships coming home with masts and hempe, and our loaden Hambrough
ships going to Hambrough.  He discoursed against them that would have us
yield to no conditions but conquest over the Dutch, and seems to believe
that the Dutch will call for the protection of the King of France and come
under his power, which were to be wished they might be brought to do under
ours by fair means, and to that end would have all Dutch men and familys,
that would come hither and settled, to be declared denizens; and my Lord
did whisper to me alone that things here must break in pieces, nobody
minding any thing, but every man his owne business of profit or pleasure,
and the King some little designs of his owne, and that certainly the
kingdom could not stand in this condition long, which I fear and believe
is very true.  So to supper and there my Lord the kindest man to me,
before all the table talking of me to my advantage and with tenderness too
that it overjoyed me.  So after supper Captain Cocke and I and Temple on
board the Bezan, and there to cards for a while and then to read again in
"Rhodes" and so to sleep.  But, Lord! the mirth which it caused me to be
waked in the night by their snoaring round about me; I did laugh till I
was ready to burst, and waked one of the two companions of Temple, who
could not a good while tell where he was that he heard one laugh so, till
he recollected himself, and I told him what it was at, and so to sleep
again, they still snoaring.

2nd.  We having sailed all night (and I do wonder how they in the dark
could find the way) we got by morning to Gillingham, and thence all walked
to Chatham; and there with Commissioner Pett viewed the Yard; and among
other things, a teame of four horses come close by us, he being with me,
drawing a piece of timber that I am confident one man could easily have
carried upon his back.  I made the horses be taken away, and a man or two
to take the timber away with their hands.  This the Commissioner did see,
but said nothing, but I think had cause to be ashamed of.  We walked, he
and I and Cocke, to the Hill-house, where we find Sir W. Pen in bed and
there much talke and much dissembling of kindnesse from him, but he is a
false rogue, and I shall not trust him, but my being there did procure his
consent to have his silk carried away before the money received, which he
would not have done for Cocke I am sure.  Thence to Rochester, walked to
the Crowne, and while dinner was getting ready, I did there walk to visit
the old Castle ruines, which hath been a noble place, and there going up I
did upon the stairs overtake three pretty mayds or women and took them up
with me, and I did 'baiser sur mouches et toucher leur mains' and necks to
my great pleasure: but, Lord! to see what a dreadfull thing it is to look
down the precipices, for it did fright me mightily, and hinder me of much
pleasure which I would have made to myself in the company of these three,
if it had not been for that.  The place hath been very noble and great and
strong in former ages.  So to walk up and down the Cathedral, and thence
to the Crowne, whither Mr. Fowler, the Mayor of the towne, was come in his
gowne, and is a very reverend magistrate.  After I had eat a bit, not
staying to eat with them, I went away, and so took horses and to
Gravesend, and there staid not, but got a boat, the sicknesse being very
much in the towne still, and so called on board my Lord Bruncker and Sir
John Minnes, on board one of the East Indiamen at Erith, and there do find
them full of envious complaints for the pillageing of the ships, but I did
pacify them, and discoursed about making money of some of the goods, and
do hope to be the better by it honestly.  So took leave (Madam Williams
being here also with my Lord), and about 8 o'clock got to Woolwich and
there supped and mighty pleasant with my wife, who is, for ought I see,
all friends with her mayds, and so in great joy and content to bed.

3rd.  Up, and to my great content visited betimes by Mr. Woolly, my uncle
Wight's cozen, who comes to see what work I have for him about these East
India goods, and I do find that this fellow might have been of great use,
and hereafter may be of very great use to me, in this trade of prize
goods, and glad I am fully of his coming hither.  While I dressed myself,
and afterwards in walking to Greenwich we did discourse over all the
business of the prize goods, and he puts me in hopes I may get some money
in what I have done, but not so much as I expected, but that I may
hereafter do more.  We have laid a design of getting more, and are to talk
again of it a few days hence.  To the office, where nobody to meet me, Sir
W. Batten being the only man and he gone this day to meet to adjourne the
Parliament to Oxford.  Anon by appointment comes one to tell me my Lord
Rutherford is come; so I to the King's Head to him, where I find his lady,
a fine young Scotch lady, pretty handsome and plain.  My wife also, and
Mercer, by and by comes, Creed bringing them; and so presently to dinner
and very merry; and after to even our accounts, and I to give him tallys,
where he do allow me L100, of which to my grief the rogue Creed has
trepanned me out of L50.  But I do foresee a way how it may be I may get a
greater sum of my Lord to his content by getting him allowance of interest
upon his tallys.  That being done, and some musique and other diversions,
at last away goes my Lord and Lady, and I sent my wife to visit Mrs.
Pierce, and so I to my office, where wrote important letters to the Court,
and at night (Creed having clownishly left my wife), I to Mrs. Pierces and
brought her and Mrs. Pierce to the King's Head and there spent a piece
upon a supper for her and mighty merry and pretty discourse, she being as
pretty as ever, most of our mirth being upon "my Cozen" (meaning my Lord
Bruncker's ugly mistress, whom he calls cozen), and to my trouble she
tells me that the fine Mrs. Middleton is noted for carrying about her body
a continued sour base smell, that is very offensive, especially if she be
a little hot.  Here some bad musique to close the night and so away and
all of us saw Mrs. Belle Pierce (as pretty as ever she was almost) home,
and so walked to Will's lodging where I used to lie, and there made shift
for a bed for Mercer, and mighty pleasantly to bed.  This night I hear
that of our two watermen that use to carry our letters, and were well on
Saturday last, one is dead, and the other dying sick of the plague.  The
plague, though decreasing elsewhere, yet being greater about the Tower and
thereabouts.

4th.  Up and to my office, where Mr. Andrews comes, and reckoning with him
I get L64 of him.  By and by comes Mr. Gawden, and reckoning with him he
gives me L60 in his account, which is a great mercy to me.  Then both of
them met and discoursed the business of the first man's resigning and the
other's taking up the business of the victualling of Tangier, and I do not
think that I shall be able to do as well under Mr. Gawden as under these
men, or within a little as to profit and less care upon me.  Thence to the
King's Head to dinner, where we three and Creed and my wife and her woman
dined mighty merry and sat long talking, and so in the afternoon broke up,
and I led my wife to our lodging again, and I to the office where did much
business, and so to my wife.  This night comes Sir George Smith to see me
at the office, and tells me how the plague is decreased this week 740, for
which God be praised!  but that it encreases at our end of the town still,
and says how all the towne is full of Captain Cocke's being in some ill
condition about prize-goods, his goods being taken from him, and I know
not what.  But though this troubles me to have it said, and that it is
likely to be a business in Parliament, yet I am not much concerned at it,
because yet I believe this newes is all false, for he would have wrote to
me sure about it.  Being come to my wife, at our lodging, I did go to bed,
and left my wife with her people to laugh and dance and I to sleep.

5th.  Lay long in bed talking among other things of my sister Pall, and my
wife of herself is very willing that I should give her L400 to her
portion, and would have her married soon as we could; but this great
sicknesse time do make it unfit to send for her up.  I abroad to the
office and thence to the Duke of Albemarle, all my way reading a book of
Mr. Evelyn's translating and sending me as a present, about directions for
gathering a Library;

     [Instructions concerning erecting of a Library, presented to my
     Lord the President De Mesme by Gilbert Naudeus, and now interpreted
     by Jo.  Evelyn, Esquire.  London, 1661: This little book was
     dedicated to Lord Clarendon by the translator.  It was printed while
     Evelyn was abroad, and is full of typographical errors; these are
     corrected in a copy mentioned in Evelyn's "Miscellaneous Writings,"
     1825, p.  xii, where a letter to Dr. Godolphin on the subject is
     printed.]

but the book is above my reach, but his epistle to my Lord Chancellor is a
very fine piece.  When I come to the Duke it was about the victuallers'
business, to put it into other hands, or more hands, which I do advise in,
but I hope to do myself a jobb of work in it.  So I walked through
Westminster to my old house the Swan, and there did pass some time with
Sarah, and so down by water to Deptford and there to my Valentine.

          [A Mrs. Bagwell.  See ante, February 14th, 1664-65]

Round about and next door on every side is the plague, but I did not value
it, but there did what I would 'con elle', and so away to Mr. Evelyn's to
discourse of our confounded business of prisoners, and sick and wounded
seamen, wherein he and we are so much put out of order.

     [Each of the Commissioners for the Sick and Wounded was appointed to
     a particular district, and Evelyn's district was Kent and Sussex.
     On September 25th, 1665, Evelyn wrote in his Diary: "My Lord Admiral
     being come from ye fleete to Greenewich, I went thence with him to
     ye Cockpit to consult with the Duke of Albemarle.  I was peremptory
     that unlesse we had L10,000 immediately, the prisoners would starve,
     and 'twas proposed it should be rais'd out of the E. India prizes
     now taken by Lord Sandwich.  They being but two of ye Commission,
     and so not impower'd to determine, sent an expresse to his Majesty
     and Council to know what they should do."]

And here he showed me his gardens, which are for variety of evergreens,
and hedge of holly, the finest things I ever saw in my life.

     [Evelyn purchased Sayes Court, Deptford, in 1653, and laid out his
     gardens, walks, groves, enclosures, and plantations, which
     afterwards became famous for their beauty.  When he took the place
     in hand it was nothing but an open field of one hundred acres, with
     scarcely a hedge in it.]

Thence in his coach to Greenwich, and there to my office, all the way
having fine discourse of trees and the nature of vegetables.  And so to
write letters, I very late to Sir W. Coventry of great concernment, and so
to my last night's lodging, but my wife is gone home to Woolwich.  The
Bill, blessed be God! is less this week by 740 of what it was the last
week.  Being come to my lodging I got something to eat, having eat little
all the day, and so to bed, having this night renewed my promises of
observing my vowes as I used to do; for I find that, since I left them
off, my mind is run a'wool-gathering and my business neglected.

6th.  Up, and having sent for Mr. Gawden he come to me, and he and I
largely discoursed the business of his Victualling, in order to the adding
of partners to him or other ways of altering it, wherein I find him ready
to do anything the King would have him do.  So he and I took his coach and
to Lambeth and to the Duke of Albemarle about it, and so back again, where
he left me.  In our way discoursing of the business and contracting a
great friendship with him, and I find he is a man most worthy to be made a
friend, being very honest and gratefull, and in the freedom of our
discourse he did tell me his opinion and knowledge of Sir W. Pen to be,
what I know him to be, as false a man as ever was born, for so, it seems,
he hath been to him.  He did also tell me, discoursing how things are
governed as to the King's treasure, that, having occasion for money in the
country, he did offer Alderman Maynell to pay him down money here, to be
paid by the Receiver in some county in the country, upon whom Maynell had
assignments, in whose hands the money also lay ready.  But Maynell refused
it, saying that he could have his money when he would, and had rather it
should lie where it do than receive it here in towne this sickly time,
where he hath no occasion for it.  But now the evil is that he hath lent
this money upon tallys which are become payable, but he finds that nobody
looks after it, how long the money is unpaid, and whether it lies dead in
the Receiver's hands or no, so the King he pays Maynell 10 per cent. while
the money lies in his Receiver's hands to no purpose but the benefit of
the Receiver.  I to dinner to the King's Head with Mr. Woolly, who is come
to instruct me in the business of my goods, but gives me not so good
comfort as I thought I should have had.  But, however, it will be well
worth my time though not above 2 or L300.  He gone I to my office, where
very busy drawing up a letter by way of discourse to the Duke of Albemarle
about my conception how the business of the Victualling should be ordered,
wherein I have taken great pains, and I think have hitt the right if they
will but follow it.  At this very late and so home to our lodgings to bed.

7th.  Up and to the office along with Mr. Childe, whom I sent for to
discourse about the victualling business, who will not come into
partnership (no more will Captain Beckford ), but I do find him a mighty
understanding man, and one I will keep a knowledge of.  Did business,
though not much, at the office; because of the horrible crowd and
lamentable moan of the poor seamen that lie starving in the streets for
lack of money.  Which do trouble and perplex me to the heart; and more at
noon when we were to go through them, for then a whole hundred of them
followed us; some cursing, some swearing, and some praying to us.  And
that that made me more troubled was a letter come this afternoon from the
Duke of Albemarle, signifying the Dutch to be in sight, with 80 sayle,
yesterday morning, off of Solebay, coming right into the bay.  God knows
what they will and may do to us, we having no force abroad able to oppose
them, but to be sacrificed to them.  Here come Sir W. Rider to me, whom I
sent for about the victualling business also, but he neither will not come
into partnership, but desires to be of the Commission if there be one.
Thence back the back way to my office, where very late, very busy. But
most of all when at night come two waggons from Rochester with more goods
from Captain Cocke; and in houseing them at Mr. Tooker's lodgings come two
of the Custome-house to seize them, and did seize them but I showed them
my 'Transire'.  However, after some hot and angry words, we locked them
up, and sealed up the key, and did give it to the constable to keep till
Monday, and so parted.  But, Lord!  to think how the poor constable come
to me in the dark going home; "Sir," says he, "I have the key, and if you
would have me do any service for you, send for me betimes to-morrow
morning, and I will do what you would have me."  Whether the fellow do
this out of kindness or knavery, I cannot tell; but it is pretty to
observe.  Talking with him in the high way, come close by the bearers with
a dead corpse of the plague; but, Lord! to see what custom is, that I am
come almost to think nothing of it.  So to my lodging, and there, with Mr.
Hater and Will, ending a business of the state of the last six months'
charge of the Navy, which we bring to L1,000,000 and above, and I think we
do not enlarge much in it if anything.  So to bed.

8th (Lord's day).  Up and, after being trimmed, to the office, whither I
upon a letter from the Duke of Albemarle to me, to order as many ships
forth out of the river as I can presently, to joyne to meet the Dutch;
having ordered all the Captains of the ships in the river to come to me, I
did some business with them, and so to Captain Cocke's to dinner, he being
in the country.  But here his brother Solomon was, and, for guests,
myself, Sir G. Smith, and a very fine lady, one Mrs. Penington, and two
more gentlemen.  But, both [before] and after dinner, most witty discourse
with this lady, who is a very fine witty lady, one of the best I ever
heard speake, and indifferent handsome.  There after dinner an houre or
two, and so to the office, where ended my business with the Captains; and
I think of twenty-two ships we shall make shift to get out seven.  (God
helpe us! men being sick, or provisions lacking.) And so to write letters
to Sir Ph. Warwicke, Sir W. Coventry, and Sir G. Carteret to Court about
the last six months' accounts, and sent away by an express to-night.  This
day I hear the Pope is dead;--[a false report]--and one said, that the
newes is, that the King of France is stabbed, but that the former is very
true, which will do great things sure, as to the troubling of that part of
the world, the King of Spayne

     [Philip IV., King of Spain, who succeeded to the throne in 1621,
     died in 1665.  He was succeeded by his son Charles II.]

being so lately dead.  And one thing more, Sir Martin Noell's lady is dead
with griefe for the death of her husband and nothing else, as they say, in
the world; but it seems nobody can make anything of his estate, whether he
be dead worth anything or no, he having dealt in so many things, publique
and private, as nobody can understand whereabouts his estate is, which is
the fate of these great dealers at everything.  So after my business being
done I home to my lodging and to bed,

9th.  Up, my head full of business, and called upon also by Sir John Shaw,
to whom I did give a civil answer about our prize goods, that all his dues
as one of the Farmers of the Customes are paid, and showed him our
Transire; with which he was satisfied, and parted, ordering his servants
to see the weight of them.  I to the office, and there found an order for
my coming presently to the Duke of Albemarle, and what should it be, but
to tell me, that, if my Lord Sandwich do not come to towne, he do resolve
to go with the fleete to sea himself, the Dutch, as he thinks, being in
the Downes, and so desired me to get a pleasure boat for to take him in
to-morrow morning, and do many other things, and with a great liking of
me, and my management especially, as that coxcombe my Lord Craven do tell
me, and I perceive it, and I am sure take pains enough to deserve it.
Thence away and to the office at London, where I did some business about
my money and private accounts, and there eat a bit of goose of Mr.
Griffin's, and so by water, it raining most miserably, to Greenwich,
calling on several vessels in my passage.  Being come there I hear another
seizure hath been made of our goods by one Captain Fisher that hath been
at Chatham by warrant of the Duke of Albemarle, and is come in my absence
to Tooker's and viewed them, demanding the key of the constable, and so
sealed up the door.  I to the house, but there being no officers nor
constable could do nothing, but back to my office full of trouble about
this, and there late about business, vexed to see myself fall into this
trouble and concernment in a thing that I want instruction from my Lord
Sandwich whether I should appear in it or no, and so home to bed, having
spent two hours, I and my boy, at Mr. Glanvill's removing of faggots to
make room to remove our goods to, but when done I thought it not fit to
use it.  The newes of the killing of the [King of] France is wholly
untrue, and they say that of the Pope too.

10th.  Up, and receive a stop from the Duke of Albemarle of setting out
any more ships, or providing a pleasure boat for himself, which I am glad
of, and do see, what I thought yesterday, that this resolution of his was
a sudden one and silly.  By and by comes Captain Cocke's Jacob to tell me
that he is come from Chatham this morning, and that there are four waggons
of goods at hand coming to towne, which troubles me.  I directed him to
bring them to his master's house.  But before I could send him away to
bring them thither, newes is brought me that they are seized on in the
towne by this Captain Fisher and they will carry them to another place.
So I to them and found our four waggons in the streete stopped by the
church by this Fisher and company and 100 or 200 people in the streetes
gazing.  I did give them good words, and made modest desires of carrying
the goods to Captain Cocke's, but they would have them to a house of their
hiring, where in a barne the goods were laid.  I had transires to show for
all, and the tale was right, and there I spent all the morning seeing this
done.  At which Fisher was vexed that I would not let it be done by any
body else for the merchant, and that I must needs be concerned therein,
which I did not think fit to owne.  So that being done, I left the goods
to be watched by men on their part and ours, and so to the office by noon,
whither by and by comes Captain Cocke, whom I had with great care sent for
by expresse the last night, and so I with him to his house and there eat a
bit, and so by coach to Lambeth, and I took occasion first to go to the
Duke of Albemarle to acquaint him with some thing of what had been done
this morning in behalf of a friend absent, which did give a good entrance
and prevented their possessing the Duke with anything of evil of me by
their report, and by and by in comes. Captain Cocke and tells his whole
story.  So an order was made for the putting him in possession upon giving
security to, be accountable for the goods, which for the present did
satisfy us, and so away, giving Locke that drew the order a piece.  (Lord!
to see how unhappily a man may fall into a necessity of bribing people to
do him right in a thing, wherein he hath done nothing but fair, and bought
dear.) So to the office, there to write my letters, and Cocke comes to
tell me that Fisher is come to him, and that he doubts not to cajole
Fisher and his companion and make them friends with drink and a bribe.
This night comes Sir Christopher Mings to towne, and I went to see him,
and by and by he being then out of the town comes to see me.  He is newly
come from Court, and carries direction for the making a show of getting
out the fleete again to go fight the Dutch, but that it will end in a
fleete of 20 good sayling frigates to go to the Northward or Southward,
and that will be all.  I enquired, but he would not be to know that he had
heard any thing at Oxford about the business of the prize goods, which I
did suspect, but he being gone, anon comes Cocke and tells me that he hath
been with him a great while, and that he finds him sullen and speaking
very high what disrespect he had received of my Lord, saying that he hath
walked 3 or 4 hours together at that Earle's cabbin door for audience and
could not be received, which, if true, I am sorry for.  He tells me that
Sir G. Ascue says, that he did from the beginning declare against these
[prize] goods, and would not receive his dividend; and that he and Sir W.
Pen are at odds about it, and that he fears Mings hath been doing ill
offices to my Lord.  I did to-night give my Lord an account of all this,
and so home and to bed.

11th.  Up, and so in my chamber staid all the morning doing something
toward my Tangier accounts, for the stating of them, and also comes up my
landlady, Mrs. Clerke, to make an agreement for the time to come; and I,
for the having room enough, and to keepe out strangers, and to have a
place to retreat to for my wife, if the sicknesse should come to Woolwich,
am contented to pay dear; so for three rooms and a dining-room, and for
linen and bread and beer and butter, at nights and mornings, I am to give
her L5 10s.  per month, and I wrote and we signed to an agreement.  By and
by comes Cocke to tell me that Fisher and his fellow were last night
mightily satisfied and promised all friendship, but this morning he finds
them to have new tricks and shall be troubled with them. So he being to go
down to Erith with them this afternoon about giving security, I advised
him to let them go by land, and so he and I (having eat something at his
house) by water to Erith, but they got thither before us, and there we met
Mr. Seymour, one of the Commissioners for Prizes, and a Parliament-man,
and he was mighty high, and had now seized our goods on their behalf; and
he mighty imperiously would have all forfeited, and I know not what.  I
thought I was in the right in a thing I said and spoke somewhat earnestly,
so we took up one another very smartly, for which I was sorry afterwards,
shewing thereby myself too much concerned, but nothing passed that I
valued at all.  But I could not but think [it odd] that a Parliament-man,
in a serious discourse before such persons as we and my Lord Bruncker, and
Sir John Minnes, should quote Hudibras, as being the book I doubt he hath
read most.  They I doubt will stand hard for high security, and Cocke
would have had me bound with him for his appearing, but I did stagger at
it, besides Seymour do stop the doing it at all till he has been with the
Duke of Albemarle.  So there will be another demurre.  It growing late,
and I having something to do at home, took my leave alone, leaving Cocke
there for all night, and so against tide and in the darke and very cold
weather to Woolwich, where we had appointed to keepe the night merrily;
and so, by Captain Cocke's coach, had brought a very pretty child, a
daughter of one Mrs. Tooker's, next door to my lodging, and so she, and a
daughter and kinsman of Mrs. Pett's made up a fine company at my lodgings
at Woolwich, where my wife and Mercer, and Mrs. Barbara danced, and mighty
merry we were, but especially at Mercer's dancing a jigg, which she does
the best I ever did see, having the most natural way of it, and keeps time
the most perfectly I ever did see.  This night is kept in lieu of
yesterday, for my wedding day of ten years; for which God be praised!
being now in an extreme good condition of health and estate and honour,
and a way of getting more money, though at this houre under some
discomposure, rather than damage, about some prize goods that I have
bought off the fleete, in partnership with Captain Cocke; and for the
discourse about the world concerning my Lord Sandwich, that he hath done a
thing so bad; and indeed it must needs have been a very rash act; and the
rather because of a Parliament now newly met to give money, and will have
some account of what hath already been spent, besides the precedent for a
General to take what prizes he pleases, and the giving a pretence to take
away much more than he intended, and all will lie upon him; and not giving
to all the Commanders, as well as the Flaggs, he displeases all them, and
offends even some of them, thinking others to be better served than
themselves; and lastly, puts himself out of a power of begging anything
again a great while of the King.  Having danced with my people as long as
I saw fit to sit up, I to bed and left them to do what they would.  I
forgot that we had W. Hewer there, and Tom, and Golding, my barber at
Greenwich, for our fiddler, to whom I did give 10s.

12th.  Called up before day, and so I dressed myself and down, it being
horrid cold, by water to my Lord Bruncker's ship, who advised me to do so,
and it was civilly to show me what the King had commanded about the
prize-goods, to examine most severely all that had been done in the taking
out any with or without order, without respect to my Lord Sandwich at all,
and that he had been doing of it, and find him examining one man, and I do
find that extreme ill use was made of my Lord's order.  For they did toss
and tumble and spoil, and breake things in hold to a great losse and shame
to come at the fine goods, and did take a man that knows where the fine
goods were, and did this over and over again for many days, Sir W.
Berkeley being the chief hand that did it, but others did the like at
other times, and they did say in doing it that my Lord Sandwich's back was
broad enough to bear it.  Having learned as much as I could, which was,
that the King and Duke were very severe in this point, whatever order they
before had given my Lord in approbation of what he had done, and that all
will come out and the King see, by the entries at the Custome House, what
all do amount to that had been taken, and so I took leave, and by water,
very cold, and to Woolwich where it was now noon, and so I staid dinner
and talking part of the afternoon, and then by coach, Captain Cocke's, to
Greenwich, taking the young lady home, and so to Cocke, and he tells me
that he hath cajolled with Seymour, who will be our friend; but that,
above all, Seymour tells him, that my Lord Duke did shew him to-day an
order from Court, for having all respect paid to the Earle of Sandwich,
and what goods had been delivered by his order, which do overjoy us, and
that to-morrow our goods shall be weighed, and he doubts not possession
to-morrow or next day.  Being overjoyed at this I to write my letters, and
at it very late.  Good newes this week that there are about 600 less dead
of the plague than the last.  So home to bed.

13th.  Lay long, and this morning comes Sir Jer. Smith

     [Captain Jeremiah Smith (or Smyth), knighted June, 1665; Admiral of
     the Blue in 1666.  He succeeded Sir William Penn as Comptroller of
     the Victualling Accounts in 1669, and held the office until 1675.]

to see me in his way to Court, and a good man he is, and one that I must
keep fair with, and will, it being I perceive my interest to have
kindnesse with the Commanders.  So to the office, and there very busy till
about noon comes Sir W. Warren, and he goes and gets a bit of meat ready
at the King's Head for us, and I by and by thither, and we dined together,
and I am not pleased with him about a little business of Tangier that I
put to him to do for me, but however, the hurt is not much, and his other
matters of profit to me continue very likely to be good.  Here we spent
till 2 o'clock, and so I set him on shore, and I by water to the Duke of
Albemarle, where I find him with Lord Craven and Lieutenant of the Tower
about him; among other things, talking of ships to get of the King to
fetch coles for the poore of the city, which is a good worke.  But, Lord!
to hear the silly talke between these three great people!  Yet I have no
reason to find fault, the Duke and Lord Craven being my very great
friends.  Here did the business I come about, and so back home by water,
and there Cocke comes to me and tells me that he is come to an
understanding with Fisher, and that he must give him L100, and that he
shall have his goods in possession to-morrow, they being all weighed
to-day, which pleases me very well.  This day the Duke tells me that there
is no news heard of the Dutch, what they do or where they are, but
believes that they are all gone home, for none of our spyes can give us
any tideings of them.  Cocke is fain to keep these people, Fisher and his
fellow, company night and day to keep them friends almost and great
troubles withal.  My head is full of settling the victualling business
also, that I may make some profit out of it, which I hope justly to do to
the King's advantage.  To-night come Sir J. Bankes to me upon my letter to
discourse it with him, and he did give me the advice I have taken almost
as fully as if I had been directed by him what to write.  The business
also of my Tangier accounts to be sent to Court is upon my hands in great
haste; besides, all my owne proper accounts are in great disorder, having
been neglected now above a month, which grieves me, but it could not be
settled sooner.  These together and the feare of the sicknesse and
providing for my family do fill my head very full, besides the infinite
business of the office, and nobody here to look after it but myself.  So
late from my office to my lodgings, and to bed.

14th.  Up, and to the office, where mighty busy, especially with Mr.
Gawden, with whom I shall, I think, have much to do, and by and by comes
the Lieutenant of the Tower by my invitation yesterday, but I had got
nothing for him, it is to discourse about the Cole shipps.  So he went
away to Sheriffe Hooker's, and I staid at the office till he sent for me
at noon to dinner, I very hungry.  When I come to the Sheriffe's he was
not there, nor in many other places, nor could find him at all, so was
forced to come to the office and get a bit of meat from the taverne, and
so to my business.  By and by comes the Lieutenant and reproaches me with
my not treating him as I ought, but all in jest, he it seemed dined with
Mr. Adrian May.  Very late writing letters at the office, and much
satisfied to hear from Captain Cocke that he had got possession of some of
his goods to his own house, and expected to have all to-night.  The towne,
I hear, is full of talke that there are great differences in the fleete
among the great Commanders, and that Mings at Oxford did impeach my Lord
of something, I think about these goods, but this is but talke. But my
heart and head to-night is full of the Victualling business, being
overjoyed and proud at my success in my proposal about it, it being read
before the King, Duke, and the Caball with complete applause and
satisfaction.  This Sir G. Carteret and Sir W. Coventry both writ me,
besides Sir W. Coventry's letter to the Duke of Albemarle, which I read
yesterday, and I hope to find my profit in it also.  So late home to bed.

15th (Lord's day).  Up, and while I staid for the barber, tried to compose
a duo of counterpoint, and I think it will do very well, it being by Mr.
Berckenshaw's rule.  By and by by appointment comes Mr. Povy's coach, and,
more than I expected, him himself, to fetch me to Brainford: so he and I
immediately set out, having drunk a draft of mulled sacke; and so rode
most nobly, in his most pretty and best contrived charriott in the world,
with many new conveniences, his never having till now, within a day or
two, been yet finished; our discourse upon Tangier business, want of
money, and then of publique miscarriages, nobody minding the publique, but
every body himself and his lusts.  Anon we come to his house, and there I
eat a bit, and so with fresh horses, his noble fine horses, the best
confessedly in England, the King having none such, he sent me to Sir
Robert Viner's, whom I met coming just from church, and so after having
spent half-an-hour almost looking upon the horses with some gentlemen that
were in company, he and I into his garden to discourse of money, but none
is to be had, he confessing himself in great straits, and I believe it.
Having this answer, and that I could not get better, we fell to publique
talke, and to think how the fleete and seamen will be paid, which he
protests he do not think it possible to compass, as the world is now: no
money got by trade, nor the persons that have it by them in the City to be
come at.  The Parliament, it seems, have voted the King L1,250,000 at
L50,000 per month, tax for the war; and voted to assist the King against
the Dutch, and all that shall adhere to them; and thanks to be given him
for his care of the Duke of Yorke, which last is a very popular vote on
the Duke's behalf.  He tells me how the taxes of the last assessment,
which should have been in good part gathered, are not yet laid, and that
even in part of the City of London; and the Chimny-money comes almost to
nothing, nor any thing else looked after.  Having done this I parted, my
mind not eased by any money, but only that I had done my part to the
King's service.  And so in a very pleasant evening back to Mr. Povy's, and
there supped, and after supper to talke and to sing, his man Dutton's wife
singing very pleasantly (a mighty fat woman), and I wrote out one song
from her and pricked the tune, both very pretty. But I did never heare one
sing with so much pleasure to herself as this lady do, relishing it to her
very heart, which was mighty pleasant.

16th.  Up about seven o'clock; and, after drinking, and I observing Mr.
Povy's being mightily mortifyed in his eating and drinking, and coaches
and horses, he desiring to sell his best, and every thing else, his
furniture of his house, he walked with me to Syon,

     [Sion House, granted by Edward VI. to his uncle, the Duke of
     Somerset.  After his execution, 1552, it was forfeited, and given to
     John Dudley, Duke of Northumberland.  The duke being beheaded in
     1553, it reverted to the Crown, and was granted in 1604 to Henry
     Percy, Earl of Northumberland.  It still belongs to the Duke of
     Northumberland.]

and there I took water, in our way he discoursing of the wantonnesse of
the Court, and how it minds nothing else, and I saying that that would
leave the King shortly if he did not leave it, he told me "No," for the
King do spend most of his time in feeling and kissing them naked .  .  .
But this lechery will never leave him.  Here I took boat (leaving him
there) and down to the Tower, where I hear the Duke of Albemarle is, and I
to Lumbard Streete, but can get no money.  So upon the Exchange, which is
very empty, God knows! and but mean people there.  The newes for certain
that the Dutch are come with their fleete before Margett, and some men
were endeavouring to come on shore when the post come away, perhaps to
steal some sheep.  But, Lord! how Colvill talks of the businesse of
publique revenue like a madman, and yet I doubt all true; that nobody
minds it, but that the King and Kingdom must speedily be undone, and rails
at my Lord about the prizes, but I think knows not my relation to him.
Here I endeavoured to satisfy all I could, people about Bills of Exchange
from Tangier, but it is only with good words, for money I have not, nor
can get.  God knows what will become of all the King's matters in a little
time, for he runs in debt every day, and nothing to pay them looked after.
Thence I walked to the Tower; but, Lord! how empty the streets are and
melancholy, so many poor sick people in the streets full of sores; and so
many sad stories overheard as I walk, every body talking of this dead, and
that man sick, and so many in this place, and so many in that.  And they
tell me that, in Westminster, there is never a physician and but one
apothecary left, all being dead; but that there are great hopes of a great
decrease this week: God send it!  At the Tower found my Lord Duke and
Duchesse at dinner; so I sat down.  And much good cheer, the Lieutenant
and his lady, and several officers with the Duke.  But, Lord! to hear the
silly talk that was there, would make one mad; the Duke having none almost
but fools about him.  Much of their talke about the Dutch coming on shore,
which they believe they may some of them have been and steal sheep, and
speak all in reproach of them in whose hands the fleete is; but, Lord
helpe him, there is something will hinder him and all the world in going
to sea, which is want of victuals; for we have not wherewith to answer our
service; and how much better it would have been if the Duke's advice had
been taken for the fleete to have gone presently out; but, God helpe the
King! while no better counsels are given, and what is given no better
taken.  Thence after dinner receiving many commands from the Duke, I to
our office on the Hill, and there did a little business and to Colvill's
again, and so took water at the Tower, and there met with Captain Cocke,
and he down with me to Greenwich, I having received letters from my Lord
Sandwich to-day, speaking very high about the prize goods, that he would
have us to fear nobody, but be very confident in what we have done, and
not to confess any fault or doubt of what he hath done; for the King hath
allowed it, and do now confirm it, and sent orders, as he says, for
nothing to be disturbed that his Lordshipp hath ordered therein as to the
division of the goods to the fleete; which do comfort us, but my Lord
writes to me that both he and I may hence learn by what we see in this
business.  But that which pleases me best is that Cocke tells me that he
now understands that Fisher was set on in this business by the design of
some of the Duke of Albemarle's people, Warcupp and others, who lent him
money to set him out in it, and he has spent high.  Who now curse him for
a rogue to take L100 when he might have had as well L1,500, and they are
mightily fallen out about it.  Which in due time shall be discovered, but
that now that troubles me afresh is, after I am got to the office at
Greenwich that some new troubles are come, and Captain Cocke's house is
beset before and behind with guards, and more, I do fear they may come to
my office here to search for Cocke's goods and find some small things of
my clerk's.  So I assisted them in helping to remove their small trade,
but by and by I am told that it is only the Custome House men who came to
seize the things that did lie at Mr. Glanville's, for which they did never
yet see our Transire, nor did know of them till to-day.  So that my fear
is now over, for a transire is ready for them.  Cocke did get a great many
of his goods to London to-day.  To the Still Yarde, which place, however,
is now shut up of the plague; but I was there, and we now make no bones of
it.  Much talke there is of the Chancellor's speech and the King's at the
Parliament's meeting, which are very well liked; and that we shall
certainly, by their speeches, fall out with France at this time, together
with the Dutch, which will find us work.  Late at the office entering my
Journall for 8 days past, the greatness of my business hindering me of
late to put it down daily, but I have done it now very true and
particularly, and hereafter will, I hope, be able to fall into my old way
of doing it daily.  So to my lodging, and there had a good pullet to my
supper, and so to bed, it being very cold again, God be thanked for it!

17th.  Up, and all day long busy at the office, mighty busy, only stepped
to my lodging and had a fowl for my dinner, and at night my wife and
Mercer comes to me, which troubled me a little because I am to be mighty
busy to-morrow all day seriously about my accounts.  So late from my
office to her, and supped, and so to bed.

18th.  Up, and after some pleasant discourse with my wife (though my head
full of business) I out and left her to go home, and myself to the office,
and thence by water to the Duke of Albemarle's, and so back again and find
my wife gone.  So to my chamber at my lodgings, and to the making of my
accounts up of Tangier, which I did with great difficulty, finding the
difference between short and long reckonings where I have had occasion to
mix my moneys, as I have of late done my Tangier treasure upon other
occasions, and other moneys upon that.  However, I was at it late and did
it pretty perfectly, and so, after eating something, to bed, my mind eased
of a great deal of figures and castings.

19th.  Up, and to my accounts again, and stated them very clear and fair,
and at noon dined at my lodgings with Mr. Hater and W. Hewer at table with
me, I being come to an agreement yesterday with my landlady for L6 per
month, for so many rooms for myself, them, and my wife and mayde, when she
shall come, and to pay besides for my dyett.  After dinner I did give them
my accounts and letters to write against I went to the Duke of Albemarle's
this evening, which I did; and among other things, spoke to him for my
wife's brother, Balty, to be of his guard, which he kindly answered that
he should.  My business of the Victualling goes on as I would have it; and
now my head is full how to make some profit of it to myself or people.  To
that end, when I came home, I wrote a letter to Mr. Coventry, offering
myself to be the Surveyor Generall, and am apt to think he will assist me
in it, but I do not set my heart much on it, though it would be a good
helpe.  So back to my office, and there till past one before I could get
all these letters and papers copied out, which vexed me, but so sent them
away without hopes of saving the post, and so to my lodging to bed.

20th.  Up, and had my last night's letters brought back to me, which
troubles me, because of my accounts, lest they should be asked for before
they come, which I abhorr, being more ready to give than they can be to
demand them: so I sent away an expresse to Oxford with them, and another
to Portsmouth, with a copy of my letter to Mr. Coventry about my
victualling business, for fear he should be gone from Oxford, as he
intended, thither.  So busy all the morning and at noon to Cocke, and
dined there.  He and I alone, vexed that we are not rid of all our trouble
about our goods, but it is almost over, and in the afternoon to my
lodging, and there spent the whole afternoon and evening with Mr. Hater,
discoursing of the business of the office, where he tells me that among
others Thomas Willson do now and then seem to hint that I do take too much
business upon me, more than I can do, and that therefore some do lie
undone.  This I confess to my trouble is true, but it arises from my being
forced to take so much on me, more than is my proper task to undertake.
But for this at last I did advise to him to take another clerk if he
thinks fit, I will take care to have him paid.  I discoursed also much
with him about persons fit to be put into the victualling business, and
such as I could spare something out of their salaries for them, but
without trouble I cannot, I see, well do it, because Thomas Willson must
have the refusal of the best place which is London of L200 per annum,
which I did intend for Tooker, and to get L50 out of it as a help to Mr.
Hater.  How[ever], I will try to do something of this kind for them.
Having done discourse with him late, I to enter my Tangier accounts fair,
and so to supper and to bed.

21 st.  Up, and to my office, where busy all the morning, and then with my
two clerks home to dinner, and so back again to the office, and there very
late very busy, and so home to supper and to bed.

22nd (Lord's day).  Up, and after ready and going to Captain Cocke's,
where I find we are a little further safe in some part of our goods, I to
Church, in my way was meeting with some letters, which made me resolve to
go after church to my Lord Duke of Albemarle's, so, after sermon, I took
Cocke's chariott, and to Lambeth; but, in going and getting over the
water, and through White Hall, I spent so much time, the Duke had almost
dined.  However, fresh meat was brought for me to his table, and there I
dined, and full of discourse and very kind.  Here they are again talking
of the prizes, and my Lord Duke did speake very broad that my Lord
Sandwich and Pen should do what they would, and answer for themselves.
For his part, he would lay all before the King.  Here he tells me the
Dutch Embassador at Oxford is clapped up, but since I hear it is not true.
Thence back again, it being evening before I could get home, and there
Cocke not being within, I and Mr. Salomon to Mr. Glanville's, and there we
found Cocke and sat and supped, and was mighty merry with only Madam
Penington, who is a fine, witty lady.  Here we spent the evening late with
great mirth, and so home and to bed.

23rd.  Up, and after doing some business I down by water, calling to see
my wife, with whom very merry for ten minutes, and so to Erith, where my
Lord Bruncker and I kept the office, and dispatched some business by
appointment on the Bezan.  Among other things about the slopsellers, who
have trusted us so long, they are not able, nor can be expected to trust
us further, and I fear this winter the fleete will be undone by that
particular.  Thence on board the East India ship, where my Lord Bruncker
had provided a great dinner, and thither comes by and by Sir John Minnes
and before him Sir W. Warren and anon a Perspective glasse maker, of whom
we, every one, bought a pocket glasse.  But I am troubled with the much
talke and conceitedness of Mrs. Williams and her impudence, in case she be
not married to my Lord.  They are getting themselves ready to deliver the
goods all out to the East India Company, who are to have the goods in
their possession and to advance two thirds of the moderate value thereof
and sell them as well as they can and the King to give them 6 per cent.
for the use of the money they shall so advance.  By this means the company
will not suffer by the King's goods bringing down the price of their own.
Thence in the evening back again with Sir W. Warren and Captain Taylor in
my boat, and the latter went with me to the office, and there he and I
reckoned; and I perceive I shall get L100 profit by my services of late to
him, which is a very good thing.  Thence to my lodging, where I find my
Lord Rutherford, of which I was glad.  We supped together and sat up late,
he being a mighty wanton man with a daughter in law of my landlady's, a
pretty conceited woman big with child, and he would be handling her
breasts, which she coyly refused.  But they gone, my Lord and I to
business, and he would have me forbear paying Alderman Backewell the money
ordered him, which I, in hopes to advantage myself, shall forbear, but do
not think that my Lord will do any thing gratefully more to me than he
hath done, not that I shall get any thing as I pretended by helping him to
interest for his last L7700, which I could do, and do him a courtesy too.
Discourse being done, he to bed in my chamber and I to another in the
house.

24th.  Lay long, having a cold.  Then to my Lord and sent him going to
Oxford, and I to my office, whither comes Sir William Batten now newly
from Oxford.  I can gather nothing from him about my Lord Sandwich about
the business of the prizes, he being close, but he shewed me a bill which
hath been read in the House making all breaking of bulke for the time to
come felony, but it is a foolish Act, and will do no great matter, only is
calculated to my Lord Sandwich's case.  He shewed me also a good letter
printed from the Bishopp of Munster to the States of Holland shewing the
state of their case.  Here we did some business and so broke up and I to
Cocke, where Mr. Evelyn was, to dinner, and there merry, yet vexed again
at publique matters, and to see how little heed is had to the prisoners
and sicke and wounded.  Thence to my office, and no sooner there but to my
great surprise am told that my Lord Sandwich is come to towne; so I
presently to Boreman's, where he is and there found him: he mighty kind to
me, but no opportunity of discourse private yet, which he tells me he must
have with me; only his business is sudden to go to the fleece, to get out
a few ships to drive away the Dutch.  I left him in discourse with Sir W.
Batten and others, and myself to the office till about 10 at night and so,
letters being done, I to him again to Captain Cocke's, where he supped,
and lies, and never saw him more merry, and here is Charles Herbert, who
the King hath lately knighted.

     [This person, erroneously called by Pepys Sir C. Herbert, will be
     best defined by subjoining the inscription on his monument in
     Westminster Abbey: "Sir Charles Harbord, Knight, third son of Sir
     Charles Harbord, Knight, Surveyor-General, and First Lieutenant of
     the Royall James, under the most noble and illustrious Captaine,
     Edward, Earle of Sandwich, Vice-Admirall of England, which, after a
     terrible fight, maintained to admiration against a squadron of the
     Holland fleet, above six hours, neere the Suffolk coast, having put
     off two fireships; at last, being utterly disabled, and few of her
     men remaining unhurt, was, by a third, unfortunately set on fire.
     But he (though he swome well) neglected to save himselfe, as some
     did, and out of perfect love to that worthy Lord, whom, for many
     yeares, he had constantly accompanyed, in all his honourable
     employments, and in all the engagements of the former warre, dyed
     with him, at the age of xxxii., much bewailed by his father, whom he
     never offended; and much beloved by all for his knowne piety,
     vertue, loyalty, fortitude, and fidelity."--B.]

My Lord, to my great content, did tell me before them, that never anything
was read to the King and Council, all the chief Ministers of State being
there, as my letter about the Victualling was, and no more said upon it
than a most thorough consent to every word was said, and directed, that it
be pursued and practised.  After much mirth, and my Lord having travelled
all night last night, he to bed, and we all parted, I home.

25th.  Up and to my Lord Sandwich's, where several Commanders, of whom I
took the state of all their ships, and of all could find not above four
capable of going out.  The truth is, the want of victuals being the whole
overthrow of this yeare both at sea, and now at the Nore here and
Portsmouth, where all the fleete lies.  By and by comes down my Lord, and
then he and I an houre together alone upon private discourse.  He tells me
that Mr. Coventry and he are not reconciled, but declared enemies: the
only occasion of it being, he tells me, his ill usage from him about the
first fight, wherein he had no right done him, which, methinks, is a poor
occasion, for, in my conscience, that was no design of Coventry's.  But,
however, when I asked my Lord whether it were not best, though with some
condescension, to be friends with him, he told me it was not possible, and
so I stopped.  He tells me, as very private, that there are great factions
at the Court between the King's party and the Duke of Yorke's, and that
the King, which is a strange difficulty, do favour my Lord in opposition
to the Duke's party; that my Lord Chancellor, being, to be sure, the
patron of the Duke's, it is a mystery whence it should be that Mr.
Coventry is looked upon by him [Clarendon] as an enemy to him; that if he
had a mind himself to be out of this employment, as Mr. Coventry, he
believes, wishes, and himself and I do incline to wish it also, in many
respects, yet he believes he shall not be able, because of the King, who
will keepe him in on purpose, in opposition to the other party; that
Prince Rupert and he are all possible friends in the world; that Coventry
hath aggravated this business of the prizes, though never so great
plundering in the world as while the Duke and he were at sea; and in Sir
John Lawson's time he could take and pillage, and then sink a whole ship
in the Streights, and Coventry say nothing to it; that my Lord Arlington
is his fast friend; that the Chancellor is cold to him, and though I told
him that I and the world do take my Lord Chancellor, in his speech the
other day, to have said as much as could be wished, yet he thinks he did
not.  That my Lord Chancellor do from hence begin to be cold to him,
because of his seeing him and Arlington so great: that nothing at Court is
minded but faction and pleasure, and nothing intended of general good to
the kingdom by anybody heartily; so that he believes with me, in a little
time confusion will certainly come over all the nation.  He told me how a
design was carried on a while ago, for the Duke of Yorke to raise an army
in the North, and to be the Generall of it, and all this without the
knowledge or advice of the Duke of Albemarle, which when he come to know,
he was so vexed, they were fain to let it fall to content him: that his
matching with the family of Sir G. Carteret do make the difference greater
between Coventry and him, they being enemies; that the Chancellor did, as
every body else, speak well of me the other day, but yet was, at the
Committee for Tangier, angry that I should offer to suffer a bill of
exchange to be protested.  So my Lord did bid me take heed, for that I
might easily suppose I could not want enemies, no more than others.  In
all he speaks with the greatest trust and love and confidence in what I
say or do, that a man can do.  After this discourse ended we sat down to
dinner and mighty merry, among other things, at the Bill brought into the
House to make it felony to break bulke, which, as my Lord says well, will
make that no prizes shall be taken, or, if taken, shall be sunke after
plundering; and the Act for the method of gathering this last L1,250,000
now voted, and how paid wherein are several strange imperfections.  After
dinner my Lord by a ketch down to Erith, where the Bezan was, it blowing
these last two days and now both night and day very hard southwardly, so
that it has certainly drove the Dutch off the coast. My Lord being gone I
to the office, and there find Captain Ferrers, who tells me his wife is
come to town to see him, having not seen him since 15 weeks ago at his
first going to sea last.  She is now at a Taverne and stays all night, so
I was obliged to give him my house and chamber to lie in, which he with
great modesty and after much force took, and so I got Mr. Evelyn's coach
to carry her thither, and the coach coming back, I with Mr. Evelyn to
Deptford, where a little while with him doing a little business, and so in
his coach back again to my lodgings, and there sat with Mrs. Ferrers two
hours, and with my little girle, Mistress Frances Tooker, and very
pleasant.  Anon the Captain comes, and then to supper very merry, and so I
led them to bed.  And so to bed myself, having seen my pretty little girle
home first at the next door.

26th.  Up, and, leaving my guests to make themselves ready, I to the
office, and thither comes Sir Jer. Smith and Sir Christopher Mings to see
me, being just come from Portsmouth and going down to the Fleete.  Here I
sat and talked with them a good while and then parted, only Sir
Christopher Mings and I together by water to the Tower; and I find him a
very witty well-spoken fellow, and mighty free to tell his parentage,
being a shoemaker's son, to whom he is now going, and I to the 'Change,
where I hear how the French have taken two and sunk one of our
merchant-men in the Streights, and carried the ships to Toulon; so that
there is no expectation but we must fall out with them.  The 'Change
pretty full, and the town begins to be lively again, though the streets
very empty, and most shops shut.  So back again I and took boat and called
for Sir Christopher Mings at St. Katharine's, who was followed with some
ordinary friends, of which, he says, he is proud, and so down to
Greenwich, the wind furious high, and we with our sail up till I made it
be taken down. I took him, it being 3 o'clock, to my lodgings and did give
him a good dinner and so parted, he being pretty close to me as to any
business of the fleete, knowing me to be a servant of my Lord Sandwich's.
He gone I to the office till night, and then they come and tell me my wife
is come to towne, so I to her vexed at her coming, but it was upon
innocent business, so I was pleased and made her stay, Captain Ferrers and
his lady being yet there, and so I left them to dance, and I to the office
till past nine at night, and so to them and there saw them dance very
prettily, the Captain and his wife, my wife and Mrs. Barbary, and Mercer
and my landlady's daughter, and then little Mistress Frances Tooker and
her mother, a pretty woman come to see my wife.  Anon to supper, and then
to dance again (Golding being our fiddler, who plays very well and all
tunes) till past twelve at night, and then we broke up and every one to
bed, we make shift for all our company, Mrs. Tooker being gone.

27th.  Up, and after some pleasant discourse with my wife, I out, leaving
her and Mrs. Ferrers there, and I to Captain Cocke's, there to do some
business, and then away with Cocke in his coach through Kent Streete, a
miserable, wretched, poor place, people sitting sicke and muffled up with
plasters at every 4 or 5 doors.  So to the 'Change, and thence I by water
to the Duke of Albemarle's, and there much company, but I staid and dined,
and he makes mighty much of me; and here he tells us the Dutch are gone,
and have lost above 160 cables and anchors, through the last foule
weather.  Here he proposed to me from Mr. Coventry, as I had desired of
Mr. Coventry, that I should be Surveyor-Generall of the Victualling
business, which I accepted.  But, indeed, the terms in which Mr. Coventry
proposes it for me are the most obliging that ever I could expect from any
man, and more; it saying me to be the fittest man in England, and that he
is sure, if I will undertake, I will perform it; and that it will be also
a very desirable thing that I might have this encouragement, my
encouragement in the Navy alone being in no wise proportionable to my
pains or deserts.  This, added to the letter I had three days since from
Mr. Southerne, signifying that the Duke of Yorke had in his master's
absence opened my letter, and commanded him to tell me that he did approve
of my being the Surveyor-General, do make me joyful beyond myself that I
cannot express it, to see that as I do take pains, so God blesses me, and
hath sent me masters that do observe that I take pains.  After having done
here, I back by water and to London, and there met with Captain Cocke's
coach again, and I went in it to Greenwich and thence sent my wife in it
to Woolwich, and I to the office, and thence home late with Captain
Taylor, and he and I settled all accounts between us, and I do find that I
do get above L129 of him for my services for him within these six months.
At it till almost one in the morning, and after supper he away and I to
bed, mightily satisfied in all this, and in a resolution I have taken
to-night with Mr. Hater to propose the port of London for the victualling
business for Thomas Willson, by which it will be better done and I at more
ease, in case he should grumble.

     [The Duke of York's letter appointing Thomas Wilson Surveyor of the
     Victualling of His Majesty's Navy in the Port of London, and
     referring to Pepys as Surveyor-General of the Victualling Affairs,
     is printed in "Memoirs of the English Affairs, chiefly Naval, 1660-
     73," by James, Duke of York, 1729, p. 131.]

So to bed.

28th.  Up, and sent for Thomas Willson, and broke the victualling business
to him and he is mightily contented, and so am I that I have bestowed it
on him, and so I to Mr. Boreman's, where Sir W. Batten is, to tell him
what I had proposed to Thomas Willson, and the newes also I have this
morning from Sir W. Clerke, which is, that notwithstanding all the care
the Duke of Albemarle hath taken about the putting the East India prize
goods into the East India Company's hands, and my Lord Bruncker and Sir J.
Minnes having laden out a great part of the goods, an order is come from
Court to stop all, and to have the goods delivered to the
Sub-Commissioners of prizes.  At which I am glad, because it do vex this
simple weake man, and we shall have a little reparation for the disgrace
my Lord Sandwich has had in it.  He tells me also that the Parliament hath
given the Duke of Yorke L120,000, to be paid him after the L1,250,000 is
gathered upon the tax which they have now given the King.

     [This sum was granted by the Commons to Charles, with a request that
     he would bestow it on his brother.--B.]

He tells me that the Dutch have lately launched sixteen new ships; all
which is great news.  Thence by horsebacke with Mr. Deane to Erith, and so
aboard my Lord Bruncker and dined, and very merry with him and good
discourse between them about ship building, and, after dinner and a little
pleasant discourse, we away and by horse back again to Greenwich, and
there I to the office very late, offering my persons for all the
victualling posts much to my satisfaction.  Also much other business I did
to my mind, and so weary home to my lodging, and there after eating and
drinking a little I to bed.  The King and Court, they say, have now
finally resolved to spend nothing upon clothes, but what is of the growth
of England; which, if observed, will be very pleasing to the people, and
very good for them.

29th (Lord's day).  Up, and being ready set out with Captain Cocke in his
coach toward Erith, Mr. Deane riding along with us, where we dined and
were very merry.  After dinner we fell to discourse about the Dutch, Cocke
undertaking to prove that they were able to wage warr with us three years
together, which, though it may be true, yet, not being satisfied with his
arguments, my Lord and I did oppose the strength of his arguments, which
brought us to a great heate, he being a conceited man, but of no Logique
in his head at all, which made my Lord and I mirth. Anon we parted, and
back again, we hardly having a word all the way, he being so vexed at our
not yielding to his persuasion.  I was set down at Woolwich towne end, and
walked through the towne in the darke, it being now night.  But in the
streete did overtake and almost run upon two women crying and carrying a
man's coffin between them.  I suppose the husband of one of them, which,
methinks, is a sad thing.  Being come to Shelden's, I find my people in
the darke in the dining room, merry and laughing, and, I thought, sporting
one with another, which, God helpe me! raised my jealousy presently.  Come
in the darke, and one of them touching me (which afterward I found was
Susan) made them shreeke, and so went out up stairs, leaving them to light
a candle and to run out.  I went out and was very vexed till I found my
wife was gone with Mr. Hill and Mercer this day to see me at Greenwich,
and these people were at supper, and the candle on a sudden falling out of
the candlesticke (which I saw as I come through the yarde) and Mrs.
Barbary being there I was well at ease again, and so bethought myself what
to do, whether to go to Greenwich or stay there; at last go I would, and
so with a lanthorne, and 3 or 4  people with me, among others Mr. Browne,
who was there, would go, I walked with a lanthorne and discoursed with him
about paynting and the several sorts of it.  I came in good time to
Greenwich, where I found Mr. Hill with my wife, and very glad I was to see
him.  To supper and discourse of musique and so to bed, I lying with him
talking till midnight about Berckenshaw's musique rules, which I did to
his great satisfaction inform him in, and so to sleep.

30th.  Up, and to my office about business.  At noon to dinner, and after
some discourse of musique, he and I to the office awhile, and he to get
Mr. Coleman, if he can, against night.  By and by I back again home, and
there find him returned with Mr. Coleman (his wife being ill) and Mr.
Laneare, with whom with their Lute we had excellent company and good
singing till midnight, and a good supper I did give them, but Coleman's
voice is quite spoiled, and when he begins to be drunk he is excellent
company, but afterward troublesome and impertinent.  Laneare sings in a
melancholy method very well, and a sober man he seems to be.  They being
gone, we to bed.  Captain Ferrers coming this day from my Lord is forced
to lodge here, and I put him to Mr. Hill.

31st.  Up, and to the office, Captain Ferrers going back betimes to my
Lord.  I to the office, where Sir W. Batten met me, and did tell me that
Captain Cocke's black was dead of the plague, which I had heard of before,
but took no notice.  By and by Captain Cocke come to the office, and Sir
W. Batten and I did send to him that he would either forbear the office,
or forbear going to his owne office.  However, meeting yesterday the
Searchers with their rods in their hands coming from Captain Cocke's
house, I did overhear them say that the fellow did not die of the plague,
but he had I know been ill a good while, and I am told that his boy Jack
is also ill.  At noon home to dinner, and then to the office again,
leaving Mr. Hill if he can to get Mrs. Coleman at night.  About nine at
night I come home, and there find Mrs. Pierce come and little Fran.
Tooker, and Mr. Hill, and other people, a great many dancing, and anon
comes Mrs. Coleman with her husband and Laneare.  The dancing ended and to
sing, which Mrs. Coleman do very finely, though her voice is decayed as to
strength but mighty sweet though soft, and a pleasant jolly woman, and in
mighty good humour was to-night.  Among other things Laneare did, at the
request of Mr. Hill, bring two or three the finest prints for my wife to
see that ever I did see in all my life.  But for singing, among other
things, we got Mrs. Coleman to sing part of the Opera, though she won't
owne that ever she did get any of it without book in order to the stage;
but, above all, her counterfeiting of Captain Cooke's part, in his
reproaching his man with cowardice, "Base slave," &c., she do it most
excellently.  At it till past midnight, and then broke up and to bed.
Hill and I together again, and being very sleepy we had little discourse
as we had the other night. Thus we end the month merrily; and the more for
that, after some fears that the plague would have increased again this
week, I hear for certain that there is above 400 [less], the whole number
being 1,388, and of them of the plague, 1,031. Want of money in the Navy
puts everything out of order.  Men grow mutinous; and nobody here to mind
the business of the Navy but myself.  At least Sir W. Batten for the few
days he has been here do nothing.  I in great hopes of my place of
Surveyor-Generall of the Victualling, which will bring me L300 per annum.




     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     A conceited man, but of no Logique in his head at all
     Best poem that ever was wrote (Siege of Rhodes)
     French have taken two and sunk one of our merchant-men
     Hath sent me masters that do observe that I take pains
     How little heed is had to the prisoners and sicke and wounded
     How unhppily a man may fall into a necessity of bribing people
     Lechery will never leave him
     Money I have not, nor can get
     Mr. Evelyn's translating and sending me as a present
     Poor seamen that lie starving in the streets
     Saying me to be the fittest man in England
     Searchers with their rods in their hands





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Diary of Samuel Pepys, October 1665
by Samuel Pepys

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***

***** This file should be named 4160.txt or 4160.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/4/1/6/4160/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
