The Project Gutenberg EBook of Diary of Samuel Pepys, November/December
1665, by Samuel Pepys

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Diary of Samuel Pepys, November/December 1665

Author: Samuel Pepys

Release Date: November 30, 2004 [EBook #4161]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***




Produced by David Widger





                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A. F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                           NOVEMBER & DECEMBER
                                  1665

November 1st.  Lay very long in bed discoursing with Mr. Hill of most
things of a man's life, and how little merit do prevail in the world, but
only favour; and that, for myself, chance without merit brought me in; and
that diligence only keeps me so, and will, living as I do among so many
lazy people that the diligent man becomes necessary, that they cannot do
anything without him, and so told him of my late business of the
victualling, and what cares I am in to keepe myself having to do with
people of so different factions at Court, and yet must be fair with them
all, which was very pleasant discourse for me to tell, as well as he
seemed to take it, for him to hear.  At last up, and it being a very foule
day for raine and a hideous wind, yet having promised I would go by water
to Erith, and bearing sayle was in danger of oversetting, but ordered them
take down their sayle, and so cold and wet got thither, as they had ended
their dinner.  How[ever], I dined well, and after dinner all on shore, my
Lord Bruncker with us to Mrs. Williams's lodgings, and Sir W. Batten, Sir
Edmund Pooly, and others; and there, it being my Lord's birth-day, had
every one a green riband tied in our hats very foolishly; and methinks
mighty disgracefully for my Lord to have his folly so open to all the
world with this woman.  But by and by Sir W. Batten and I took coach, and
home to Boreman, and so going home by the backside I saw Captain Cocke
'lighting out of his coach (having been at Erith also with her but not on
board) and so he would come along with me to my lodging, and there sat and
supped and talked with us, but we were angry a little a while about our
message to him the other day about bidding him keepe from the office or
his owne office, because of his black dying.  I owned it and the reason of
it, and would have been glad he had been out of the house, but I could not
bid him go, and so supped, and after much other talke of the sad condition
and state of the King's matters we broke up, and my friend and I to bed.
This night coming with Sir W. Batten into Greenwich we called upon Coll.
Cleggatt, who tells us for certaine that the King of Denmark hath declared
to stand for the King of England, but since I hear it is wholly false.

2nd.  Up, left my wife and to the office, and there to my great content
Sir W. Warren come to me to settle the business of the Tangier boates,
wherein I shall get above L100, besides L100 which he gives me in the
paying for them out of his owne purse.  He gone, I home to my lodgings to
dinner, and there comes Captain Wagers newly returned from the Streights,
who puts me in great fear for our last ships that went to Tangier with
provisions, that they will be taken.  A brave, stout fellow this Captain
is, and I think very honest.  To the office again after dinner and there
late writing letters, and then about 8 at night set out from my office and
fitting myself at my lodgings intended to have gone this night in a Ketch
down to the Fleete, but calling in my way at Sir J. Minnes's, who is come
up from Erith about something about the prizes, they persuaded me not to
go till the morning, it being a horrible darke and a windy night. So I
back to my lodging and to bed.

3rd.  Was called up about four o'clock and in the darke by lanthorne took
boat and to the Ketch and set sayle, sleeping a little in the Cabbin till
day and then up and fell to reading of Mr. Evelyn's book about Paynting,

     [This must surely have been Evelyn's "Sculptura, or the History and
     Art of Chalcography and Engraving in Copper," published in 1662.
     The translation of Freart's "Idea of the Perfection of Painting
     demonstrated" was not published until 1668.]

which is a very pretty book.  Carrying good victuals and Tom with me I to
breakfast about 9 o'clock, and then to read again and come to the Fleete
about twelve, where I found my Lord (the Prince being gone in) on board
the Royall James, Sir Thomas Allen commander, and with my Lord an houre
alone discoursing what was my chief and only errand about what was
adviseable for his Lordship to do in this state of things, himself being
under the Duke of Yorke's and Mr. Coventry's envy, and a great many more
and likely never to do anything honourably but he shall be envied and the
honour taken as much as can be from it.  His absence lessens his interest
at Court, and what is worst we never able to set out a fleete fit for him
to command, or, if out, to keepe them out or fit them to do any great
thing, or if that were so yet nobody at home minds him or his condition
when he is abroad, and lastly the whole affairs of state looking as if
they would all on a sudden break in pieces, and then what a sad thing it
would be for him to be out of the way.  My Lord did concur in every thing
and thanked me infinitely for my visit and counsel, telling me that in
every thing he concurs, but puts a query, what if the King will not think
himself safe, if any man should go but him.  How he should go off then? To
that I had no answer ready, but the making the King see that he may be of
as good use to him here while another goes forth.  But for that I am not
able to say much.  We after this talked of some other little things and so
to dinner, where my Lord infinitely kind to me, and after dinner I rose
and left him with some Commanders at the table taking tobacco and I took
the Bezan back with me, and with a brave gale and tide reached up that
night to the Hope, taking great pleasure in learning the seamen's manner
of singing when they sound the depths, and then to supper and to sleep,
which I did most excellently all night, it being a horrible foule night
for wind and raine.

4th.  They sayled from midnight, and come to Greenwich about 5 o'clock in
the morning.  I however lay till about 7 or 8, and so to my office, my
head a little akeing, partly for want of natural rest, partly having so
much business to do to-day, and partly from the newes I hear that one of
the little boys at my lodging is not well; and they suspect, by their
sending for plaister and fume, that it may be the plague; so I sent Mr.
Hater and W. Hewer to speake with the mother; but they returned to me,
satisfied that there is no hurt nor danger, but the boy is well, and
offers to be searched, however, I was resolved myself to abstain coming
thither for a while.  Sir W. Batten and myself at the office all the
morning.  At noon with him to dinner at Boreman's, where Mr. Seymour with
us, who is a most conceited fellow and not over much in him.  Here Sir W.
Batten told us (which I had not heard before) that the last sitting day
his cloake was taken from Mingo he going home to dinner, and that he was
beaten by the seamen and swears he will come to Greenwich, but no more to
the office till he can sit safe.  After dinner I to the office and there
late, and much troubled to have 100 seamen all the afternoon there,
swearing below and cursing us, and breaking the glasse windows, and swear
they will pull the house down on Tuesday next.  I sent word of this to
Court, but nothing will helpe it but money and a rope.  Late at night to
Mr. Glanville's there to lie for a night or two, and to bed.

5th (Lord's day).  Up, and after being trimmed, by boat to the Cockpitt,
where I heard the Duke of Albemarle's chaplin make a simple sermon: among
other things, reproaching the imperfection of humane learning, he cried:
"All our physicians cannot tell what an ague is, and all our arithmetique
is not able to number the days of a man;" which, God knows, is not the
fault of arithmetique, but that our understandings reach not the thing. To
dinner, where a great deale of silly discourse, but the worst is I hear
that the plague increases much at Lambeth, St. Martin's and Westminster,
and fear it will all over the city.  Thence I to the Swan, thinking to
have seen Sarah but she was at church, and so I by water to Deptford, and
there made a visit to Mr. Evelyn, who, among other things, showed me most
excellent painting in little; in distemper, Indian incke, water colours:
graveing; and, above all, the whole secret of mezzo-tinto, and the manner
of it, which is very pretty, and good things done with it. He read to me
very much also of his discourse, he hath been many years and now is about,
about Guardenage; which will be a most noble and pleasant piece.  He read
me part of a play or two of his making, very good, but not as he conceits
them, I think, to be.  He showed me his Hortus Hyemalis; leaves laid up in
a book of several plants kept dry, which preserve colour, however, and
look very finely, better than any Herball.  In fine, a most excellent
person he is, and must be allowed a little for a little conceitedness; but
he may well be so, being a man so much above others.  He read me, though
with too much gusto, some little poems of his own, that were not
transcendant, yet one or two very pretty epigrams; among others, of a lady
looking in at a grate, and being pecked at by an eagle that was there.
Here comes in, in the middle of our discourse Captain Cocke, as drunk as a
dogg, but could stand, and talk and laugh.  He did so joy himself in a
brave woman that he had been with all the afternoon, and who should it be
but my Lady Robinson, but very troublesome he is with his noise and talke,
and laughing, though very pleasant.  With him in his coach to Mr.
Glanville's, where he sat with Mrs. Penington and myself a good while
talking of this fine woman again and then went away.  Then the lady and I
to very serious discourse and, among other things, of what a bonny lasse
my Lady Robinson is, who is reported to be kind to the prisoners, and has
said to Sir G. Smith, who is her great crony, "Look! there is a pretty
man, I would be content to break a commandment with him," and such loose
expressions she will have often.  After an houre's talke we to bed, the
lady mightily troubled about a pretty little bitch she hath, which is very
sicke, and will eat nothing, and the worst was, I could hear her in her
chamber bemoaning the bitch, and by and by taking her into bed with her.
The bitch pissed and shit a bed, and she was fain to rise and had coals
out of my chamber to dry the bed again.  This night I had a letter that
Sir G. Carteret would be in towne to-morrow, which did much surprize me.

6th.  Up, and to my office, where busy all the morning and then to dinner
to Captain Cocke's with Mr. Evelyn, where very merry, only vexed after
dinner to stay too long for our coach.  At last, however, to Lambeth and
thence the Cockpitt, where we found Sir G. Carteret come, and in with the
Duke and the East India Company about settling the business of the prizes,
and they have gone through with it.  Then they broke up, and Sir G.
Carteret come out, and thence through the garden to the water side and by
water I with him in his boat down with Captain Cocke to his house at
Greenwich, and while supper was getting ready Sir G. Carteret and I did
walk an houre in the garden before the house, talking of my Lord
Sandwich's business; what enemies he hath, and how they have endeavoured
to bespatter him: and particularly about his leaving of 30 ships of the
enemy, when Pen would have gone, and my Lord called him back again: which
is most false.  However, he says, it was purposed by some hot-heads in the
House of Commons, at the same time when they voted a present to the Duke
of Yorke, to have voted L10,000 to the Prince, and half-a-crowne to my
Lord of Sandwich; but nothing come of it.

     [The tide of popular indignation ran high against Lord Sandwich, and
     he was sent to Spain as ambassador to get him honourably out of the
     way (see post, December 6th).]

But, for all this, the King is most firme to my Lord, and so is my Lord
Chancellor, and my Lord Arlington.  The Prince, in appearance, kind; the
Duke of Yorke silent, says no hurt; but admits others to say it in his
hearing.  Sir W. Pen, the falsest rascal that ever was in the world; and
that this afternoon the Duke of Albemarle did tell him that Pen was a very
cowardly rogue, and one that hath brought all these rogueish fanatick
Captains into the fleete, and swears he should never go out with the
fleete again.  That Sir W. Coventry is most kind to Pen still; and says
nothing nor do any thing openly to the prejudice of my Lord.  He agrees
with me, that it is impossible for the King [to] set out a fleete again
the next year; and that he fears all will come to ruine, there being no
money in prospect but these prizes, which will bring, it may be, L20,000,
but that will signify nothing in the world for it.  That this late Act of
Parliament for bringing the money into the Exchequer, and making of it
payable out there, intended as a prejudice to him and will be his
convenience hereafter and ruine the King's business, and so I fear it will
and do wonder Sir W. Coventry would be led by Sir G. Downing to persuade
the King and Duke to have it so, before they had thoroughly weighed all
circumstances; that for my Lord, the King has said to him lately that I
was an excellent officer, and that my Lord Chancellor do, he thinks, love
and esteem of me as well as he do of any man in England that he hath no
more acquaintance with.  So having done and received from me the sad newes
that we are like to have no money here a great while, not even of the very
prizes, I set up my rest

     [The phrase "set up my rest" is a metaphor from the once fashionable
     game of Primero, meaning, to stand upon the cards you have in your
     hand, in hopes they may prove better than those of your adversary.
     Hence, to make up your mind, to be determined (see Nares's
     "Glossary").]

in giving up the King's service to be ruined and so in to supper, where
pretty merry, and after supper late to Mr. Glanville's, and Sir G.
Carteret to bed.  I also to bed, it being very late.

7th.  Up, and to Sir G. Carteret, and with him, he being very passionate
to be gone, without staying a minute for breakfast, to the Duke of
Albemarle's and I with him by water and with Fen: but, among other things,
Lord! to see how he wondered to see the river so empty of boats, nobody
working at the Custome-house keys; and how fearful he is, and vexed that
his man, holding a wine-glasse in his hand for him to drinke out of, did
cover his hands, it being a cold, windy, rainy morning, under the
waterman's coate, though he brought the waterman from six or seven miles
up the river, too.  Nay, he carried this glasse with him for his man to
let him drink out of at the Duke of Albemarle's, where he intended to
dine, though this he did to prevent sluttery, for, for the same reason he
carried a napkin with him to Captain Cocke's, making him believe that he
should eat with foule linnen.  Here he with the Duke walked a good while
in the Parke, and I with Fen, but cannot gather that he intends to stay
with us, nor thinks any thing at all of ever paying one farthing of money
more to us here, let what will come of it.  Thence in, and Sir W. Batten
comes in by and by, and so staying till noon, and there being a great deal
of company there, Sir W. Batten and I took leave of the Duke and Sir G.
Carteret, there being no good to be done more for money, and so over the
River and by coach to Greenwich, where at Boreman's we dined, it being
late.  Thence my head being full of business and mind out of order for
thinking of the effects which will arise from the want of money, I made an
end of my letters by eight o'clock, and so to my lodging and there spent
the evening till midnight talking with Mrs. Penington, who is a very
discreet, understanding lady and very pretty discourse we had and great
variety, and she tells me with great sorrow her bitch is dead this
morning, died in her bed.  So broke up and to bed.

8th.  Up, and to the office, where busy among other things to looke my
warrants for the settling of the Victualling business, the warrants being
come to me for the Surveyors of the ports and that for me also to be
Surveyor-Generall.  I did discourse largely with Tom Willson about it and
doubt not to make it a good service to the King as well, as the King gives
us very good salarys.  It being a fast day, all people were at church and
the office quiett; so I did much business, and at noon adventured to my
old lodging, and there eat, but am not yet well satisfied, not seeing of
Christopher, though they say he is abroad. Thence after dinner to the
office again, and thence am sent for to the King's Head by my Lord
Rutherford, who, since I can hope for no more convenience from him, his
business is troublesome to me, and therefore I did leave him as soon as I
could and by water to Deptford, and there did order my matters so, walking
up and down the fields till it was dark night, that 'je allais a la maison
of my valentine,--[Bagwell's wife]--and there 'je faisais whatever je
voudrais avec' her, and, about eight at night, did take water, being glad
I was out of the towne; for the plague, it seems, rages there more than
ever, and so to my lodgings, where my Lord had got a supper and the
mistresse of the house, and her daughters, and here staid Mrs. Pierce to
speake with me about her husband's business, and I made her sup with us,
and then at night my Lord and I walked with her home, and so back again.
My Lord and I ended all we had to say as to his business overnight, and so
I took leave, and went again to Mr. Glanville's and so to bed, it being
very late.

9th.  Up, and did give the servants something at Mr. Glanville's and so
took leave, meaning to lie to-night at my owne lodging.  To my office,
where busy with Mr. Gawden running over the Victualling business, and he
is mightily pleased that this course is taking and seems sensible of my
favour and promises kindnesse to me.  At noon by water, to the King's Head
at Deptford, where Captain Taylor invites Sir W: Batten, Sir John Robinson
(who come in with a great deale of company from hunting, and brought in a
hare alive and a great many silly stories they tell of their sport, which
pleases them mightily, and me not at all, such is the different sense of
pleasure in mankind), and others upon the score of a survey of his new
ship; and strange to see how a good dinner and feasting reconciles
everybody, Sir W. Batten and Sir J. Robinson being now as kind to him, and
report well of his ship and proceedings, and promise money, and Sir W.
Batten is a solicitor for him, but it is a strange thing to observe, they
being the greatest enemys he had, and yet, I believe, hath in the world in
their hearts.  Thence after dinner stole away and to my office, where did
a great deale of business till midnight, and then to Mrs. Clerk's, to
lodge again, and going home W. Hewer did tell me my wife will be here
to-morrow, and hath put away Mary, which vexes me to the heart, I cannot
helpe it, though it may be a folly in me, and when I think seriously on
it, I think my wife means no ill design in it, or, if she do, I am a foole
to be troubled at it, since I cannot helpe it.  The Bill of Mortality, to
all our griefs, is encreased 399 this week, and the encrease generally
through the whole City and suburbs, which makes us all sad.

10th.  Up, and entered all my Journall since the 28th of October, having
every day's passages well in my head, though it troubles me to remember
it, and which I was forced to, being kept from my lodging, where my books
and papers are, for several days.  So to my office, where till two or
three o'clock busy before I could go to my lodging to dinner, then did it
and to my office again.  In the evening newes is brought me my wife is
come: so I to her, and with her spent the evening, but with no great
pleasure, I being vexed about her putting away of Mary in my absence, but
yet I took no notice of it at all, but fell into other discourse, and she
told me, having herself been this day at my house at London, which was
boldly done, to see Mary have her things, that Mr. Harrington, our
neighbour, an East country merchant, is dead at Epsum of the plague, and
that another neighbour of ours, Mr. Hollworthy, a very able man, is also
dead by a fall in the country from his horse, his foot hanging in the
stirrup, and his brains beat out.  Here we sat talking, and after supper
to bed.

11th.  I up and to the office (leaving my wife in bed) and there till
noon, then to dinner and back again to the office, my wife going to
Woolwich again, and I staying very late at my office, and so home to bed.

12th (Lord's day).  Up, and invited by Captain Cocke to dinner.  So after
being ready I went to him, and there he and I and Mr. Yard (one of the
Guinny Company) dined together and very merry.  After dinner I by water to
the Duke of Albemarle, and there had a little discourse and business with
him, chiefly to receive his commands about pilotts to be got for our
Hambro' ships, going now at this time of the year convoy to the merchant
ships, that have lain at great pain and charge, some three, some four
months at Harwich for a convoy.  They hope here the plague will be less
this weeke.  Thence back by water to Captain Cocke's, and there he and I
spent a great deale of the evening as we had done of the day reading and
discoursing over part of Mr. Stillingfleet's "Origines Sacrae," wherein
many things are very good and some frivolous.  Thence by and by he and I
to Mrs. Penington's, but she was gone to bed.  So we back and walked a
while, and then to his house and to supper, and then broke up, and I home
to my lodging to bed.

13th.  Up, and to my office, where busy all the morning, and at noon to
Captain Cocke's to dinner as we had appointed in order to settle our
business of accounts.  But here came in an Alderman, a merchant, a very
merry man, and we dined, and, he being gone, after dinner Cocke and I
walked into the garden, and there after a little discourse he did
undertake under his hand to secure me in L500 profit, for my share of the
profit of what we have bought of the prize goods.  We agreed upon the
terms, which were easier on my side than I expected, and so with
extraordinary inward joy we parted till the evening.  So I to the office
and among other business prepared a deed for him to sign and seale to me
about our agreement, which at night I got him to come and sign and seale,
and so he and I to Glanville's, and there he and I sat talking and playing
with Mrs. Penington, whom we found undrest in her smocke and petticoats by
the fireside, and there we drank and laughed, and she willingly suffered
me to put my hand in her bosom very wantonly, and keep it there long.
Which methought was very strange, and I looked upon myself as a man
mightily deceived in a lady, for I could not have thought she could have
suffered it, by her former discourse with me; so modest she seemed and I
know not what.  We staid here late, and so home after he and I had walked
till past midnight, a bright moonshine, clear, cool night, before his door
by the water, and so I home after one of the clock.

14th.  Called up by break of day by Captain Cocke, by agreement, and he
and I in his coach through Kent-streete (a sad place through the plague,
people sitting sicke and with plaisters about them in the street begging)
to Viner's and Colvill's about money business, and so to my house, and
there I took L300 in order to the carrying it down to my Lord Sandwich in
part of the money I am to pay for Captain Cocke by our agreement.  So I
took it down, and down I went to Greenwich to my office, and there sat
busy till noon, and so home to dinner, and thence to the office again, and
by and by to the Duke of Albemarle's by water late, where I find he had
remembered that I had appointed to come to him this day about money, which
I excused not doing sooner; but I see, a dull fellow, as he is, do
sometimes remember what another thinks he mindeth not.  My business was
about getting money of the East India Company; but, Lord! to see how the
Duke himself magnifies himself in what he had done with the Company; and
my Lord Craven what the King could have done without my Lord Duke, and a
deale of stir, but most mightily what a brave fellow I am.  Back by water,
it raining hard, and so to the office, and stopped my going, as I
intended, to the buoy of the Nore, and great reason I had to rejoice at
it, for it proved the night of as great a storme as was almost ever
remembered.  Late at the office, and so home to bed.  This day, calling at
Mr. Rawlinson's to know how all did there, I hear that my pretty grocer's
wife, Mrs. Beversham, over the way there, her husband is lately dead of
the plague at Bow, which I am sorry for, for fear of losing her
neighbourhood.

15th.  Up and all the morning at the office, busy, and at noon to the
King's Head taverne, where all the Trinity House dined to-day, to choose a
new Master in the room of Hurlestone, that is dead, and Captain Crispe is
chosen.  But, Lord! to see how Sir W. Batten governs all and tramples upon
Hurlestone, but I am confident the Company will grow the worse for that
man's death, for now Batten, and in him a lazy, corrupt, doating rogue,
will have all the sway there.  After dinner who comes in but my Lady
Batten, and a troop of a dozen women almost, and expected, as I found
afterward, to be made mighty much of, but nobody minded them; but the best
jest was, that when they saw themselves not regarded, they would go away,
and it was horrible foule weather; and my Lady Batten walking through the
dirty lane with new spicke and span white shoes, she dropped one of her
galoshes in the dirt, where it stuck, and she forced to go home without
one, at which she was horribly vexed, and I led her; and after vexing her
a little more in mirth, I parted, and to Glanville's, where I knew Sir
John Robinson, Sir G. Smith, and Captain Cocke were gone, and there, with
the company of Mrs. Penington, whose father, I hear, was one of the Court
of justice, and died prisoner, of the stone, in the Tower, I made them,
against their resolutions, to stay from houre to houre till it was almost
midnight, and a furious, darke and rainy, and windy, stormy night, and,
which was best, I, with drinking small beer, made them all drunk drinking
wine, at which Sir John Robinson made great sport.  But, they being gone,
the lady and I very civilly sat an houre by the fireside observing the
folly of this Robinson, that makes it his worke to praise himself, and all
he say and do, like a heavy-headed coxcombe.  The plague, blessed be God!
is decreased 400; making the whole this week but 1300 and odd; for which
the Lord be praised!

16th.  Up, and fitted myself for my journey down to the fleete, and
sending my money and boy down by water to Eriffe,--[Erith]--I borrowed a
horse of Mr. Boreman's son, and after having sat an houre laughing with my
Lady Batten and Mrs. Turner, and eat and drank with them, I took horse and
rode to Eriffe, where, after making a little visit to Madam Williams, who
did give me information of W. Howe's having bought eight bags of precious
stones taken from about the Dutch Vice-Admirall's neck, of which there
were eight dyamonds which cost him L60,000 sterling, in India, and hoped
to have made L2000 here for them.  And that this is told by one that sold
him one of the bags, which hath nothing but rubys in it, which he had for
35s.; and that it will be proved he hath made L125 of one stone that he
bought.  This she desired, and I resolved I would give my Lord Sandwich
notice of.  So I on board my Lord Bruncker; and there he and Sir Edmund
Pooly carried me down into the hold of the India shipp, and there did show
me the greatest wealth lie in confusion that a man can see in the world.
Pepper scattered through every chink, you trod upon it; and in cloves and
nutmegs, I walked above the knees; whole rooms full.  And silk in bales,
and boxes of copper-plate, one of which I saw opened.  Having seen this,
which was as noble a sight as ever I saw in my life, I away on board the
other ship in despair to get the pleasure-boat of the gentlemen there to
carry me to the fleet.  They were Mr. Ashburnham and Colonell Wyndham; but
pleading the King's business, they did presently agree I should have it.
So I presently on board, and got under sail, and had a good bedd by the
shift, of Wyndham's; and so,

17th.  Sailed all night, and got down to Quinbrough water, where all the
great ships are now come, and there on board my Lord, and was soon
received with great content.  And after some little discourse, he and I on
board Sir W. Pen; and there held a council of Warr about many wants of the
fleete, but chiefly how to get slopps and victuals for the fleete now
going out to convoy our Hambro' ships, that have been so long detained for
four or five months for want of convoy, which we did accommodate one way
or other, and so, after much chatt, Sir W. Pen did give us a very good and
neat dinner, and better, I think, than ever I did see at his owne house at
home in my life, and so was the other I eat with him. After dinner much
talke, and about other things, he and I about his money for his prize
goods, wherein I did give him a cool answer, but so as we did not disagree
in words much, and so let that fall, and so followed my Lord Sandwich, who
was gone a little before me on board the Royall James. And there spent an
houre, my Lord playing upon the gittarr, which he now commends above all
musique in the world, because it is base enough for a single voice, and is
so portable and manageable without much trouble. That being done, I got my
Lord to be alone, and so I fell to acquaint him with W. Howe's business,
which he had before heard a little of from Captain Cocke, but made no
great matter of it, but now he do, and resolves nothing less than to lay
him by the heels, and seize on all he hath, saying that for this yeare or
two he hath observed him so proud and conceited he could not endure him.
But though I was not at all displeased with it, yet I prayed him to
forbear doing anything therein till he heard from me again about it, and I
had made more enquiry into the truth of it, which he agreed to.  Then we
fell to publique discourse, wherein was principally this: he cleared it to
me beyond all doubt that Coventry is his enemy, and has been long so.  So
that I am over that, and my Lord told it me upon my proposal of a
friendship between them, which he says is impossible, and methinks that my
Lord's displeasure about the report in print of the first fight was not of
his making, but I perceive my Lord cannot forget it, nor the other think
he can.  I shewed him how advisable it were upon almost any terms for him
to get quite off the sea employment.  He answers me again that he agrees
to it, but thinks the King will not let him go off: He tells me he lacks
now my Lord Orrery to solicit it for him, who is very great with the King.
As an infinite secret, my Lord tells me, the factions are high between the
King and the Duke, and all the Court are in an uproare with their loose
amours; the Duke of Yorke being in love desperately with Mrs. Stewart.
Nay, that the Duchesse herself is fallen in love with her new Master of
the Horse, one Harry Sidney, and another, Harry Savill.  So that God knows
what will be the end of it.  And that the Duke is not so obsequious as he
used to be, but very high of late; and would be glad to be in the head of
an army as Generall; and that it is said that he do propose to go and
command under the King of Spayne, in Flanders.  That his amours to Mrs.
Stewart are told the King.  So that all is like to be nought among them.
That he knows that the Duke of Yorke do give leave to have him spoken
slightly of in his owne hearing, and doth not oppose it, and told me from
what time he hath observed this to begin.  So that upon the whole my Lord
do concur to wish with all his heart that he could with any honour get
from off the imployment.  After he had given thanks to me for my kind
visit and good counsel, on which he seems to set much by, I left him, and
so away to my Bezan againe, and there to read in a pretty French book, "La
Nouvelle Allegorique," upon the strife between rhetorique and its enemies,
very pleasant.  So, after supper, to sleepe, and sayled all night, and
came to Erith before break of day.

18th.  About nine of the clock, I went on shore, there (calling by the way
only to look upon my Lord Bruncker) to give Mrs. Williams an account of
her matters, and so hired an ill-favoured horse, and away to Greenwich to
my lodgings, where I hear how rude the souldiers have been in my absence,
swearing what they would do with me, which troubled me, but, however,
after eating a bit I to the office and there very late writing letters,
and so home and to bed.

19th (Lord's day).  Up, and after being trimmed, alone by water to Erith,
all the way with my song book singing of Mr. Lawes's long recitative song
in the beginning of his book.  Being come there, on board my Lord
Bruncker, I find Captain Cocke and other company, the lady not well, and
mighty merry we were; Sir Edmund Pooly being very merry, and a right
English gentleman, and one of the discontented Cavaliers, that think their
loyalty is not considered.  After dinner, all on shore to my Lady
Williams, and there drank and talked; but, Lord! the most impertinent bold
woman with my Lord that ever I did see.  I did give her an account again
of my business with my Lord touching W. Howe, and she did give me some
more information about it, and examination taken about it, and so we
parted and I took boat, and to Woolwich, where we found my wife not well
of them, and I out of humour begun to dislike her paynting, the last
things not pleasing me so well as the former, but I blame myself for my
being so little complaisant.  So without eating or drinking, there being
no wine (which vexed me too), we walked with a lanthorne to Greenwich and
eat something at his house, and so home to bed.

20th.  Up before day, and wrote some letters to go to my Lord, among
others that about W. Howe, which I believe will turn him out, and so took
horse for Nonesuch, with two men with me, and the ways very bad, and the
weather worse, for wind and rayne.  But we got in good time thither, and I
did get my tallys got ready, and thence, with as many as could go, to
Yowell, and there dined very well, and I saw my Besse, a very
well-favoured country lass there, and after being very merry and having
spent a piece I took horse, and by another way met with a very good road,
but it rained hard and blew, but got home very well.  Here I find Mr.
Deering come to trouble me about business, which I soon dispatched and
parted, he telling me that Luellin hath been dead this fortnight, of the
plague, in St. Martin's Lane, which much surprised me.

21st.  Up, and to the office, where all the morning doing business, and at
noon home to dinner and quickly back again to the office, where very busy
all the evening and late sent a long discourse to Mr. Coventry by his
desire about the regulating of the method of our payment of bills in the
Navy, which will be very good, though, it may be, he did ayme principally
at striking at Sir G. Carteret.  So weary but pleased with this business
being over I home to supper and to bed.

22nd.  Up, and by water to the Duke of Albemarle, and there did some
little business, but most to shew myself, and mightily I am yet in his and
Lord Craven's books, and thence to the Swan and there drank and so down to
the bridge, and so to the 'Change, where spoke with many people, and about
a great deale of business, which kept me late.  I heard this day that Mr.
Harrington is not dead of the plague, as we believed, at which I was very
glad, but most of all, to hear that the plague is come very low; that is,
the whole under 1,000, and the plague 600 and odd: and great hopes of a
further decrease, because of this day's being a very exceeding hard frost,
and continues freezing.  This day the first of the Oxford Gazettes come
out, which is very pretty, full of newes, and no folly in it.  Wrote by
Williamson.  Fear that our Hambro' ships at last cannot go, because of the
great frost, which we believe it is there, nor are our ships cleared at
the Pillow [Pillau], which will keepe them there too all this winter, I
fear.  From the 'Change, which is pretty full again, I to my office and
there took some things, and so by water to my lodging at Greenwich and
dined, and then to the office awhile and at night home to my lodgings, and
took T. Willson and T. Hater with me, and there spent the evening till
midnight discoursing and settling of our Victualling business, that
thereby I might draw up instructions for the Surveyours and that we might
be doing something to earne our money.  This done I late to bed.  Among
other things it pleased me to have it demonstrated, that a Purser without
professed cheating is a professed loser, twice as much as he gets.

23rd.  Up betimes, and so, being trimmed, I to get papers ready against
Sir H. Cholmly come to me by appointment, he being newly come over from
Tangier.  He did by and by come, and we settled all matters about his
money, and he is a most satisfied man in me, and do declare his resolution
to give me 200 per annum.  It continuing to be a great frost, which gives
us hope for a perfect cure of the plague, he and I to walk in the parke,
and there discoursed with grief of the calamity of the times; how the
King's service is performed, and how Tangier is governed by a man, who,
though honourable, yet do mind his ways of getting and little else
compared, which will never make the place flourish.  I brought him and had
a good dinner for him, and there come by chance Captain Cuttance, who
tells me how W. Howe is laid by the heels, and confined to the Royall
Katharine, and his things all seized and how, also, for a quarrel, which
indeed the other night my Lord told me, Captain Ferrers, having cut all
over the back of another of my Lord's servants, is parted from my Lord. I
sent for little Mrs. Frances Tooker, and after they were gone I sat
dallying with her an hour, doing what I would with my hands about her. And
a very pretty creature it is.  So in the evening to the office, where late
writing letters, and at my lodging later writing for the last twelve days
my Journall and so to bed.  Great expectation what mischief more the
French will do us, for we must fall out.  We in extraordinary lacke of
money and everything else to go to sea next year.  My Lord Sandwich is
gone from the fleete yesterday toward Oxford.

24th.  Up, and after doing some business at the office, I to London, and
there, in my way, at my old oyster shop in Gracious Streete, bought two
barrels of my fine woman of the shop, who is alive after all the plague,
which now is the first observation or inquiry we make at London concerning
everybody we knew before it.  So to the 'Change, where very busy with
several people, and mightily glad to see the 'Change so full, and hopes of
another abatement still the next week.  Off the 'Change I went home with
Sir G. Smith to dinner, sending for one of my barrels of oysters, which
were good, though come from Colchester, where the plague hath been so
much.  Here a very brave dinner, though no invitation; and, Lord! to see
how I am treated, that come from so mean a beginning, is matter of wonder
to me.  But it is God's great mercy to me, and His blessing upon my taking
pains, and being punctual in my dealings.  After dinner Captain Cocke and
I about some business, and then with my other barrel of oysters home to
Greenwich, sent them by water to Mrs. Penington, while he and I landed,
and visited Mr. Evelyn, where most excellent discourse with him; among
other things he showed me a ledger of a Treasurer of the Navy, his great
grandfather, just 100 years old; which I seemed mighty fond of, and he did
present me with it, which I take as a great rarity; and he hopes to find
me more, older than it.  He also shewed us several letters of the old Lord
of Leicester's, in Queen Elizabeth's time, under the very hand-writing of
Queen Elizabeth, and Queen Mary, Queen of Scotts; and others, very
venerable names.  But, Lord! how poorly, methinks, they wrote in those
days, and in what plain uncut paper.  Thence, Cocke having sent for his
coach, we to Mrs. Penington, and there sat and talked and eat our oysters
with great pleasure, and so home to my lodging late and to bed.

25th.  Up, and busy at the office all day long, saving dinner time, and in
the afternoon also very late at my office, and so home to bed.  All our
business is now about our Hambro fleete, whether it can go or no this
yeare, the weather being set in frosty, and the whole stay being for want
of Pilotts now, which I have wrote to the Trinity House about, but have so
poor an account from them, that I did acquaint Sir W. Coventry with it
this post.

26th (Lord's day).  Up, though very late abed, yet before day to dress
myself to go toward Erith, which I would do by land, it being a horrible
cold frost to go by water: so borrowed two horses of Mr. Howell and his
friend, and with much ado set out, after my horses being frosted

     [Frosting means, having the horses' shoes turned up by the smith.]

(which I know not what it means to this day), and my boy having lost one
of my spurs and stockings, carrying them to the smith's; but I borrowed a
stocking, and so got up, and Mr. Tooker with me, and rode to Erith, and
there on board my Lord Bruncker, met Sir W. Warren upon his business,
among others, and did a great deale, Sir J. Minnes, as God would have it,
not being there to hinder us with his impertinences.  Business done, we to
dinner very merry, there being there Sir Edmund Pooly, a very worthy
gentleman.  They are now come to the copper boxes in the prizes, and hope
to have ended all this weeke.  After dinner took leave, and on shore to
Madam Williams, to give her an account of my Lord's letter to me about
Howe, who he has clapped by the heels on suspicion of having the jewells,
and she did give me my Lord Bruncker's examination of the fellow, that
declares his having them; and so away, Sir W. Warren riding with me, and
the way being very bad, that is, hard and slippery by reason of the frost,
so we could not come to past Woolwich till night.  However, having a great
mind to have gone to the Duke of Albemarle, I endeavoured to have gone
farther, but the night come on and no going, so I 'light and sent my horse
by Tooker, and returned on foot to my wife at Woolwich, where I found, as
I had directed, a good dinner to be made against to-morrow, and invited
guests in the yarde, meaning to be merry, in order to her taking leave,
for she intends to come in a day or two to me for altogether.  But here,
they tell me, one of the houses behind them is infected, and I was fain to
stand there a great while, to have their back-door opened, but they could
not, having locked them fast, against any passing through, so was forced
to pass by them again, close to their sicke beds, which they were removing
out of the house, which troubled me; so I made them uninvite their guests,
and to resolve of coming all away to me to-morrow, and I walked with a
lanthorne, weary as I was, to Greenwich; but it was a fine walke, it being
a hard frost, and so to Captain Cocke's, but he I found had sent for me to
come to him to Mrs. Penington's, and there I went, and we were very merry,
and supped, and Cocke being sleepy he went away betimes.  I stayed alone
talking and playing with her till past midnight, she suffering me whatever
'ego voulais avec ses mamilles .  . .  .  Much pleased with her company we
parted, and I home to bed at past one, all people being in bed thinking I
would have staid out of town all night.

27th.  Up, and being to go to wait on the Duke of Albemarle, who is to go
out of towne to Oxford to-morrow, and I being unwilling to go by water, it
being bitter cold, walked it with my landlady's little boy Christopher to
Lambeth, it being a very fine walke and calling at half the way and drank,
and so to the Duke of Albemarle, who is visited by every body against his
going; and mighty kind to me: and upon my desiring his grace to give me
his kind word to the Duke of Yorke, if any occasion there were of speaking
of me, he told me he had reason to do so; for there had been nothing done
in the Navy without me.  His going, I hear, is upon putting the sea
business into order, and, as some say, and people of his owne family, that
he is agog to go to sea himself the next year.  Here I met with a letter
from Sir G. Carteret, who is come to Cranborne, that he will be here this
afternoon and desires me to be with him.  So the Duke would have me dine
with him.  So it being not dinner time, I to the Swan, and there found
Sarah all alone in the house .  .  .  .  So away to the Duke of Albemarle
again, and there to dinner, he most exceeding kind to me to the
observation of all that are there.  At dinner comes Sir G. Carteret and
dines with us.  After dinner a great deal alone with Sir G. Carteret, who
tells me that my Lord hath received still worse and worse usage from some
base people about the Court.  But the King is very kind, and the Duke do
not appear the contrary; and my Lord Chancellor swore to him "by---I will
not forsake my Lord of Sandwich."  Our next discourse is upon this Act for
money, about which Sir G. Carteret comes to see what money can be got upon
it.  But none can be got, which pleases him the thoughts of, for, if the
Exchequer should succeede in this, his office would faile.  But I am apt
to think at this time of hurry and plague and want of trade, no money will
be got upon a new way which few understand. We walked, Cocke and I,
through the Parke with him, and so we being to meet the Vice-Chamberlayne
to-morrow at Nonesuch, to treat with Sir Robert Long about the same
business, I into London, it being dark night, by a hackney coach; the
first I have durst to go in many a day, and with great pain now for fear.
But it being unsafe to go by water in the dark and frosty cold, and unable
being weary with my morning walke to go on foot, this was my only way.
Few people yet in the streets, nor shops open, here and there twenty in a
place almost; though not above five or sixe o'clock at night.  So to
Viner's, and there heard of Cocke, and found him at the Pope's Head,
drinking with Temple.  I to them, where the Goldsmiths do decry the new
Act, for money to be all brought into the Exchequer, and paid out thence,
saying they will not advance one farthing upon it; and indeed it is their
interest to say and do so.  Thence Cocke and I to Sir G. Smith's, it being
now night, and there up to his chamber and sat talking, and I
barbing--[shaving]--against to-morrow; and anon, at nine at night, comes
to us Sir G. Smith and the Lieutenant of the Tower, and there they sat
talking and drinking till past midnight, and mighty merry we were, the
Lieutenant of the Tower being in a mighty vein of singing, and he hath a
very good eare and strong voice, but no manner of skill.  Sir G. Smith
shewed me his lady's closett, which was very fine; and, after being very
merry, here I lay in a noble chamber, and mighty highly treated, the first
time I have lain in London a long time.

28th.  Up before day, and Cocke and I took a hackney coach appointed with
four horses to take us up, and so carried us over London Bridge.  But
there, thinking of some business, I did 'light at the foot of the bridge,
and by helpe of a candle at a stall, where some payers were at work, I
wrote a letter to Mr. Hater, and never knew so great an instance of the
usefulness of carrying pen and ink and wax about one: so we, the way being
very bad, to Nonesuch, and thence to Sir Robert Longs house; a fine place,
and dinner time ere we got thither; but we had breakfasted a little at Mr.
Gawden's, he being out of towne though, and there borrowed Dr. Taylor's
sermons, and is a most excellent booke and worth my buying, where had a
very good dinner, and curiously dressed, and here a couple of ladies,
kinswomen of his, not handsome though, but rich, that knew me by report of
The. Turner, and mighty merry we were.  After dinner to talk of our
business, the Act of Parliament, where in short I see Sir R. Long mighty
fierce in the great good qualities of it.  But in that and many other
things he was stiff in, I think without much judgement, or the judgement I
expected from him, and already they have evaded the necessity of bringing
people into the Exchequer with their bills to be paid there. Sir G.
Carteret is titched--[fretful, tetchy]--at this, yet resolves with me to
make the best use we can of this Act for the King, but all our care, we
think, will not render it as it should be.  He did again here alone
discourse with me about my Lord, and is himself strongly for my Lord's not
going to sea, which I am glad to hear and did confirm him in it.  He tells
me too that he talked last night with the Duke of Albemarle about my Lord
Sandwich, by the by making him sensible that it is his interest to
preserve his old friends, which he confessed he had reason to do, for he
knows that ill offices were doing of him, and that he honoured my Lord
Sandwich with all his heart.  After this discourse we parted, and all of
us broke up and we parted.  Captain Cocke and I through Wandsworth.  Drank
at Sir Allen Broderick's, a great friend and comrade of Cocke's, whom he
values above the world for a witty companion, and I believe he is so.  So
to Fox-Hall and there took boat, and down to the Old Swan, and thence to
Lumbard Streete, it being darke night, and thence to the Tower.  Took boat
and down to Greenwich, Cocke and I, he home and I to the office, where did
a little business, and then to my lodgings, where my wife is come, and I
am well pleased with it, only much trouble in those lodgings we have, the
mistresse of the house being so deadly dear in everything we have; so that
we do resolve to remove home soon as we know how the plague goes this
weeke, which we hope will be a good decrease.  So to bed.

29th.  Up, my wife and I talking how to dispose of our goods, and resolved
upon sending our two mayds Alce (who has been a day or two at Woolwich
with my wife, thinking to have had a feast there) and Susan home.  So my
wife after dinner did take them to London with some goods, and I in the
afternoon after doing other business did go also by agreement to meet
Captain Cocke and from him to Sir Roger Cuttance, about the money due from
Cocke to him for the late prize goods, wherein Sir Roger is troubled that
he hath not payment as agreed, and the other, that he must pay without
being secured in the quiett possession of them, but some accommodation to
both, I think, will be found.  But Cocke do tell me that several have
begged so much of the King to be discovered out of stolen prize goods and
so I am afeard we shall hereafter have trouble, therefore I will get
myself free of them as soon as I can and my money paid.  Thence home to my
house, calling my wife, where the poor wretch is putting things in a way
to be ready for our coming home, and so by water together to Greenwich,
and so spent the night together.

30th.  Up, and at the office all the morning.  At noon comes Sir Thomas
Allen, and I made him dine with me, and very friendly he is, and a good
man, I think, but one that professes he loves to get and to save.  He
dined with my wife and me and Mrs. Barbary, whom my wife brings along with
her from Woolwich for as long as she stays here.  In the afternoon to the
office, and there very late writing letters and then home, my wife and
people sitting up for me, and after supper to bed.  Great joy we have this
week in the weekly Bill, it being come to 544 in all, and but 333 of the
plague; so that we are encouraged to get to London soon as we can. And my
father writes as great news of joy to them, that he saw Yorke's waggon go
again this week to London, and was full of passengers; and tells me that
my aunt Bell hath been dead of the plague these seven weeks.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                DECEMBER
                                  1665

December 1st.  This morning to the office, full of resolution to spend the
whole day at business, and there, among other things, I did agree with
Poynter to be my clerke for my Victualling business, and so all alone all
the day long shut up in my little closett at my office, drawing up
instructions, which I should long since have done for my Surveyours of the
Ports, Sir W. Coventry desiring much to have them, and he might well have
expected them long since.  After dinner to it again, and at night had long
discourse with Gibson, who is for Yarmouth, who makes me understand so
much of the victualling business and the pursers' trade, that I am ashamed
I should go about the concerning myself in a business which I understand
so very very little of, and made me distrust all I had been doing to-day.
So I did lay it by till to-morrow morning to think of it afresh, and so
home by promise to my wife, to have mirth there.  So we had our
neighbours, little Miss Tooker and Mrs. Daniels, to dance, and after
supper I to bed, and left them merry below, which they did not part from
till two or three in the morning.

2nd.  Up, and discoursing with my wife, who is resolved to go to London
for good and all this day, we did agree upon giving Mr. Sheldon L10, and
Mrs. Barbary two pieces, and so I left her to go down thither to fetch
away the rest of the things and pay him the money, and so I to the office,
where very busy setting Mr. Poynter to write out my last night's worke,
which pleases me this day, but yet it is pretty to reflect how much I am
out of confidence with what I had done upon Gibson's discourse with me,
for fear I should have done it sillily, but Poynter likes them, and Mr.
Hater also, but yet I am afeard lest they should do it out of flattery, so
conscious I am of my ignorance.  Dined with my wife at noon and took leave
of her, she being to go to London, as I said, for altogether, and I to the
office, busy till past one in the morning.

3rd.  It being Lord's day, up and dressed and to church, thinking to have
sat with Sir James Bunce to hear his daughter and her husband sing, that
are so much commended, but was prevented by being invited into Coll.
Cleggatt's pew.  However, there I sat, near Mr. Laneare, with whom I
spoke, and in sight, by chance, and very near my fat brown beauty of our
Parish, the rich merchant's lady, a very noble woman, and Madame Pierce. A
good sermon of Mr. Plume's, and so to Captain Cocke's, and there dined
with him, and Colonell Wyndham, a worthy gentleman, whose wife was nurse
to the present King, and one that while she lived governed him and every
thing else, as Cocke says, as a minister of state; the old King putting
mighty weight and trust upon her.  They talked much of matters of State
and persons, and particularly how my Lord Barkeley hath all along been a
fortunate, though a passionate and but weak man as to policy; but as a
kinsman brought in and promoted by my Lord of St. Alban's, and one that is
the greatest vapourer in the world, this Colonell Wyndham says; and one to
whom only, with Jacke Asheburnel and Colonel Legg, the King's removal to
the Isle of Wight from Hampton Court was communicated; and (though
betrayed by their knavery, or at best by their ignorance, insomuch that
they have all solemnly charged one another with their failures therein,
and have been at daggers-drawing publickly about it), yet now none greater
friends in the world.  We dined, and in comes Mrs. Owen, a kinswoman of my
Lord Bruncker's, about getting a man discharged, which I did for her, and
by and by Mrs. Pierce to speake with me (and Mary my wife's late maid, now
gone to her) about her husband's business of money, and she tells us how
she prevented Captain Fisher the other day in his purchase of all her
husband's fine goods, as pearls and silks, that he had seized in an
Apothecary's house, a friend of theirs, but she got in and broke them open
and removed all before Captain Fisher came the next day to fetch them
away, at which he is starke mad.  She went home, and I to my lodgings.  At
night by agreement I fetched her again with Cocke's coach, and he come and
we sat and talked together, thinking to have had Mrs. Coleman and my
songsters, her husband and Laneare, but they failed me.  So we to supper,
and as merry as was sufficient, and my pretty little Miss with me; and so
after supper walked [with] Pierce home, and so back and to bed.  But,
Lord! I stand admiring of the wittinesse of her little boy, which is one
of the wittiest boys, but most confident that ever I did see of a child of
9 years old or under in all my life, or indeed one twice his age almost,
but all for roguish wit.  So to bed.

4th.  Several people to me about business, among others Captain Taylor,
intended Storekeeper for Harwich, whom I did give some assistance in his
dispatch by lending him money.  So out and by water to London and to the
'Change, and up and down about several businesses, and after the observing
(God forgive me!) one or two of my neighbour Jason's women come to towne,
which did please me very well, home to my house at the office, where my
wife had got a dinner for me: and it was a joyfull thing for us to meet
here, for which God be praised!  Here was her brother come to see her, and
speake with me about business.  It seems my recommending of him hath not
only obtained his presently being admitted into the Duke of Albemarle's
guards, and present pay, but also by the Duke's and Sir Philip Howard's
direction, to be put as a right-hand man, and other marks of special
respect, at which I am very glad, partly for him, and partly to see that I
am reckoned something in my recommendations, but wish he may carry himself
that I may receive no disgrace by him.  So to the 'Change.  Up and down
again in the evening about business and to meet Captain Cocke, who waited
for Mrs. Pierce (with whom he is mightily stricken), to receive and hide
for her her rich goods she saved the other day from seizure.  Upon the
'Change to-day Colvill tells me, from Oxford, that the King in person hath
justified my Lord Sandwich to the highest degree; and is right in his
favour to the uttermost.  So late by water home, taking a barrel of
oysters with me, and at Greenwich went and sat with Madam Penington
.  .  .  . and made her undress her head and sit dishevilled all night
sporting till two in the morning, and so away to my lodging and so to bed.
Over-fasting all the morning hath filled me mightily with wind, and
nothing else hath done it, that I fear a fit of the cholique.

5th.  Up and to the office, where very busy about several businesses all
the morning.  At noon empty, yet without stomach to dinner, having spoiled
myself with fasting yesterday, and so filled with wind.  In the afternoon
by water, calling Mr. Stevens (who is with great trouble paying of seamen
of their tickets at Deptford) and to London, to look for Captain Kingdom
whom we found at home about 5 o'clock.  I tried him, and he promised to
follow us presently to the East India House to sign papers to-night in
order to the settling the business of my receiving money for Tangier.  We
went and stopt the officer there to shut up.  He made us stay above an
houre.  I sent for him; he comes, but was not found at home, but abroad on
other business, and brings a paper saying that he had been this houre
looking for the Lord Ashley's order.  When he looks for it, that is not
the paper.  He would go again to look; kept us waiting till almost 8 at
night.  Then was I to go home by water this weather and darke, and to
write letters by the post, besides keeping the East India officers there
so late.  I sent for him again; at last he comes, and says he cannot find
the paper (which is a pretty thing to lay orders for L100,000 no better).
I was angry; he told me I ought to give people ease at night, and all
business was to be done by day.  I answered him sharply, that I did [not]
make, nor any honest man, any difference between night and day in the
King's business, and this was such, and my Lord Ashley should know.  He
answered me short.  I told him I knew the time (meaning the Rump's time)
when he did other men's business with more diligence.  He cried, "Nay, say
not so," and stopped his mouth, not one word after.  We then did our
business without the order in less than eight minutes, which he made me to
no purpose stay above two hours for the doing.  This made him mad, and so
we exchanged notes, and I had notes for L14,000 of the Treasurer of the
Company, and so away and by water to Greenwich and wrote my letters, and
so home late to bed.

6th.  Up betimes, it being fast-day; and by water to the Duke of
Albemarle, who come to towne from Oxford last night.  He is mighty brisk,
and very kind to me, and asks my advice principally in every thing.  He
surprises me with the news that my Lord Sandwich goes Embassador to Spayne
speedily; though I know not whence this arises, yet I am heartily glad of
it.  He did give me several directions what to do, and so I home by water
again and to church a little, thinking to have met Mrs. Pierce in order to
our meeting at night; but she not there, I home and dined, and comes
presently by appointment my wife.  I spent the afternoon upon a song of
Solyman's words to Roxalana that I have set, and so with my wife walked
and Mercer to Mrs. Pierce's, where Captain Rolt and Mrs. Knipp, Mr.
Coleman and his wife, and Laneare, Mrs. Worshipp and her singing daughter,
met; and by and by unexpectedly comes Mr. Pierce from Oxford. Here the
best company for musique I ever was in, in my life, and wish I could live
and die in it, both for musique and the face of Mrs. Pierce, and my wife
and Knipp, who is pretty enough; but the most excellent, mad-humoured
thing, and sings the noblest that ever I heard in my life, and Rolt, with
her, some things together most excellently.  I spent the night in extasy
almost; and, having invited them to my house a day or two hence, we broke
up, Pierce having told me that he is told how the King hath done my Lord
Sandwich all the right imaginable, by shewing him his countenance before
all the world on every occasion, to remove thoughts of discontent; and
that he is to go Embassador, and that the Duke of Yorke is made generall
of all forces by land and sea, and the Duke of Albemarle,
lieutenant-generall.  Whether the two latter alterations be so, true or
no, he knows not, but he is told so; but my Lord is in full favour with
the King.  So all home and to bed.

7th.  Up and to the office, where very busy all day.  Sir G. Carteret's
letter tells me my Lord Sandwich is, as I was told, declared Embassador
Extraordinary to Spayne, and to go with all speed away, and that his
enemies have done him as much good as he could wish.  At noon late to
dinner, and after dinner spent till night with Mr. Gibson and Hater
discoursing and making myself more fully [know] the trade of pursers, and
what fittest to be done in their business, and so to the office till
midnight writing letters, and so home, and after supper with my wife about
one o'clock to bed.

8th.  Up, well pleased in my mind about my Lord Sandwich, about whom I
shall know more anon from Sir G. Carteret, who will be in towne, and also
that the Hambrough [ships] after all difficulties are got out.  God send
them good speed!  So, after being trimmed, I by water to London, to the
Navy office, there to give order to my mayde to buy things to send down to
Greenwich for supper to-night; and I also to buy other things, as oysters,
and lemons, 6d. per piece, and oranges, 3d.  That done I to the 'Change,
and among many other things, especially for getting of my Tangier money, I
by appointment met Mr. Gawden, and he and I to the Pope's Head Taverne,
and there he did give me alone a very pretty dinner. Our business to talk
of his matters and his supply of money, which was necessary for us to talk
on before the Duke of Albemarle this afternoon and Sir G. Carteret.  After
that I offered now to pay him the L4000 remaining of his L8000 for
Tangier, which he took with great kindnesse, and prayed me most frankly to
give him a note for L3500 and accept the other L500 for myself, which in
good earnest was against my judgement to do, for [I] expected about L100
and no more, but however he would have me do it, and ownes very great
obligations to me, and the man indeed I love, and he deserves it.  This
put me into great joy, though with a little stay to it till we have time
to settle it, for for so great a sum I was fearfull any accident might by
death or otherwise defeate me, having not now time to change papers.  So
we rose, and by water to White Hall, where we found Sir G. Carteret with
the Duke, and also Sir G. Downing, whom I had not seen in many years
before.  He greeted me very kindly, and I him; though methinks I am
touched, that it should be said that he was my master heretofore, as
doubtless he will.  So to talk of our Navy business, and particularly
money business, of which there is little hopes of any present supply upon
this new Act, the goldsmiths being here (and Alderman Backewell newly come
from Flanders), and none offering any.  So we rose without doing more than
my stating the case of the Victualler, that whereas there is due to him on
the last year's declaration L80,000, and the charge of this year's amounts
to L420,000 and odd, he must be supplied between this and the end of
January with L150,000, and the remainder in 40 weeks by weekly payments,
or else he cannot go through his business.  Thence after some discourse
with Sir G. Carteret, who, though he tells me that he is glad of my Lord's
being made Embassador, and that it is the greatest courtesy his enemies
could do him; yet I find he is not heartily merry upon it, and that it was
no design of my Lord's friends, but the prevalence of his enemies, and
that the Duke of Albemarle and Prince Rupert are like to go to sea
together the next year. I pray God, when my Lord is gone, they do not fall
hard upon the Vice-Chamberlain, being alone, and in so envious a place,
though by this late Act and the instructions now a brewing for our office
as to method of payments will destroy the profit of his place of itself
without more trouble.  Thence by water down to Greenwich, and there found
all my company come; that is, Mrs. Knipp, and an ill, melancholy,
jealous-looking fellow, her husband, that spoke not a word to us all the
night, Pierce and his wife, and Rolt, Mrs. Worshipp and her daughter,
Coleman and his wife, and Laneare, and, to make us perfectly happy, there
comes by chance to towne Mr. Hill to see us.  Most excellent musique we
had in abundance, and a good supper, dancing, and a pleasant scene of Mrs.
Knipp's rising sicke from table, but whispered me it was for some hard
word or other her husband gave her just now when she laughed and was more
merry than ordinary.  But we got her in humour again, and mighty merry;
spending the night, till two in the morning, with most complete content as
ever in my life, it being increased by my day's work with Gawden. Then
broke up, and we to bed, Mr. Hill and I, whom I love more and more, and he
us.

9th.  Called up betimes by my Lord Bruncker, who is come to towne from his
long water worke at Erith last night, to go with him to the Duke of
Albemarle, which by his coach I did.  Our discourse upon the ill posture
of the times through lacke of money.  At the Duke's did some business, and
I believe he was not pleased to see all the Duke's discourse and
applications to me and everybody else.  Discoursed also with Sir G.
Carteret about office business, but no money in view.  Here my Lord and I
staid and dined, the Vice-Chamberlain taking his leave.  At table the
Duchesse, a damned ill-looked woman, complaining of her Lord's going to
sea the next year, said these cursed words: "If my Lord had been a coward
he had gone to sea no more: it may be then he might have been excused, and
made an Embassador" (meaning my Lord Sandwich).

     [When Lord Sandwich was away a new commander had to be chosen, and
     rank and long service pointed out Prince Rupert for the office, it
     having been decided that the heir presumptive should be kept at
     home.  It was thought, however, that the same confidence could not
     be placed in the prince's discretion as in his courage, and
     therefore the Duke of Albemarle was induced to take a joint command
     with him, "and so make one admiral of two persons" (see Lister's
     "Life of Clarendon," vol. ii., pp. 360,361).]

This made me mad, and I believed she perceived my countenance change, and
blushed herself very much.  I was in hopes others had not minded it, but
my Lord Bruncker, after we were come away, took notice of the words to me
with displeasure.  Thence after dinner away by water, calling and taking
leave of Sir G. Carteret, whom we found going through at White Hall, and
so over to Lambeth and took coach and home, and so to the office, where
late writing letters, and then home to Mr. Hill, and sang, among other
things, my song of "Beauty retire," which he likes, only excepts against
two notes in the base, but likes the whole very well.  So late to bed.

10th (Lord's day).  Lay long talking, Hill and I, with great pleasure, and
then up, and being ready walked to Cocke's for some newes, but heard none,
only they would have us stay their dinner, and sent for my wife, who come,
and very merry we were, there being Sir Edmund Pooly and Mr. Evelyn.
Before we had dined comes Mr. Andrews, whom we had sent for to Bow, and so
after dinner home, and there we sang some things, but not with much
pleasure, Mr. Andrews being in so great haste to go home, his wife looking
every hour to be brought to bed.  He gone Mr. Hill and I continued our
musique, one thing after another, late till supper, and so to bed with
great pleasure.

11th.  Lay long with great pleasure talking.  So I left him and to London
to the 'Change, and after discoursed with several people about business;
met Mr. Gawden at the Pope's Head, where he brought Mr. Lewes and T.
Willson to discourse about the Victualling business, and the alterations
of the pursers' trade, for something must be done to secure the King a
little better, and yet that they may have wherewith to live. After dinner
I took him aside, and perfected to my great joy my business with him,
wherein he deals most nobly in giving me his hand for the L4,000, and
would take my note but for L3500.  This is a great blessing, and God make
me thankfull truly for it.  With him till it was darke putting in writing
our discourse about victualling, and so parted, and I to Viner's, and
there evened all accounts, and took up my notes setting all straight
between us to this day.  The like to Colvill, and paying several bills due
from me on the Tangier account.  Then late met Cocke and Temple at the
Pope's Head, and there had good discourse with Temple, who tells me that
of the L80,000 advanced already by the East India Company, they have had
L5000 out of their hands.  He discoursed largely of the quantity of money
coyned, and what may be thought the real sum of money in the kingdom.  He
told me, too, as an instance of the thrift used in the King's business,
that the tools and the interest of the money-using to the King for the
money he borrowed while the new invention of the mill money was perfected,
cost him L35,000, and in mirthe tells me that the new fashion money is
good for nothing but to help the Prince if he can secretly get copper
plates shut up in silver it shall never be discovered, at least not in his
age.  Thence Cocke and I by water, he home and I home, and there sat with
Mr. Hill and my wife supping, talking and singing till midnight, and then
to bed.  [That I may remember it the more particularly, I thought fit to
insert this additional memorandum of Temple's discourse this night with
me, which I took in writing from his mouth.  Before the Harp and Crosse
money was cried down, he and his fellow goldsmiths did make some
particular trials what proportion that money bore to the old King's money,
and they found that generally it come to, one with another, about L25 in
every L100.  Of this money there was, upon the calling of it in, L650,000
at least brought into the Tower; and from thence he computes that the
whole money of England must be full L6,250,000.  But for all this believes
that there is above L30,000,000; he supposing that about the King's coming
in (when he begun to observe the quantity of the new money) people begun
to be fearfull of this money's being cried down, and so picked it out and
set it a-going as fast as they could, to be rid of it; and he thinks
L30,000,000 the rather, because if there were but L16,250,000 the King
having L2,000,000 every year, would have the whole money of the kingdom in
his hands in eight years.  He tells me about L350,000 sterling was coined
out of the French money, the proceeds of Dunkirke; so that, with what was
coined of the Crosse money, there is new coined about L1,000,000 besides
the gold, which is guessed at L500,000.  He tells me, that, though the
King did deposit the French money in pawn all the while for the L350,000
he was forced to borrow thereupon till the tools could be made for the new
Minting in the present form, yet the interest he paid for that time came
to L35,000, Viner having to his knowledge L10,000 for the use of L100,000
of it.]--(The passage between brackets is from a piece of paper inserted
in this place.)

12th.  Up, and to the office, where my Lord Bruncker met, and among other
things did finish a contract with Cocke for hemp, by which I hope to get
my money due from him paid presently.  At noon home to dinner, only eating
a bit, and with much kindness taking leave of Mr. Hill who goes away
to-day, and so I by water saving the tide through Bridge and to Sir G.
Downing by appointment at Charing Crosse, who did at first mightily please
me with informing me thoroughly the virtue and force of this Act, and
indeed it is ten times better than ever I thought could have been said of
it, but when he come to impose upon me that without more ado I must get by
my credit people to serve in goods and lend money upon it and none could
do it better than I, and the King should give me thanks particularly in
it, and I could not get him to excuse me, but I must come to him though to
no purpose on Saturday, and that he is sure I will bring him some bargains
or other made upon this Act, it vexed me more than all the pleasure I took
before, for I find he will be troublesome to me in it, if I will let him
have as much of my time as he would have.  So late I took leave and in the
cold (the weather setting in cold) home to the office and, after my
letters being wrote, home to supper and to bed, my wife being also gone to
London.

13th.  Up betimes and finished my journall for five days back, and then
after being ready to my Lord Bruncker by appointment, there to order the
disposing of some money that we have come into the office, and here to my
great content I did get a bill of imprest to Captain Cocke to pay myself
in part of what is coming to me from him for my Lord Sandwich's
satisfaction and my owne, and also another payment or two wherein I am
concerned, and having done that did go to Mr. Pierce's, where he and his
wife made me drink some tea, and so he and I by water together to London.
Here at a taverne in Cornhill he and I did agree upon my delivering up to
him a bill of Captain Cocke's, put into my hand for Pierce's use upon
evening of reckonings about the prize goods, and so away to the 'Change,
and there hear the ill news, to my great and all our great trouble, that
the plague is encreased again this week, notwithstanding there hath been a
day or two great frosts; but we hope it is only the effects of the late
close warm weather, and if the frosts continue the next week, may fall
again; but the town do thicken so much with people, that it is much if the
plague do not grow again upon us.  Off the 'Change invited by Sheriff
Hooker, who keeps the poorest, mean, dirty table in a dirty house that
ever I did see any Sheriff of London; and a plain, ordinary, silly man I
think he is, but rich; only his son, Mr. Lethulier, I like, for a pretty,
civil, understanding merchant; and the more by much, because he happens to
be husband to our noble, fat, brave lady in our parish, that I and my wife
admire so.  Thence away to the Pope's Head Taverne, and there met first
with Captain Cocke, and dispatched my business with him to my content, he
being ready to sign his bill of imprest of L2,000, and gives it me in part
of his payment to me, which glads my heart.  He being gone, comes Sir W.
Warren, who advised with me about several things about getting money, and
L100 I shall presently have of him.  We advised about a business of
insurance, wherein something may be saved to him and got to me, and to
that end he and I did take a coach at night and to the Cockepitt, there to
get the Duke of Albemarle's advice for our insuring some of our Sounde
goods coming home under Harman's convoy, but he proved shy of doing it
without knowledge of the Duke of Yorke, so we back again and calling at my
house to see my wife, who is well; though my great trouble is that our
poor little parish is the greatest number this weeke in all the city
within the walls, having six, from one the last weeke; and so by water to
Greenwich leaving Sir W. Warren at home, and I straight to my Lord
Bruncker, it being late, and concluded upon insuring something and to send
to that purpose to Sir W. Warren to come to us to-morrow morning.  So I
home and, my mind in great rest, to bed.

14th.  Up, and to the office a while with my Lord Bruncker, where we
directed Sir W. Warren in the business of the insurance as I desired, and
ended some other businesses of his, and so at noon I to London, but the
'Change was done before I got thither, so I to the Pope's Head Taverne,
and there find Mr. Gawden and Captain Beckford and Nick Osborne going to
dinner, and I dined with them and very exceeding merry we were as I had
[not] been a great while, and dinner being done I to the East India House
and there had an assignment on Mr. Temple for the L2,000 of Cocke's, which
joyed my heart; so, having seen my wife in the way, I home by water and to
write my letters and then home to bed.

15th.  Up, and spent all the morning with my Surveyors of the Ports for
the Victualling, and there read to them what instructions I had provided
for them and discoursed largely much of our business and the business of
the pursers.  I left them to dine with my people, and to my Lord
Bruncker's where I met with a great good dinner and Sir T. Teddiman, with
whom my Lord and I were to discourse about the bringing of W. Howe to a
tryall for his jewells, and there till almost night, and so away toward
the office and in my way met with Sir James Bunce; and after asking what
newes, he cried "Ah!"  says he (I know [not] whether in earnest or jest),
"this is the time for you," says he, "that were for Oliver heretofore; you
are full of employment, and we poor Cavaliers sit still and can get
nothing;" which was a pretty reproach, I thought, but answered nothing to
it, for fear of making it worse.  So away and I to see Mrs. Penington, but
company being to come to her, I staid not, but to the office a little and
so home, and after supper to bed.

16th.  Up, and met at the office; Sir W. Batten with us, who come from
Portsmouth on Monday last, and hath not been with us to see or discourse
with us about any business till this day.  At noon to dinner, Sir W.
Warren with me on boat, and thence I by water, it being a fearfull cold,
snowing day to Westminster to White Hall stairs and thence to Sir G.
Downing, to whom I brought the happy newes of my having contracted, as we
did this day with Sir W. Warren, for a ship's lading of Norway goods here
and another at Harwich to the value of above L3,000, which is the first
that hath been got upon the New Act, and he is overjoyed with it and tells
me he will do me all the right to Court about it in the world, and I am
glad I have it to write to Sir W. Coventry to-night.  He would fain have
me come in L200 to lend upon the Act, but I desire to be excused in doing
that, it being to little purpose for us that relate to the King to do it,
for the sum gets the King no courtesy nor credit.  So I parted from him
and walked to Westminster Hall, where Sir W. Warren, who come along with
me, staid for me, and there I did see Betty Howlet come after the
sicknesse to the Hall.  Had not opportunity to salute her, as I desired,
but was glad to see her and a very pretty wench she is.  Thence back,
landing at the Old Swan and taking boat again at Billingsgate, and setting
ashore we home and I to the office .  .  .  .  and there wrote my letters,
and so home to supper and to bed, it being a great frost.  Newes is come
to-day of our Sounde fleete being come, but I do not know what Sir W.
Warren hath insured.

17th (Lord's day).  After being trimmed word brought me that Cutler's
coach is, by appointment, come to the Isle of Doggs for me, and so I over
the water; and in his coach to Hackney, a very fine, cold, clear, frosty
day.  At his house I find him with a plain little dinner, good wine, and
welcome.  He is still a prating man; and the more I know him, the less I
find in him.  A pretty house he hath here indeed, of his owne building.
His old mother was an object at dinner that made me not like it; and,
after dinner, to visit his sicke wife I did not also take much joy in, but
very friendly he is to me, not for any kindnesse I think he hath to any
man, but thinking me, I perceive, a man whose friendship is to be looked
after.  After dinner back again and to Deptford to Mr. Evelyn's, who was
not within, but I had appointed my cozen Thos. Pepys of Hatcham to meet me
there, to discourse about getting his L1000 of my Lord Sandwich, having
now an opportunity of my having above that sum in my hands of his.  I
found this a dull fellow still in all his discourse, but in this he is
ready enough to embrace what I counsel him to, which is, to write
importunately to my Lord and me about it and I will look after it. I do
again and again declare myself a man unfit to be security for such a sum.
He walked with me as far as Deptford upper towne, being mighty respectfull
to me, and there parted, he telling me that this towne is still very bad
of the plague.  I walked to Greenwich first, to make a short visit to my
Lord Bruncker, and next to Mrs. Penington and spent all the evening with
her with the same freedom I used to have and very pleasant company.  With
her till one of the clock in the morning and past, and so to my lodging to
bed, and

18th.  Betimes, up, it being a fine frost, and walked it to Redriffe,
calling and drinking at Half-way house, thinking, indeed, to have
overtaken some of the people of our house, the women, who were to walk the
same walke, but I could not.  So to London, and there visited my wife, and
was a little displeased to find she is so forward all of a spurt to make
much of her brother and sister since my last kindnesse to him in getting
him a place, but all ended well presently, and I to the 'Change and up and
down to Kingdon and the goldsmith's to meet Mr. Stephens, and did get all
my money matters most excellently cleared to my complete satisfaction.
Passing over Cornhill I spied young Mrs. Daniel and Sarah, my landlady's
daughter, who are come, as I expected, to towne, and did say they spied me
and I dogged them to St. Martin's, where I passed by them being shy, and
walked down as low as Ducke Lane and enquired for some Spanish books, and
so back again and they were gone. So to the 'Change, hoping to see them in
the streete, and missing them, went back again thither and back to the
'Change, but no sight of them, so went after my business again, and,
though late, was sent to by Sir W. Warren (who heard where I was) to
intreat me to come dine with him, hearing that I lacked a dinner, at the
Pope's Head; and there with Mr. Hinton, the goldsmith, and others, very
merry; but, Lord! to see how Dr. Hinton come in with a gallant or two from
Court, and do so call "Cozen" Mr. Hinton, the goldsmith, but I that know
him to be a beggar and a knave, did make great sport in my mind at it.

     [John Hinton, M.D., a strong royalist, who attended Henrietta Maria
     in her confinement at Exeter when she gave birth to the Princess
     Henrietta.  He was knighted by Charles II., and appointed physician
     in ordinary to the king and queen.  His knighthood was a reward for
     having procured a private advance of money from his kinsman, the
     goldsmith, to enable the Duke of Albemarle to pay the army (see
     "Memorial to King Charles II. from Sir John Hinton, A.D. 1679,"
     printed in Ellis's "Original Letters," 3rd series, vol. iv.,
     p  296).]

After dinner Sir W. Warren and I alone in another room a little while
talking about business, and so parted, and I hence, my mind full of
content in my day's worke, home by water to Greenwich, the river beginning
to be very full of ice, so as I was a little frighted, but got home well,
it being darke.  So having no mind to do any business, went home to my
lodgings, and there got little Mrs. Tooker, and Mrs. Daniel, the,
daughter, and Sarah to my chamber to cards and sup with me, when in comes
Mr. Pierce to me, who tells me how W. Howe has been examined on shipboard
by my Lord Bruncker to-day, and others, and that he has charged him out of
envy with sending goods under my Lord's seale and in my Lord Bruncker's
name, thereby to get them safe passage, which, he tells me, is false, but
that he did use my name to that purpose, and hath acknowledged it to my
Lord Bruncker, but do also confess to me that one parcel he thinks he did
use my Lord Bruncker's name, which do vexe me mightily that my name should
be brought in question about such things, though I did not say much to him
of my discontent till I have spoke with my Lord Bruncker about it.  So he
being gone, being to go to Oxford to-morrow, we to cards again late, and
so broke up, I having great pleasure with my little girle, Mrs. Tooker.

19th.  Up, and to the office, where all the morning.  At noon by agreement
comes Hatcham Pepys to dine with me.  I thought to have had him to Sir J.
Minnes to a good venison pasty with the rest of my fellows, being invited,
but seeing much company I went away with him and had a good dinner at
home.  He did give me letters he hath wrote to my Lord and Moore about my
Lord's money to get it paid to my cozen, which I will make good use of.  I
made mighty much of him, but a sorry dull fellow he is, fit for nothing
that is ingenious, nor is there a turd of kindnesse or service to be had
from him.  So I shall neglect him if I could get but him satisfied about
this money that I may be out of bonds for my Lord to him.  To see that
this fellow could desire me to helpe him to some employment, if it were
but of L100 per annum: when he is not worth less than, I believe, L20,000.
He gone, I to Sir J. Minnes, and thence with my Lord Bruncker on board the
Bezan to examine W. Howe again, who I find upon this tryall one of much
more wit and ingenuity in his answers than ever I expected, he being very
cunning and discreet and well spoken in them.  I said little to him or
concerning him; but, Lord! to see how he writes to me a-days, and styles
me "My Honour."  So much is a man subjected and dejected under afflictions
as to flatter me in that manner on this occasion.  Back with my Lord to
Sir J. Minnes, where I left him and the rest of a great deale of company,
and so I to my office, where late writing letters and then home to bed.

20th.  Up, and was trimmed, but not time enough to save my Lord Bruncker's
coach or Sir J. Minnes's, and so was fain to walk to Lambeth on foot, but
it was a very fine frosty walke, and great pleasure in it, but troublesome
getting over the River for ice.  I to the Duke of Albemarle, whither my
brethren were all come, but I was not too late. There we sat in discourse
upon our Navy business an houre, and thence in my Lord Bruncker's coach
alone, he walking before (while I staid awhile talking with Sir G. Downing
about the Act, in which he is horrid troublesome) to the Old Exchange.
Thence I took Sir Ellis Layton to Captain Cocke's, where my Lord Bruncker
and Lady Williams dine, and we all mighty merry; but Sir Ellis Layton one
of the best companions at a meale in the world.  After dinner I to the
Exchange to see whether my pretty seamstress be come again or no, and I
find she is, so I to her, saluted her over her counter in the open
Exchange above, and mightily joyed to see her, poor pretty woman!  I must
confess I think her a great beauty.  After laying out a little money there
for two pair of thread stockings, cost 8s., I to Lumbard Streete to see
some business to-night there at the goldsmith's, among others paying in
L1258 to Viner for my Lord Sandwich's use upon Cocke's account.  I was
called by my Lord Bruncker in his coach with his mistresse, and Mr. Cottle
the lawyer, our acquaintance at Greenwich, and so home to Greenwich, and
thence I to Mrs. Penington, and had a supper from the King's Head for her,
and there mighty merry and free as I used to be with her, and at last,
late, I did pray her to undress herself into her nightgowne, that I might
see how to have her picture drawne carelessly (for she is mighty proud of
that conceit), and I would walk without in the streete till she had done.
So I did walk forth, and whether I made too many turns or no in the darke
cold frosty night between the two walls up to the Parke gate I know not,
but she was gone to bed when I come again to the house, upon pretence of
leaving some papers there, which I did on purpose by her consent.  So I
away home, and was there sat up for to be spoken with my young Mrs.
Daniel, to pray me to speake for her husband to be a Lieutenant.  I had
the opportunity here of kissing her again and again, and did answer that I
would be very willing to do him any kindnesse, and so parted, and I to
bed, exceedingly pleased in all my matters of money this month or two, it
having pleased God to bless me with several opportunities of good sums,
and that I have them in effect all very well paid, or in my power to have.
But two things trouble me; one, the sicknesse is increased above 80 this
weeke (though in my owne parish not one has died, though six the last
weeke); the other, most of all, which is, that I have so complexed an
account for these last two months for variety of layings out upon Tangier,
occasions and variety of gettings that I have not made even with myself
now these 3 or 4 months, which do trouble me mightily, finding that I
shall hardly ever come to understand them thoroughly again, as I used to
do my accounts when I was at home.

21st.  At the office all the morning.  At noon all of us dined at Captain
Cocke's at a good chine of beef, and other good meat; but, being all
frost-bitten, was most of it unroast; but very merry, and a good dish of
fowle we dressed ourselves.  Mr. Evelyn there, in very good humour.  All
the afternoon till night pleasant, and then I took my leave of them and to
the office, where I wrote my letters, and away home, my head full of
business and some trouble for my letting my accounts go so far that I have
made an oathe this night for the drinking no wine, &c., on such penalties
till I have passed my accounts and cleared all.  Coming home and going to
bed, the boy tells me his sister Daniel has provided me a supper of little
birds killed by her husband, and I made her sup with me, and after supper
were alone a great while, and I had the pleasure of her lips, she being a
pretty woman, and one whom a great belly becomes as well as ever I saw
any.  She gone, I to bed.  This day I was come to by Mrs. Burrows, of
Westminster, Lieutenant Burrows (lately dead) his wife, a most pretty
woman and my old acquaintance; I had a kiss or two of her, and a most
modest woman she is.

22nd.  Up betimes and to my Lord Bruncker to consider the late
instructions sent us for the method of our signing bills hereafter and
paying them.  By and by, by agreement, comes Sir J. Minnes and Sir W.
Batten, and then to read them publicly and consider of putting them in
execution.  About this all the morning, and, it appearing necessary for
the Controller to have another Clerke, I recommended Poynter to him, which
he accepts, and I by that means rid of one that I fear would not have been
fit for my turne, though he writes very well.  At noon comes Mr. Hill to
towne, and finds me out here, and brings Mr. Houbland, who met him here.
So I was compelled to leave my Lord and his dinner and company, and with
them to the Beare, and dined with them and their brothers, of which Hill
had his and the other two of his, and mighty merry and very fine company
they are, and I glad to see them.  After dinner I forced to take leave of
them by being called upon by Mr. Andrews, I having sent for him, and by a
fine glosse did bring him to desire tallys for what orders I have to pay
him and his company for Tangier victualls, and I by that means cleared to
myself L210 coming to me upon their two orders, which is also a noble
addition to my late profits, which have been very considerable of late,
but how great I know not till I come to cast up my accounts, which burdens
my mind that it should be so backward, but I am resolved to settle to
nothing till I have done it.  He gone, I to my Lord Bruncker's, and there
spent the evening by my desire in seeing his Lordship open to pieces and
make up again his watch, thereby being taught what I never knew before;
and it is a thing very well worth my having seen, and am mightily pleased
and satisfied with it.  So I sat talking with him till late at night,
somewhat vexed at a snappish answer Madam Williams did give me to herself,
upon my speaking a free word to her in mirthe, calling her a mad jade.
She answered, we were not so well acquainted yet.  But I was more at a
letter from my Lord Duke of Albemarle to-day, pressing us to continue our
meetings for all Christmas, which, though every body intended not to have
done, yet I am concluded in it, who intended nothing else.  But I see it
is necessary that I do make often visits to my Lord Duke, which nothing
shall hinder after I have evened my accounts, and now the river is frozen
I know not how to get to him.  Thence to my lodging, making up my Journall
for 8 or 9 days, and so my mind being eased of it, I to supper and to bed.
The weather hath been frosty these eight or nine days, and so we hope for
an abatement of the plague the next weeke, or else God have mercy upon us!
for the plague will certainly continue the next year if it do not.

23rd.  At my office all the morning and home to dinner, my head full of
business, and there my wife finds me unexpectedly.  But I not being at
leisure to stay or talk with her, she went down by coach to Woolwich,
thinking to fetch Mrs. Barbary to carry her to London to keep her
Christmas with her, and I to the office.  This day one come to me with
four great turkies, as a present from Mr. Deane, at Harwich, three of
which my wife carried in the evening home with her to London in her coach
(Mrs. Barbary not being to be got so suddenly, but will come to her the
next week), and I at my office late, and then to my lodgings to bed.

24th (Sunday).  Up betimes, to my Lord Duke of Albemarle by water, and
after some talke with him about business of the office with great content,
and so back again and to dinner, my landlady and her daughters with me,
and had mince-pies, and very merry at a mischance her young son had in
tearing of his new coate quite down the outside of his sleeve in the whole
cloth, one of the strangest mishaps that ever I saw in my life. Then to
church, and placed myself in the Parson's pew under the pulpit, to hear
Mrs. Chamberlain in the next pew sing, who is daughter to Sir James Bunch,
of whom I have heard much, and indeed she sings very finely, and from
church met with Sir W. Warren and he and I walked together talking about
his and my businesses, getting of money as fairly as we can, and, having
set him part of his way home, I walked to my Lord Bruncker, whom I heard
was at Alderman Hooker's, hoping to see and salute Mrs. Lethulier, whom I
did see in passing, but no opportunity of beginning acquaintance, but a
very noble lady she is, however the silly alderman got her.  Here we sat
talking a great while, Sir The. Biddulph and Mr. Vaughan, a son-in-law of
Alderman Hooker's.  Hence with my Lord Bruncker home and sat a little with
him and so home to bed.

25th (Christmas-day).  To church in the morning, and there saw a wedding
in the church, which I have not seen many a day; and the young people so
merry one with another, and strange to see what delight we married people
have to see these poor fools decoyed into our condition, every man and
woman gazing and smiling at them.  Here I saw again my beauty Lethulier.
Thence to my Lord Bruncker's by invitation and dined there, and so home to
look over and settle my papers, both of my accounts private, and those of
Tangier, which I have let go so long that it were impossible for any soul,
had I died, to understand them, or ever come to any good end in them.  I
hope God will never suffer me to come to that disorder again.

26th.  Up, and to the office, where Sir J. Minnes and my Lord Bruncker and
I met, to give our directions to the Commanders of all the ships in the
river to bring in lists of their ships' companies, with entries,
discharges, &c., all the last voyage, where young Seymour, among 20 that
stood bare, stood with his hat on, a proud, saucy young man.  Thence with
them to Mr. Cuttle's, being invited, and dined nobly and neatly; with a
very pretty house and a fine turret at top, with winding stairs and the
finest prospect I know about all Greenwich, save the top of the hill, and
yet in some respects better than that.  Here I also saw some fine writing
worke and flourishing of Mr. Hore, he one that I knew long ago, an
acquaintance of Mr. Tomson's at Westminster, that is this man's clerk. It
is the story of the several Archbishops of Canterbury, engrossed in
vellum, to hang up in Canterbury Cathedrall in tables, in lieu of the old
ones, which are almost worn out.  Thence to the office a while, and so to
Captain Cocke's and there talked, and home to look over my papers, and so
to bed.

27th.  Up, and with Cocke, by coach to London, there home to my wife, and
angry about her desiring a mayde yet, before the plague is quite over. It
seems Mercer is troubled that she hath not one under her, but I will not
venture my family by increasing it before it be safe.  Thence about many
businesses, particularly with Sir W. Warren on the 'Change, and he and I
dined together and settled our Tangier matters, wherein I get above L200
presently.  We dined together at the Pope's Head to do this, and thence to
the goldsmiths, I to examine the state of my matters there too, and so
with him to my house, but my wife was gone abroad to Mrs. Mercer's, so we
took boat, and it being darke and the thaw having broke the ice, but not
carried it quite away, the boat did pass through so much of it all along,
and that with the crackling and noise that it made me fearfull indeed.  So
I forced the watermen to land us on Redriffe side, and so walked together
till Sir W. Warren and I parted near his house and thence I walked quite
over the fields home by light of linke, one of my watermen carrying it,
and I reading by the light of it, it being a very fine, clear, dry night.
So to Captain Cocke's, and there sat and talked, especially with his
Counsellor, about his prize goods, that hath done him good turne, being of
the company with Captain Fisher, his name Godderson; here I supped and so
home to bed, with great content that the plague is decreased to 152, the
whole being but 330.

28th.  Up and to the office, and thence with a great deal of business in
my head, dined alone with Cocke.  So home alone strictly about my
accounts, wherein I made a good beginning, and so, after letters wrote by
the post, to bed.

29th.  Up betimes, and all day long within doors upon my accounts,
publique and private, and find the ill effect of letting them go so long
without evening, that no soul could have ever understood them but myself,
and I with much ado.  But, however, my regularity in all I did and spent
do helpe me, and I hope to find them well.  Late at them and to bed.

30th.  Up and to the office, at noon home to dinner, and all the afternoon
to my accounts again, and there find myself, to my great joy, a great deal
worth above L4000, for which the Lord be praised! and is principally
occasioned by my getting L500 of Cocke, for my profit in his bargains of
prize goods, and from Mr. Gawden's making me a present of L500 more, when
I paid him 8000 for Tangier.  So to my office to write letters, then to my
accounts again, and so to bed, being in great ease of mind.

31st (Lord's day).  All the morning in my chamber, writing fair the state
of my Tangier accounts, and so dined at home.  In the afternoon to the
Duke of Albemarle and thence back again by water, and so to my chamber to
finish the entry of my accounts and to think of the business I am next to
do, which is the stating my thoughts and putting in order my collections
about the business of pursers, to see where the fault of our present
constitution relating to them lies and what to propose to mend it, and
upon this late and with my head full of this business to bed.  Thus ends
this year, to my great joy, in this manner.  I have raised my estate from
L1300 in this year to L4400.  I have got myself greater interest, I think,
by my diligence, and my employments encreased by that of Treasurer for
Tangier, and Surveyour of the Victualls.  It is true we have gone through
great melancholy because of the great plague, and I put to great charges
by it, by keeping my family long at Woolwich, and myself and another part
of my family, my clerks, at my charge at Greenwich, and a mayde at London;
but I hope the King will give us some satisfaction for that.  But now the
plague is abated almost to nothing, and I intending to get to London as
fast as I can.  My family, that is my wife and maids, having been there
these two or three weeks.  The Dutch war goes on very ill, by reason of
lack of money; having none to hope for, all being put into disorder by a
new Act that is made as an experiment to bring credit to the Exchequer,
for goods and money to be advanced upon the credit of that Act.  I have
never lived so merrily (besides that I never got so much) as I have done
this plague time, by my Lord Bruncker's and Captain Cocke's good company,
and the acquaintance of Mrs. Knipp, Coleman and her husband, and Mr.
Laneare, and great store of dancings we have had at my cost (which I was
willing to indulge myself and wife) at my lodgings. The great evil of this
year, and the only one indeed, is the fall of my Lord of Sandwich, whose
mistake about the prizes hath undone him, I believe, as to interest at
Court; though sent (for a little palliating it) Embassador into Spayne,
which he is now fitting himself for.  But the Duke of Albemarle goes with
the Prince to sea this next year, and my Lord very meanly spoken of; and,
indeed, his miscarriage about the prize goods is not to be excused, to
suffer a company of rogues to go away with ten times as much as himself,
and the blame of all to be deservedly laid upon him.

     [According to Granville Penn ("Memorials of Sir W. Penn," ii. 488 n.)
     L2000 went to Lord Sandwich and L8000 among eight others.]

My whole family hath been well all this while, and all my friends I know
of, saving my aunt Bell, who is dead, and some children of my cozen
Sarah's, of the plague.  But many of such as I know very well, dead; yet,
to our great joy, the town fills apace, and shops begin to be open again.
Pray God continue the plague's decrease! for that keeps the Court away
from the place of business, and so all goes to rack as to publick matters,
they at this distance not thinking of it.




     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     A most conceited fellow and not over much in him
     A pretty man, I would be content to break a commandment with him
     Among  many lazy people that the diligent man becomes necessary
     Delight to see these poor fools decoyed into our condition
     Great many silly stories they tell of their sport
     His enemies have done him as much good as he could wish
     How little merit do prevail in the world, but only favour
     I am a foole to be troubled at it, since I cannot helpe it
     L10,000 to the Prince, and half-a-crowne to my Lord of Sandwich
     Left him with some Commanders at the table taking tobacco
     One whom a great belly becomes as well as ever I saw any
     Pleases them mightily, and me not at all
     See how a good dinner and feasting reconciles everybody
     The boy is well, and offers to be searched





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Diary of Samuel Pepys,
November/December 1665, by Samuel Pepys

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***

***** This file should be named 4161.txt or 4161.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/4/1/6/4161/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
