The Project Gutenberg EBook of Diary of Samuel Pepys, March/April 1665/66
by Samuel Pepys

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Diary of Samuel Pepys, March/April 1665/66

Author: Samuel Pepys

Release Date: December 1, 2004 [EBook #4164]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***




Produced by David Widger





                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A. F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

   TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                              MARCH & APRIL
                                1665-1666

March 1st.  Up, and to the office and there all the morning sitting and at
noon to dinner with my Lord Bruncker, Sir W. Batten and Sir W. Pen at the
White Horse in Lumbard Streete, where, God forgive us!  good sport with
Captain Cocke's having his mayde sicke of the plague a day or two ago and
sent to the pest house, where she now is, but he will not say anything but
that she is well.  But blessed be God!  a good Bill this week we have;
being but 237 in all, and 42 of the plague, and of them but six in the
City: though my Lord Bruneker says, that these six are most of them in new
parishes where they were not the last week.  Here was with us also Mr.
Williamson, who the more I know, the more I honour.  Hence I slipt after
dinner without notice home and there close to my business at my office
till twelve at night, having with great comfort returned to my business by
some fresh vowes in addition to my former, and-more severe, and a great
joy it is to me to see myself in a good disposition to business.  So home
to supper and to my Journall and to bed.

2nd.  Up, as I have of late resolved before 7 in the morning and to the
office, where all the morning, among other things setting my wife and
Mercer with much pleasure to worke upon the ruling of some paper for the
making of books for pursers, which will require a great deale of worke and
they will earn a good deale of money by it, the hopes of which makes them
worke mighty hard.  At noon dined and to the office again, and about 4
o'clock took coach and to my Lord Treasurer's and thence to Sir Philip
Warwicke's new house by appointment, there to spend an houre in talking
and we were together above an hour, and very good discourse about the
state of the King as to money, and particularly in the point of the Navy.
He endeavours hard to come to a good understanding of Sir G. Carteret's
accounts, and by his discourse I find Sir G. Carteret must be brought to
it, and what a madman he is that he do not do it of himself, for the King
expects the Parliament will call upon him for his promise of giving an
account of the money, and he will be ready for it, which cannot be, I am
sure, without Sir G. Carteret's accounts be better understood than they
are.  He seems to have a great esteem of me and my opinion and thoughts of
things.  After we had spent an houre thus discoursing and vexed that we do
but grope so in the darke as we do, because the people, that should
enlighten us, do not helpe us, we resolved fitting some things for another
meeting, and so broke up.  He shewed me his house, which is yet all
unhung, but will be a very noble house indeed.  Thence by coach calling at
my bookseller's and carried home L10 worth of books, all, I hope, I shall
buy a great while.  There by appointment find Mr. Hill come to sup and
take his last leave of me, and by and by in comes Mr. James Houbland to
bear us company, a man I love mightily, and will not lose his
acquaintance.  He told me in my eare this night what he and his brothers
have resolved to give me, which is L200, for helping them out with two or
three ships.  A good sum and that which I did believe they would give me,
and I did expect little less.  Here we talked and very good company till
late, and then took leave of one another, and indeed I am heartily sorry
for Mr. Hill's leaving us, for he is a very worthy gentleman, as most I
know.  God give him a good voyage and successe in his business.  Thus we
parted and my wife and I to bed, heavy for the losse of our friend.

3rd.  All the morning at the office, at noon to the Old James, being sent
for, and there dined with Sir William Rider, Cutler, and others, to make
an end with two Scots Maisters about the freight of two ships of my Lord
Rutherford's.  After a small dinner and a little discourse I away to the
Crowne behind the Exchange to Sir W. Pen, Captain Cocke and Fen, about
getting a bill of Cocke's paid to Pen, in part for the East India goods he
sold us.  Here Sir W. Pen did give me the reason in my eare of his
importunity for money, for that he is now to marry his daughter.  God send
her better fortune than her father deserves I should wish him for a false
rogue.  Thence by coach to Hales's, and there saw my wife sit; and I do
like her picture mightily, and very like it will be, and a brave piece of
work.  But he do complain that her nose hath cost him as much work as
another's face, and he hath done it finely indeed.  Thence home and late
at the office, and then to bed.

4th (Lord's day).  And all day at my Tangier and private accounts, having
neglected them since Christmas, which I hope I shall never do again; for I
find the inconvenience of it, it being ten times the labour to remember
and settle things.  But I thank God I did it at last, and brought them all
fine and right; and I am, I thinke, by all appears to me (and I am sure I
cannot be L10 wrong), worth above L4600, for which the Lord be praised!
being the biggest sum I ever was worth yet.

5th.  I was at it till past two o'clock on Monday morning, and then read
my vowes, and to bed with great joy and content that I have brought my
things to so good a settlement, and now having my mind fixed to follow my
business again and sensible of Sir W. Coventry's jealousies, I doubt,
concerning me, partly my siding with Sir G. Carteret, and partly that
indeed I have been silent in my business of the office a great while, and
given but little account of myself and least of all to him, having not
made him one visitt since he came to towne from Oxford, I am resolved to
fall hard to it again, and fetch up the time and interest I have lost or
am in a fair way of doing it.  Up about eight o'clock, being called up by
several people, among others by Mr. Moone, with whom I went to Lumbard
Streete to Colvill, and so back again and in my chamber he and I did end
all our businesses together of accounts for money upon bills of Exchange,
and am pleased to find myself reputed a man of business and method, as he
do give me out to be.  To the 'Change at noon and so home to dinner. Newes
for certain of the King of Denmarke's declaring for the Dutch, and
resolution to assist them.  To the office, and there all the afternoon. In
the evening come Mr. James and brother Houblons to agree upon share
parties for their ships, and did acquaint me that they had paid my
messenger, whom I sent this afternoon for it, L200 for my friendship in
the business, which pleases me mightily.  They being gone I forth late to
Sir H. Viner's to take a receipt of them for the L200 lodged for me there
with them, and so back home, and after supper to bed.

6th.  Up betimes and did much business before office time.  Then to the
office and there till noon and so home to dinner and to the office again
till night.  In the evening being at Sir W. Batten's, stepped in (for I
have not used to go thither a good while), I find my Lord Bruncker and
Mrs. Williams, and they would of their own accord, though I had never
obliged them (nor my wife neither) with one visit for many of theirs, go
see my house and my wife; which I showed them and made them welcome with
wine and China oranges (now a great rarity since the war, none to be had).
There being also Captain Cocke and Mrs. Turner, who had never been in my
house since I come to the office before, and Mrs. Carcasse, wife of Mr.
Carcasses.  My house happened to be mighty clean, and did me great honour,
and they mightily pleased with it.  They gone I to the office and did some
business, and then home to supper and to bed.  My mind troubled through a
doubtfulness of my having incurred Sir W. Coventry's displeasure by not
having waited on him since his coming to towne, which is a mighty faulte
and that I can bear the fear of the bad effects of till I have been with
him, which shall be to-morrow, God willing.  So to bed.

7th.  Up betimes, and to St. James's, thinking Mr. Coventry had lain
there; but he do not, but at White Hall; so thither I went and had as good
a time as heart could wish, and after an houre in his chamber about
publique business he and I walked up, and the Duke being gone abroad we
walked an houre in the Matted Gallery: he of himself begun to discourse of
the unhappy differences between him and my Lord of Sandwich, and from the
beginning to the end did run through all passages wherein my Lord hath, at
any time, gathered any dissatisfaction, and cleared himself to me most
honourably; and in truth, I do believe he do as he says.  I did afterwards
purge myself of all partiality in the business of Sir G. Carteret, (whose
story Sir W. Coventry did also run over,) that I do mind the King's
interest, notwithstanding my relation to him; all which he declares he
firmly believes, and assures me he hath the same kindnesse and opinion of
me as ever.  And when I said I was jealous of myself, that having now come
to such an income as I am, by his favour, I should not be found to do as
much service as might deserve it; he did assure me, he thinks it not too
much for me, but thinks I deserve it as much as any man in England.  All
this discourse did cheer my heart, and sets me right again, after a good
deal of melancholy, out of fears of his disinclination to me, upon the
differences with my Lord Sandwich and Sir G. Carteret; but I am satisfied
throughly, and so went away quite another man, and by the grace of God
will never lose it again by my folly in not visiting and writing to him,
as I used heretofore to do.  Thence by coach to the Temple, and it being a
holyday, a fast-day, there 'light, and took water, being invited, and down
to Greenwich, to Captain Cocke's, where dined, he and Lord Bruncker, and
Matt. Wren, Boltele, and Major Cooper, who is also a very pretty
companion; but they all drink hard, and, after dinner, to gaming at cards.
So I provoked my Lord to be gone, and he and I to Mr. Cottle's and met
Mrs. Williams (without whom he cannot stir out of doors) and there took
coach and away home.  They carry me to London and set me down at the
Temple, where my mind changed and I home, and to writing and heare my boy
play on the lute, and a turne with my wife pleasantly in the garden by
moonshine, my heart being in great peace, and so home to supper and to
bed.  The King and Duke are to go to-morrow to Audly End, in order to the
seeing and buying of it of my Lord Suffolke.

8th.  Up betimes and to the office, where all the morning sitting and did
discover three or four fresh instances of Sir W. Pen's old cheating
dissembling tricks, he being as false a fellow as ever was born.  Thence
with Sir.  W. Batten and Lord Bruncker to the White Horse in Lumbard
Streete to dine with Captain Cocke, upon particular business of canvas to
buy for the King, and here by chance I saw the mistresse of the house I
have heard much of, and a very pretty woman she is indeed and her husband
the simplest looked fellow and old that ever I saw.  After dinner I took
coach and away to Hales's, where my wife is sitting; and, indeed, her face
and necke, which are now finished, do so please me that I am not myself
almost, nor was not all the night after in writing of my letters, in
consideration of the fine picture that I shall be master of.  Thence home
and to the office, where very late, and so home to supper and to bed.

9th.  Up, and being ready, to the Cockpitt to make a visit to the Duke of
Albemarle, and to my great joy find him the same man to me that [he has
been] heretofore, which I was in great doubt of, through my negligence in
not visiting of him a great while; and having now set all to rights there,
I am in mighty ease in my mind and I think shall never suffer matters to
run so far backward again as I have done of late, with reference to my
neglecting him and Sir W. Coventry.  Thence by water down to Deptford,
where I met my Lord Bruncker and Sir W. Batten by agreement, and to
measuring Mr. Castle's new third-rate ship, which is to be called the
Defyance.

     [William Castell wrote to the Navy Commissioners on February 17th,
     1665-66, to inform them that the "Defiance" had gone to Longreach,
     and again, on February 22nd, to say that Mr. Grey had no masts large
     enough for the new ship.  Sir William Batten on March 29th asked for
     the consent of the Board to bring the "Defiance" into dock ("
     Calendar of State Papers," Domestic, 1665-66, pp.  252, 262, 324).]

And here I had my end in saving the King some money and getting myself
some experience in knowing how they do measure ships.  Thence I left them
and walked to Redriffe, and there taking water was overtaken by them in
their boat, and so they would have me in with them to Castle's house,
where my Lady Batten and Madam Williams were, and there dined and a deale
of doings.  I had a good dinner and counterfeit mirthe and pleasure with
them, but had but little, thinking how I neglected my business.  Anon, all
home to Sir W. Batten's and there Mrs. Knipp coming we did spend the
evening together very merry.  She and I singing, and, God forgive me!  I
do still see that my nature is not to be quite conquered, but will esteem
pleasure above all things, though yet in the middle of it, it has
reluctances after my business, which is neglected by my following my
pleasure.  However musique and women I cannot but give way to, whatever my
business is.  They being gone I to the office a while and so home to
supper and to bed.

10th.  Up, and to the office, and there busy sitting till noon.  I find at
home Mrs. Pierce and Knipp come to dine with me.  We were mighty merry;
and, after dinner, I carried them and my wife out by coach to the New
Exchange, and there I did give my valentine, Mrs. Pierce, a dozen payre of
gloves, and a payre of silke stockings, and Knipp for company's sake,
though my wife had, by my consent, laid out 20s. upon her the other day,
six payre of gloves.  Thence to Hales's to have seen our pictures, but
could not get in, he being abroad, and so to the Cakehouse hard by, and
there sat in the coach with great pleasure, and eat some fine cakes and so
carried them to Pierces and away home.  It is a mighty fine witty boy,
Mrs. Pierces little boy.  Thence home and to the office, where late
writing letters and leaving a great deale to do on Monday, I home to
supper and to bed.  The truth is, I do indulge myself a little the more in
pleasure, knowing that this is the proper age of my life to do it; and out
of my observation that most men that do thrive in the world, do forget to
take pleasure during the time that they are getting their estate, but
reserve that till they have got one, and then it is too late for them to
enjoy it with any pleasure.

11th (Lord's day).  Up, and by water to White Hall, there met Mr. Coventry
coming out, going along with the Commissioners of the Ordnance to the
water side to take barge, they being to go down to the Hope.  I returned
with them as far as the Tower in their barge speaking with Sir W. Coventry
and so home and to church, and at noon dined and then to my chamber, where
with great pleasure about one business or other till late, and so to
supper and to bed.

12th.  Up betimes, and called on by abundance of people about business,
and then away by water to Westminster, and there to the Exchequer about
some business, and thence by coach calling at several places, to the Old
Exchange, and there did much business, and so homeward and bought a silver
salt for my ordinary table to use, and so home to dinner, and after dinner
comes my uncle and aunt Wight, the latter I have not seen since the
plague; a silly, froward, ugly woman she is.  We made mighty much of them,
and she talks mightily of her fear of the sicknesse, and so a deale of
tittle tattle and I left them and to my office where late, and so home to
supper and to bed.  This day I hear my Uncle Talbot Pepys died the last
week, and was buried.  All the news now is, that Sir Jeremy Smith is at
Cales--[Cadiz]--with his fleete, and Mings in the Elve.--[Elbe]--The King
is come this noon to towne from Audly End, with the Duke of Yorke and a
fine train of gentlemen.

13th.  Up betimes, and to the office, where busy sitting all the morning,
and I begin to find a little convenience by holding up my head to Sir W.
Pen, for he is come to be more supple.  At noon to dinner, and then to the
office again, where mighty business, doing a great deale till midnight and
then home to supper and to bed.  The plague encreased this week 29 from
28, though the total fallen from 238 to 207, which do never a whit please
me.

14th.  Up, and met by 6 o'clock in my chamber Mr. Povy (from White Hall)
about evening reckonings between him and me, on our Tangier business, and
at it hard till toward eight o'clock, and he then carried me in his
chariot to White Hall, where by and by my fellow officers met me, and we
had a meeting before the Duke.  Thence with my Lord Bruncker towards
London, and in our way called in Covent Garden, and took in Sir John
(formerly Dr.) Baber; who hath this humour that he will not enter into
discourse while any stranger is in company, till he be told who he is that
seems a stranger to him.  This he did declare openly to me, and asked my
Lord who I was, giving this reason, that he has been inconvenienced by
being too free in discourse till he knew who all the company were.  Thence
to Guildhall (in our way taking in Dr. Wilkins), and there my Lord and I
had full and large discourse with Sir Thomas Player, the Chamberlain of
the City (a man I have much heard of for his credit and punctuality in the
City, and on that score I had a desire to be made known to him), about the
credit of our tallys, which are lodged there for security to such as
should lend money thereon to the use of the Navy.  And I had great
satisfaction therein: and the truth is, I find all our matters of credit
to be in an ill condition.  Thence, I being in a little haste walked
before and to the 'Change a little and then home, and presently to Trinity
house to dinner, where Captain Cox made his Elder Brother's dinner.  But
it seemed to me a very poor sorry dinner.  I having many things in my head
rose, when my belly was full, though the dinner not half done, and home
and there to do some business, and by and by out of doors and met Mr. Povy
coming to me by appointment, but it being a little too late, I took a
little pride in the streete not to go back with him, but prayed him to
come another time, and I away to Kate Joyce's, thinking to have spoke to
her husband about Pall's business, but a stranger, the Welsh Dr. Powell,
being there I forebore and went away and so to Hales's, to see my wife's
picture, which I like mighty well, and there had the pleasure to see how
suddenly he draws the Heavens, laying a darke ground and then lightening
it when and where he will. Thence to walk all alone in the fields behind
Grayes Inne, making an end of reading over my dear "Faber fortunae," of my
Lord Bacon's, and thence, it growing dark, took two or three wanton turns
about the idle places and lanes about Drury Lane, but to no satisfaction,
but a great fear of the plague among them, and so anon I walked by
invitation to Mrs. Pierces, where I find much good company, that is to
say, Mrs. Pierce, my wife, Mrs. Worshipp and her daughter, and Harris the
player, and Knipp, and Mercer, and Mrs. Barbary Sheldon, who is come this
day to spend a weeke with my wife; and here with musique we danced, and
sung and supped, and then to sing and dance till past one in the morning;
and much mirthe with Sir Anthony Apsley and one Colonell Sidney, who lodge
in the house; and above all, they are mightily taken with Mrs. Knipp.
Hence weary and sleepy we broke up, and I and my company homeward by coach
and to bed.

15th.  Lay till it was full time to rise, it being eight o'clock, and so
to the office and there sat till almost three o'clock and then to dinner,
and after dinner (my wife and Mercer and Mrs. Barbary being gone to
Hales's before), I and my cozen Anthony Joyce, who come on purpose to
dinner with me, and he and I to discourse of our proposition of marriage
between Pall and Harman, and upon discourse he and I to Harman's house and
took him to a taverne hard by, and we to discourse of our business, and I
offered L500, and he declares most ingenuously that his trade is not to be
trusted on, that he however needs no money, but would have her money
bestowed on her, which I like well, he saying that he would adventure 2 or
L300 with her.  I like him as a most good-natured, and discreet man, and,
I believe, very cunning.  We come to this conclusion for us to meete one
another the next weeke, and then we hope to come to some end, for I did
declare myself well satisfied with the match.  Thence to Hales's, where I
met my wife and people; and do find the picture, above all things, a most
pretty picture, and mighty like my wife; and I asked him his price: he
says L14, and the truth is, I think he do deserve it.  Thence toward
London and home, and I to the office, where I did much, and betimes to
bed, having had of late so little sleep, and there slept

16th.  Till 7 this morning.  Up and all the morning about the Victualler's
business, passing his account.  At noon to the 'Change, and did several
businesses, and thence to the Crowne behind the 'Change and dined with my
Lord Bruncker and Captain Cocke and Fenn, and Madam Williams, who without
question must be my Lord's wife, and else she could not follow him
wherever he goes and kisse and use him publiquely as she do.  Thence to
the office, where Sir W. Pen and I made an end of the Victualler's
business, and thence abroad about several businesses, and so in the
evening back again, and anon called on by Mr. Povy, and he and I staid
together in my chamber till 12 at night ending our reckonings and giving
him tallys for all I was to pay him and so parted, and I to make good my
Journall for two or three days, and begun it till I come to the other
side, where I have scratched so much, for, for want of sleep, I begun to
write idle and from the purpose.  So forced to breake off, and to
bed.--[There are several erasures in the original MS.]

17th.  Up, and to finish my Journall, which I had not sense enough the
last night to make an end of, and thence to the office, where very busy
all the morning.  At noon home to dinner and presently with my wife out to
Hales's, where I am still infinitely pleased with my wife's picture. I
paid him L14 for it, and 25s. for the frame, and I think it is not a whit
too deare for so good a picture.  It is not yet quite finished and dry, so
as to be fit to bring home yet.  This day I begun to sit, and he will make
me, I think, a very fine picture.  He promises it shall be as good as my
wife's, and I sit to have it full of shadows, and do almost break my neck
looking over my shoulder to make the posture for him to work by.  Thence
home and to the office, and so home having a great cold, and so my wife
and Mrs. Barbary have very great ones, we are at a loss how we all come by
it together, so to bed, drinking butter-ale.  This day my W. Hewer comes
from Portsmouth and gives me an instance of another piece of knavery of
Sir W. Pen, who wrote to Commissioner Middleton, that it was my negligence
the other day he was not acquainted, as the board directed, with our
clerks coming down to the pay.  But I need no new arguments to teach me
that he is a false rogue to me and all the world besides.

18th (Lord's day).  Up and my cold better, so to church, and then home to
dinner, and so walked out to St. James's Church, thinking to have seen
faire Mrs. Butler, but could not, she not being there, nor, I believe,
lives thereabouts now.  So walked to Westminster, very fine fair dry
weather, but all cry out for lack of rain.  To Herbert's and drank, and
thence to Mrs. Martin's, and did what I would with her; her husband going
for some wine for us.  The poor man I do think would take pains if I can
get him a purser's place, which I will endeavour.  She tells me as a
secret that Betty Howlet of the Hall, my little sweetheart, that I used to
call my second wife, is married to a younger son of Mr. Michell's (his
elder brother, who should have had her, being dead this plague), at which
I am glad, and that they are to live nearer me in Thames Streete, by the
Old Swan.  Thence by coach home and to my chamber about some accounts, and
so to bed.  Sir Christopher Mings is come home from Hambro without
anything done, saving bringing home some pipestaves for us.

19th.  Up betimes and upon a meeting extraordinary at the office most of
the morning with Lord Bruncker, Sir W. Coventry, and Sir W. Pen, upon the
business of the accounts.  Where now we have got almost as much as we
would have we begin to lay all on the Controller, and I fear he will be
run down with it, for he is every day less and less capable of doing
business.  Thence with my Lord Bruncker, Sir W. Coventry to the ticket
office, to see in what little order things are there, and there it is a
shame to see how the King is served.  Thence to the Chamberlain of London,
and satisfy ourselves more particularly how much credit we have there,
which proves very little.  Thence to Sir Robert Long's, absent. About much
the same business, but have not the satisfaction we would have there
neither.  So Sir W. Coventry parted, and my Lord and I to Mrs. Williams's,
and there I saw her closett, where indeed a great many fine things there
are, but the woman I hate.  Here we dined, and Sir J. Minnes come to us,
and after dinner we walked to the King's play-house, all in dirt, they
being altering of the stage to make it wider.  But God knows when they
will begin to act again; but my business here was to see the inside of the
stage and all the tiring-rooms and machines; and, indeed, it was a sight
worthy seeing.  But to see their clothes, and the various sorts, and what
a mixture of things there was; here a wooden-leg, there a ruff, here a
hobbyhorse, there a crown, would make a man split himself to see with
laughing; and particularly Lacy's wardrobe, and Shotrell's. But then
again, to think how fine they show on the stage by candle-light, and how
poor things they are to look now too near hand, is not pleasant at all.
The machines are fine, and the paintings very pretty.  Thence mightily
satisfied in my curiosity I away with my Lord to see him at her house
again, and so take leave and by coach home and to the office, and thence
sent for to Sir G. Carteret by and by to the Broad Streete, where he and I
walked two or three hours till it was quite darke in his gallery talking
of his affairs, wherein I assure him all will do well, and did give him
(with great liberty, which he accepted kindly) my advice to deny the Board
nothing they would aske about his accounts, but rather call upon them to
know whether there was anything more they desired, or was wanting.  But
our great discourse and serious reflections was upon the bad state of the
kingdom in general, through want of money and good conduct, which we fear
will undo all.  Thence mightily satisfied with this good fortune of this
discourse with him I home, and there walked in the darke till 10 o'clock
at night in the garden with Sir W. Warren, talking of many things
belonging to us particularly, and I hope to get something considerably by
him before the year be over.  He gives me good advice of circumspection in
my place, which I am now in great mind to improve; for I think our office
stands on very ticklish terms, the Parliament likely to sit shortly and
likely to be asked more money, and we able to give a very bad account of
the expence of what we have done with what they did give before.  Besides,
the turning out the prize officers may be an example for the King giving
us up to the Parliament's pleasure as easily, for we deserve it as much.
Besides, Sir G. Carteret did tell me tonight how my Lord Bruncker himself,
whose good-will I could have depended as much on as any, did himself to
him take notice of the many places I have; and though I was a painful man,
yet the Navy was enough for any man to go through with in his owne single
place there, which much troubles me, and shall yet provoke me to more and
more care and diligence than ever.  Thence home to supper, where I find my
wife and Mrs. Barbary with great colds, as I also at this time have.  This
day by letter from my father he propounds a match in the country for Pall,
which pleased me well, of one that hath seven score and odd pounds land
per annum in possession, and expects L1000 in money by the death of an old
aunt.  He hath neither father, mother, sister, nor brother, but demands
L600 down, and L100 on the birth of first child, which I had some
inclination to stretch to.  He is kinsman to, and lives with, Mr.
Phillips, but my wife tells me he is a drunken, ill-favoured, ill-bred
country fellow, which sets me off of it again, and I will go on with
Harman.  So after supper to bed.

20th.  Up and to the office, where busy all the morning.  At noon dined in
haste, and so my wife, Mrs. Barbary, Mercer, and I by coach to Hales's,
where I find my wife's picture now perfectly finished in all respects, and
a beautiful picture it is, as almost I ever saw.  I sat again, and had a
great deale done, but, whatever the matter is, I do not fancy that it has
the ayre of my face, though it will be a very fine picture.  Thence home
and to my business, being post night, and so home to supper and to, bed.

21st.  Up betimes, and first by coach to my Lord Generall to visitt him,
and then to the Duke of Yorke, where we all met and did our usual business
with him; but, Lord! how everything is yielded to presently, even by Sir
W. Coventry, that is propounded by the Duke, as now to have Troutbecke,
his old surgeon, and intended to go Surgeon-General of the fleete, to go
Physician-General of the fleete, of which there never was any precedent in
the world, and he for that to have L20 per month. Thence with Lord
Bruncker to Sir Robert Long, whom we found in his closett, and after some
discourse of business he fell to discourse at large and pleasant, and
among other things told us of the plenty of partridges in France, where he
says the King of France and his company killed with their guns, in the
plain de Versailles, 300 and odd partridges at one bout.  Thence I to the
Excise Office behind the 'Change, and there find our business of our
tallys in great disorder as to payment, and thereupon do take a resolution
of thinking how to remedy it, as soon as I can.  Thence home, and there
met Sir W. Warren, and after I had eat a bit of victuals (he staying in
the office) he and I to White Hall.  He to look after the business of the
prize ships which we are endeavouring to buy, and hope to get money by
them.  So I to London by coach and to Gresham College, where I staid half
an houre, and so away home to my office, and there walking late alone in
the darke in the garden with Sir W. Warren, who tells me that at the
Committee of the Lords for the prizes to-day, there passed very high words
between my Lord Ashly and Sir W. Coventry, about our business of the prize
ships.  And that my Lord Ashly did snuff and talk as high to him, as he
used to do to any ordinary seaman.  And that Sir W. Coventry did take it
very quietly, but yet for all did speak his mind soberly and with reason,
and went away, saying, he had done his duty therein, and so left it to
them, whether they would let so many ships go for masts or not: Here he
and I talked of 1,000 businesses, all profitable discourse, and late
parted, and I home to supper and to bed, troubled a little at a letter
from my father, telling me how [he] is like to be sued for a debt of
Tom's, by Smith, the mercer.

22nd.  Up, and to the office all the morning.  At noon my wife being gone
to her father's I dined with Sir W. Batten, he inviting me.  After dinner
to my office close, and did very much business, and so late home to supper
and to bed.  The plague increased four this week, which troubles me,
though but one in the whole.

23rd.  Up, and going out of my dressing-room, when ready to go down
stairs, I spied little Mrs. Tooker, my pretty little girle, which, it
seems, did come yesterday to our house to stay a little while with us, but
I did not know of it till now.  I was glad of her coming, she being a very
pretty child, and now grown almost a woman.  I out by six o'clock by
appointment to Hales's, where we fell to my picture presently very hard,
and it comes on a very fine picture, and very merry, pleasant discourse we
had all the morning while he was painting.  Anon comes my wife and Mercer
and little Tooker, and having done with me we all to a picture drawer's
hard by, Hales carrying me to see some landskipps of a man's doing.  But I
do not [like] any of them, save only a piece of fruit, which indeed was
very fine.  Thence I to Westminster, to the Chequer, about a little
business, and then to the Swan, and there sent for a bit of meat and
dined; and after dinner had opportunity of being pleased with Sarah; and
so away to Westminster Hall, and there Mrs. Michell tells me with great
joy how little Betty Howlett is married to her young son Michell, which is
a pretty odd thing, that he should so soon succeed in the match to his
elder brother that died of the plague, and to the house and trade intended
for him, and more they say that the girle has heretofore said that she did
love this little one more than the other brother that was intended her all
along.  I am mighty glad of this match, and more that they are likely to
live near me in Thames Streete, where I may see Betty now and then, whom I
from a girle did use to call my second wife, and mighty pretty she is.
Thence by coach to Anthony Joyce to receive Harman's answer, which did
trouble me to receive, for he now demands L800, whereas he never made
exception at the portion, but accepted of L500.  This I do not like; but,
however, I cannot much blame the man, if he thinks he can get more of
another than of me.  So home and hard to my business at the office, where
much business, and so home to supper and to bed.

24th.  Up and to the office, where all the morning.  At noon home to
dinner, where Anthony Joyce, and I did give my final answer, I would give
but L500 with my sister, and did show him the good offer made us in the
country, to which I did now more and more incline, and intend to pursue
that.  After dinner I to White Hall to a Committee for Tangier, where the
Duke of Yorke was, and I acquitted myself well in what I had to do. After
the Committee up, I had occasion to follow the Duke into his lodgings,
into a chamber where the Duchesse was sitting to have her picture drawn by
Lilly, who was there at work.  But I was well pleased to see that there
was nothing near so much resemblance of her face in his work, which is now
the second, if not the third time, as there was of my wife's at the very
first time.  Nor do I think at last it can be like, the lines not being in
proportion to those of her face.  So home, and to the office, where late,
and so to bed.

25th (Lady day and Sunday).  Up, and to my chamber in my gowne all the
morning about settling my papers there.  At noon to dinner, where my
wife's brother, whom I sent for to offer making him a Muster-Master and
send to sea, which the poore man likes well of and will go, and it will be
a good preferment to him, only hazardous.  I hope he will prove a good
discreet man.  After dinner to my papers and Tangier accounts again till
supper, and after supper again to them, but by my mixing them, I know not
how, my private and publique accounts, it makes me mad to see how hard it
is to bring them to be understood, and my head is confounded, that though
I did sweare to sit up till one o'clock upon them, yet, I fear, it will be
to no purpose, for I cannot understand what I do or have been doing of
them to-day.

26th.  Up, and a meeting extraordinary there was of Sir W. Coventry, Lord
Bruncker, and myself, about the business of settling the ticket office,
where infinite room is left for abusing the King in the wages of seamen.
Our [meeting] being done, my Lord Bruncker and I to the Tower, to see the
famous engraver, to get him to grave a seale for the office.  And did see
some of the finest pieces of work in embossed work, that ever I did see in
my life, for fineness and smallness of the images thereon, and I will
carry my wife thither to shew them her.  Here I also did see bars of gold
melting, which was a fine sight.  So with my Lord to the Pope's Head
Taverne in Lumbard Streete to dine by appointment with Captain Taylor,
whither Sir W. Coventry come to us, and were mighty merry, and I find
reason to honour him every day more and more.  Thence alone to Broade
Street to Sir G. Carteret by his desire to confer with him, who is I find
in great pain about the business of the office, and not a little, I
believe, in fear of falling there, Sir W. Coventry having so great a pique
against him, and herein I first learn an eminent instance how great a man
this day, that nobody would think could be shaken, is the next overthrown,
dashed out of countenance, and every small thing of irregularity in his
business taken notice of, where nobody the other day durst cast an eye
upon them, and next I see that he that the other day nobody durst come
near is now as supple as a spaniel, and sends and speaks to me with great
submission, and readily hears to advice.  Thence home to the office, where
busy late, and so home a little to my accounts publique and private, but
could not get myself rightly to know how to dispose of them in order to
passing.

27th.  All the morning at the office busy.  At noon dined at home, Mr.
Cooke, our old acquaintance at my Lord Sandwich's, come to see and dine
with me, but I quite out of humour, having many other and better things to
thinke of.  Thence to the office to settle my people's worke and then home
to my publique accounts of Tangier, which it is strange by meddling with
evening reckonings with Mr. Povy lately how I myself am become intangled
therein, so that after all I could do, ready to breake my head and brains,
I thought of another way, though not so perfect, yet the only one which
this account is capable of.  Upon this latter I sat up till past two in
the morning and then to bed.

28th.  Up, and with Creed, who come hither betimes to speake with me about
his accounts, to White Hall by water, mighty merry in discourse, though I
had been very little troubled with him, or did countenance it, having now,
blessed be God!  a great deale of good business to mind to better purpose
than chatting with him.  Waited on the Duke, after that walked with Sir W.
Clerke into St. James's Parke, and by and by met with Mr. Hayes, Prince
Rupert's Secretary, who are mighty, both, briske blades, but I fear they
promise themselves more than they expect.  Thence to the Cockpitt, and
dined with a great deal of company at the Duke of Albemarle's, and a bad
and dirty, nasty dinner.  So by coach to Hales's, and there sat again, and
it is become mighty like.  Hither come my wife and Mercer brought by Mrs.
Pierce and Knipp, we were mighty merry and the picture goes on the better
for it.  Thence set them down at Pierces, and we home, where busy and at
my chamber till 12 at night, and so to bed. This night, I am told, the
Queene of Portugall, the mother to our Queene, is lately dead, and newes
brought of it hither this day.

     [Donna Luiza, the Queen Regent of Portugal.  She was daughter of the
     Duke de Medina Sidonia and widow of Juan IV. The Court wore the
     deepest mourning on this occasion.  The ladies were directed to wear
     their hair plain, and to appear without spots on their faces, the
     disfiguring fashion of patching having just been introduced.--
     Strickland s Queens of England, vol. viii., p. 362.]

29th.  All the morning hard at the office.  At noon dined and then out to
Lumbard Streete, to look after the getting of some money that is lodged
there of mine in Viner's hands, I having no mind to have it lie there
longer.  So back again and to the office, where and at home about publique
and private business and accounts till past 12 at night, and so to bed.
This day, poor Jane, my old, little Jane, came to us again, to my wife's
and my great content, and we hope to take mighty pleasure in her, she
having all the marks and qualities of a good and loving and honest
servant, she coming by force away from the other place, where she hath
lived ever since she went from us, and at our desire, her late mistresse
having used all the stratagems she could to keepe her.

30th.  My wife and I mighty pleased with Jane's coming to us again.  Up,
and away goes Alce, our cooke-mayde, a good servant, whom we loved and did
well by her, and she an excellent servant, but would not bear being told
of any faulte in the fewest and kindest words and would go away of her
owne accord, after having given her mistresse warning fickly for a quarter
of a yeare together.  So we shall take another girle and make little Jane
our cook, at least, make a trial of it.  Up, and after much business I out
to Lumbard Streete, and there received L2200 and brought it home; and,
contrary to expectation, received L35 for the use of L2000 of it [for] a
quarter of a year, where it hath produced me this profit, and hath been a
convenience to me as to care and security of my house, and demandable at
two days' warning, as this hath been.  This morning Sir W. Warren come to
me a second time about having L2000 of me upon his bills on the Act to
enable him to pay for the ships he is buying, wherein I shall have
considerable profit.  I am loth to do it, but yet speaking with Colvill I
do not see but I shall be able to do it and get money by it too.  Thence
home and eat one mouthful, and so to Hales's, and there sat till almost
quite darke upon working my gowne, which I hired to be drawn in; an Indian
gowne, and I do see all the reason to expect a most excellent picture of
it.  So home and to my private accounts in my chamber till past one in the
morning, and so to bed, with my head full of thoughts for my evening of
all my accounts tomorrow, the latter end of the month, in which God give
me good issue, for I never was in such a confusion in my life and that in
great sums.

31st All the morning at the office busy.  At noon to dinner, and thence to
the office and did my business there as soon as I could, and then home and
to my accounts, where very late at them, but, Lord!  what a deale of do I
have to understand any part of them, and in short do what I could, I could
not come to any understanding of them, but after I had throughly wearied
myself, I was forced to go to bed and leave them much against my will and
vowe too, but I hope God will forgive me, for I have sat up these four
nights till past twelve at night to master them, but cannot. Thus ends
this month, with my head and mind mighty full and disquiett because of my
accounts, which I have let go too long, and confounded my publique with my
private that I cannot come to any liquidating of them. However, I do see
that I must be grown richer than I was by a good deale last month.  Busy
also I am in thoughts for a husband for my sister, and to that end my wife
and I have determined that she shall presently go into the country to my
father and mother, and consider of a proffer made them for her in the
country, which, if she likes, shall go forward.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                  APRIL
                                  1666

April 1st (Lord's day).  Up and abroad, and by coach to Charing Cross, to
wait on Sir Philip Howard; whom I found in bed: and he do receive me very
civilly.  My request was about suffering my wife's brother to go to sea,
and to save his pay in the Duke's guards; which after a little difficulty
he did with great respect agree to.  I find him a very fine-spoken
gentleman, and one of great parts, and very courteous.  Much pleased with
this visit I to White Hall, where I met Sir G. Downing, and to discourse
with him an houre about the Exchequer payments upon the late Act, and
informed myself of him thoroughly in my safety in lending L2000 to Sir W.
Warren, upon an order of his upon the Exchequer for L2602 and I do purpose
to do it.  Thence meeting Dr. Allen, the physician, he and I and another
walked in the Parke, a most pleasant warm day, and to the Queene's
chappell; where I do not so dislike the musique.  Here I saw on a post an
invitation to all good Catholiques to pray for the soul of such a one
departed this life.  The Queene, I hear, do not yet hear of the death of
her mother, she being in a course of physique, that they dare not tell it
her.  At noon by coach home, and there by invitation met my uncle and aunt
Wight and their cozen Mary, and dined with me and very merry.  After
dinner my uncle and I abroad by coach to White Hall, up and down the
house, and I did some business and thence with him and a gentleman he met
with to my Lord Chancellor's new house, and there viewed it again and
again and up to the top and I like it as well as ever and think it a most
noble house.  So all up and down my Lord St. Albans his new building and
market-house, and the taverne under the market-house, looking to and again
into every place of building, and so away and took coach and home, where
to my accounts, and was at them till I could not hold open my eyes, and so
to bed.  I this afternoon made a visit to my Lady Carteret, whom I
understood newly come to towne; and she took it mighty kindly, but I see
her face and heart are dejected from the condition her husband's matters
stand in.  But I hope they will do all well enough.  And I do comfort her
as much as I can, for she is a noble lady.

2nd.  Up, and to the office and thence with Mr. Gawden to Guildhall to see
the bills and tallys there in the chamber (and by the way in the streete
his new coach broke and we fain to take an old hackney).  Thence to the
Exchequer again to inform myself of some other points in the new Act in
order to my lending Sir W. Warren L2000 upon an order of his upon the Act,
which they all encourage me to.  There walking with Mr. Gawden in
Westminster Hall, he and I to talke from one business to another and at
last to the marriage of his daughter.  He told me the story of Creed's
pretences to his daughter, and how he would not believe but she loved him,
while his daughter was in great passion on the other hand against him.
Thence to talke of his son Benjamin; and I propounded a match for him, and
at last named my sister, which he embraces heartily, and speaking of the
lowness of her portion, that it would be less than L1000, he tells me if
every thing else agrees, he will out of what he means to give me yearly,
make a portion for her shall cost me nothing more than I intend freely.
This did mightily rejoice me and full of it did go with him to London to
the 'Change; and there did much business and at the Coffee-house with Sir
W. Warren, who very wisely did shew me that my matching my sister with Mr.
Gawden would undo me in all my places, everybody suspecting me in all I
do; and I shall neither be able to serve him, nor free myself from
imputation of being of his faction, while I am placed for his severest
check.  I was convinced that it would be for neither of our interests to
make this alliance, and so am quite off of it again, but with great
satisfaction in the motion.  Thence to the Crowne tavern behind the
Exchange to meet with Cocke and Fenn and did so, and dined with them, and
after dinner had the intent of our meeting, which was some private
discourse with Fenn, telling him what I hear and think of his business,
which he takes very kindly and says he will look about him.  It was about
his giving of ill language and answers to people that come to him about
money and some other particulars.  This morning Mrs. Barbary and little
Mrs. Tooker went away homeward.  Thence my wife by coach calling me at
White Hall to visit my Lady Carteret, and she was not within.  So to
Westminster Hall, where I purposely tooke my wife well dressed into the
Hall to see and be seen; and, among others, [met] Howlet's daughter, who
is newly married, and is she I call wife, and one I love mightily.  So to
Broad Streete and there met my Lady and Sir G. Carteret, and sat and
talked with them a good while and so home, and to my accounts which I
cannot get through with.  But at it till I grew drowsy, and so to bed
mightily vexed that I can come to no better issue in my accounts.

3rd.  Up, and Sir W. Warren with me betimes and signed a bond, and
assigned his order on the Exchequer to a blank for me to fill and I did
deliver him L1900.  The truth is, it is a great venture to venture so much
on the Act, but thereby I hedge in L300 gift for my service about some
ships that he hath bought, prizes, and good interest besides, and his bond
to repay me the money at six weeks' warning.  So to the office, where busy
all the morning.  At noon home to dinner, and there my brother Balty dined
with me and my wife, who is become a good serious man, and I hope to do
him good being sending him a Muster-Master on one of the squadrons of the
fleete.  After dinner and he gone I to my accounts hard all the afternoon
till it was quite darke, and I thank God I do come to bring them very
fairly to make me worth L5,000 stocke in the world, which is a great mercy
to me.  Though I am a little troubled to find L50 difference between the
particular account I make to myself of my profits and loss in each month
and the account which I raise from my acquittances and money which I have
at the end of every month in my chest and other men's hands.  However I do
well believe that I am effectually L5,000, the greatest sum I ever was in
my life yet, and this day I have as I have said before agreed with Sir W.
Warren and got of him L300 gift.  At night a while to the office and then
home and supped and to my accounts again till I was ready to sleepe, there
being no pleasure to handle them, if they are not kept in good order.  So
to bed.

4th.  Up, and with Sir W. Pen in his coach to White Hall, in his way
talking simply and fondly as he used to do, but I find myself to slight
him and his simple talke, I thank God, and that my condition will enable
me to do it.  Thence, after doing our business with the Duke of Yorke,
with Captain Cocke home to the 'Change in his coach.  He promises me
presently a dozen of silver salts, and proposes a business for which he
hath promised Mrs. Williams for my Lord Bruncker a set of plate shall cost
him L500 and me the like, which will be a good business indeed. After done
several businesses at the 'Change I home, and being washing day dined upon
cold meate, and so abroad by coach to Hales's, and there sat till night,
mightily pleased with my picture, which is now almost finished.  So by
coach home, it being the fast day and to my chamber and so after supper to
bed, consulting how to send my wife into the country to advise about
Pall's marriage, which I much desire, and my father too, and two or three
offers are now in hand.

5th.  Up, and before office time to Lumbard Streete, and there at Viner's
was shewn the silver plates, made for Captain Cocke to present my Lord
Bruncker; and I chose a dozen of the same weight to be bespoke for myself,
which he told me yesterday he would give me on the same occasion. To the
office, where the falsenesse and impertinencies of Sir W. Pen would make a
man mad to think of.  At noon would have avoided, but could not, dining
with my Lord Bruncker and his mistresse with Captain Cocke at the Sun
Taverne in Fish Streete, where a good dinner, but the woman do tire me,
and indeed how simply my Lord Bruncker, who is otherwise a wise man, do
proceed at the table in serving of Cocke, without any means of
understanding in his proposal, or defence when proposed, would make a man
think him a foole.  After dinner home, where I find my wife hath on a
sudden, upon notice of a coach going away to-morrow, taken a resolution of
going in it to Brampton, we having lately thought it fit for her to go to
satisfy herself and me in the nature of the fellow that is there proposed
to my sister.  So she to fit herself for her journey and I to the office
all the afternoon till late, and so home and late putting notes to "It is
decreed, nor shall thy fate, &c." and then to bed.  The plague is, to our
great grief, encreased nine this week, though decreased a few in the
total.  And this encrease runs through many parishes, which makes us much
fear the next year.

6th.  Up mighty betimes upon my wife's going this day toward Brampton.  I
could not go to the coach with her, but W. Hewer did and hath leave from
me to go the whole day's journey with her.  All the morning upon business
at the office, and at noon dined, and Mrs. Hunt coming lent her L5 on her
occasions and so carried her to Axe Yard end at Westminster and there left
her, a good and understanding woman, and her husband I perceive thrives
mightily in his business of the Excise.  Thence to Mr. Hales and there
sat, and my picture almost finished, which by the word of Mr. and Mrs.
Pierce (who come in accidently) is mighty like, and I am sure I am
mightily pleased both in the thing and the posture.  Thence with them home
a little, and so to White Hall and there met by agreement with Sir Stephen
Fox and Mr. Ashburnham, and discoursed the business of our Excise tallys;
the former being Treasurer of the guards, and the other Cofferer of the
King's household.  I benefitted much by their discourse.  We come to no
great conclusion upon our discourse, but parted, and I home, where all
things, methinks, melancholy in the absence of my wife.  This day great
newes of the Swedes declaring for us against the Dutch, and, so far as
that, I believe it.  After a little supper to bed.

7th.  Lay pretty long to-day, lying alone and thinking of several
businesses.  So up to the office and there till noon.  Thence with my Lord
Bruncker home by coach to Mrs. Williams's, where Bab. Allen and Dr.
Charleton dined.  Bab and I sang and were mighty merry as we could be
there, where the rest of the company did not overplease.  Thence took her
by coach to Hales's, and there find Mrs. Pierce and her boy and Mary. She
had done sitting the first time, and indeed her face is mighty like at
first dash.  Thence took them to the cakehouse, and there called in the
coach for cakes and drank, and thence I carried them to my Lord
Chancellor's new house to shew them that, and all mightily pleased, thence
set each down at home, and so I home to the office, where about ten of the
clock W. Hewer comes to me to tell me that he has left my wife well this
morning at Bugden, which was great riding, and brings me a letter from
her.  She is very well got thither, of which I am heartily glad.  After
writing several letters, I home to supper and to bed.  The Parliament of
which I was afraid of their calling us of the Navy to an account of the
expense of money and stores and wherein we were so little ready to give
them a good answer [will soon meet].  The Bishop of Munster, every body
says, is coming to peace with the Dutch, we having not supplied him with
the money promised him.

8th (Lord's day).  Up, and was in great trouble how to get a passage to
White Hall, it raining, and no coach to be had.  So I walked to the Old
Swan, and there got a scull.  To the Duke of Yorke, where we all met to
hear the debate between Sir Thomas Allen and Mr. Wayth; the former
complaining of the latter's ill usage of him at the late pay of his ship.
But a very sorry poor occasion he had for it.  The Duke did determine it
with great judgement, chiding both, but encouraging Wayth to continue to
be a check to all captains in any thing to the King's right.  And, indeed,
I never did see the Duke do any thing more in order, nor with more
judgement than he did pass the verdict in this business.  The Court full
this morning of the newes of Tom Cheffin's death, the King's
closett-keeper.  He was well last night as ever, flaying at tables in the
house, and not very ill this morning at six o'clock, yet dead before
seven: they think, of an imposthume in his breast.  But it looks fearfully
among people nowadays, the plague, as we hear, encreasing every where
again.  To the Chappell, but could not get in to hear well.  But I had the
pleasure once in my life to see an Archbishop (this was of Yorke) in a
pulpit.  Then at a loss how to get home to dinner, having promised to
carry Mrs. Hunt thither.  At last got my Lord Hinchingbroke's coach, he
staying at Court; and so took her up in Axe-yard, and home and dined. And
good discourse of the old matters of the Protector and his family, she
having a relation to them.  The Protector

     [Richard Cromwell subsequently returned to England, and resided in
     strict privacy at Cheshunt for some years before his death in 1712]

lives in France: spends about L500 per annum.  Thence carried her home
again and then to Court and walked over to St. James's Chappell, thinking
to have heard a Jesuite preach, but come too late.  So got a hackney and
home, and there to business.  At night had Mercer comb my head and so to
supper, sing a psalm, and to bed.

9th.  Up betimes, and with my Joyner begun the making of the window in my
boy's chamber bigger, purposing it shall be a roome to eat and for having
musique in.  To the office, where a meeting upon extraordinary business,
at noon to the 'Change about more, and then home with Creed and dined, and
then with him to the Committee of Tangier, where I got two or three things
done I had a mind to of convenience to me.  Thence by coach to Mrs.
Pierce's, and with her and Knipp and Mrs. Pierce's boy and girle abroad,
thinking to have been merry at Chelsey; but being come almost to the house
by coach near the waterside, a house alone, I think the Swan, a gentleman
walking by called to us to tell us that the house was shut up of the
sicknesse.  So we with great affright turned back, being holden to the
gentleman; and went away (I for my part in great disorder) for Kensington,
and there I spent about 30s. upon the jades with great pleasure, and we
sang finely and staid till about eight at night, the night coming on apace
and so set them down at Pierce's, and so away home, where awhile with Sir
W. Warren about business, and then to bed,

10th.  Up betimes, and many people to me about business.  To the office
and there sat till noon, and then home and dined, and to the office again
all the afternoon, where we sat all, the first time of our resolution to
sit both forenoons and afternoons.  Much business at night and then home,
and though late did see some work done by the plasterer to my new window
in the boy's chamber plastered.  Then to supper, and after having my head
combed by the little girle to bed.  Bad news that the plague is decreased
in the general again and two increased in the sickness.

11th.  To White Hall, having first set my people to worke about setting me
rails upon the leads of my wife's closett, a thing I have long designed,
but never had a fit opportunity till now.  After having done with the Duke
of Yorke, I to Hales's, where there was nothing found to be done more to
my picture, but the musique, which now pleases me mightily, it being
painted true.  Thence home, and after dinner to Gresham College, where a
great deal of do and formality in choosing of the Council and Officers.  I
had three votes to be of the Council, who am but a stranger, nor expected
any.  So my Lord Bruncker being confirmed President I home, where I find
to my great content my rails up upon my leads.  To the office and did a
little business, and then home and did a great jobb at my Tangier
accounts, which I find are mighty apt to run into confusion, my head also
being too full of other businesses and pleasures.  This noon Bagwell's
wife come to me to the office, after her being long at Portsmouth.  After
supper, and past 12 at night to bed.

12th.  Up and to the office, where all the morning.  At noon dined at home
and so to my office again, and taking a turne in the garden my Lady Pen
comes to me and takes me into her house, where I find her daughter and a
pretty lady of her acquaintance, one Mrs. Lowder, sister, I suppose, of
her servant Lowder's, with whom I, notwithstanding all my resolution to
follow business close this afternoon, did stay talking and playing the
foole almost all the afternoon, and there saw two or three foolish sorry
pictures of her doing, but very ridiculous compared to what my wife do.
She grows mighty homely and looks old.  Thence ashamed at myself for this
losse of time, yet not able to leave it, I to the office, where my Lord
Bruncker come; and he and I had a little fray, he being, I find, a very
peevish man, if he be denied what he expects, and very simple in his
argument in this business (about signing a warrant for paying Sir Thos.
Allen L1000 out of the groats); but we were pretty good friends before we
parted, and so we broke up and I to the writing my letters by the post,
and so home to supper and to bed.

13th.  Up, being called up by my wife's brother, for whom I have got a
commission from the Duke of Yorke for Muster-Master of one of the
divisions, of which Harman is Rere-Admirall, of which I am glad as well as
he.  After I had acquainted him with it, and discoursed a little of it, I
went forth and took him with me by coach to the Duke of Albemarle, who
being not up, I took a walk with Balty into the Parke, and to the Queene's
Chappell, it being Good Friday, where people were all upon their knees
very silent; but, it seems, no masse this day.  So back and waited on the
Duke and received some commands of his, and so by coach to Mr. Hales's,
where it is pretty strange to see that his second doing, I mean the second
time of her sitting, is less like Mrs. Pierce than the first, and yet I am
confident will be most like her, for he is so curious that I do not see
how it is possible for him to mistake.  Here he and I presently resolved
of going to White Hall, to spend an houre in the galleries there among the
pictures, and we did so to my great satisfaction, he shewing me the
difference in the payntings, and when I come more and more to distinguish
and observe the workmanship, I do not find so many good things as I
thought there was, but yet great difference between the works of some and
others; and, while my head and judgment was full of these, I would go back
again to his house to see his pictures, and indeed, though, I think, at
first sight some difference do open, yet very inconsiderably but that I
may judge his to be very good pictures. Here we fell into discourse of my
picture, and I am for his putting out the Landskipp, though he says it is
very well done, yet I do judge it will be best without it, and so it shall
be put out, and be made a plain sky like my wife's picture, which will be
very noble.  Thence called upon an old woman in Pannier Ally to agree for
ruling of some paper for me and she will do it pretty cheap.  Here I found
her have a very comely black mayde to her servant, which I liked very
well.  So home to dinner and to see my joiner do the bench upon my leads
to my great content.  After dinner I abroad to carry paper to my old
woman, and so to Westminster Hall, and there beyond my intention or design
did see and speak with Betty Howlett, at her father's still, and it seems
they carry her to her own house to begin the world with her young husband
on Monday next, Easter Monday.  I please myself with the thoughts of her
neighbourhood, for I love the girl mightily.  Thence home, and thither
comes Mr. Houblon and a brother, with whom I evened for the charter
parties of their ships for Tangier, and paid them the third advance on
their freight to full satisfaction, and so, they being gone, comes Creed
and with him till past one in the morning, evening his accounts till my
head aked and I was fit for nothing, however, coming at last luckily to
see through and settle all to my mind, it did please me mightily, and so
with my mind at rest to bed, and he with me and hard to sleep.

14th.  Up about seven and finished our papers, he and I, and I delivered
him tallys and some money and so away I to the office, where we sat all
the morning.  At noon dined at home and Creed with me, then parted, and I
to the office, and anon called thence by Sir H. Cholmley and he and I to
my chamber, and there settled our matters of accounts, and did give him
tallys and money to clear him, and so he being gone and all these accounts
cleared I shall be even with the King, so as to make a very clear and
short account in a very few days, which pleases me very well. Here he and
I discoursed a great while about Tangier, and he do convince me, as things
are now ordered by my Lord Bellasses and will be by Norwood (men that do
only mind themselves), the garrison will never come to any thing, and he
proposes his owne being governor, which in truth I do think will do very
well, and that he will bring it to something.  He gone I to my office,
where to write letters late, and then home and looked over a little more
my papers of accounts lately passed, and so to bed.

15th (Easter Day).  Up and by water to Westminster to the Swan to lay down
my cloak, and there found Sarah alone, with whom after I had staid awhile
I to White Hall Chapel, and there coming late could hear nothing of the
Bishop of London's sermon.  So walked into the Park to the Queene's
chappell, and there heard a good deal of their mass, and some of their
musique, which is not so contemptible, I think, as our people would make
it, it pleasing me very well; and, indeed, better than the anthem I heard
afterwards at White Hall, at my coming back.  I staid till the King went
down to receive the Sacrament, and stood in his closett with a great many
others, and there saw him receive it, which I did never see the manner of
before.  But I do see very little difference between the degree of the
ceremonies used by our people in the administration thereof, and that in
the Roman church, saving that methought our Chappell was not so fine, nor
the manner of doing it so glorious, as it was in the Queene's chappell.
Thence walked to Mr. Pierces, and there dined, I alone with him and her
and their children: very good company and good discourse, they being able
to tell me all the businesses of the Court; the amours and the mad doings
that are there; how for certain Mrs. Stewart do do everything with the
King that a mistress should do; and that the King hath many bastard
children that are known and owned, besides the Duke of Monmouth.  After a
great deale of this discourse I walked thence into the Parke with her
little boy James with me, who is the wittiest boy and the best company in
the world, and so back again through White Hall both coming and going, and
people did generally take him to be my boy and some would aske me.  Thence
home to Mr. Pierce again; and he being gone forth, she and I and the
children out by coach to Kensington, to where we were the other day, and
with great pleasure stayed till night; and were mighty late getting home,
the horses tiring and stopping at every twenty steps. By the way we
discoursed of Mrs. Clerke, who, she says, is grown mighty high, fine, and
proud, but tells me an odd story how Captain Rolt did see her the other
day accost a gentleman in Westminster Hall and went with him, and he
dogged them to Moorefields to a little blind bawdy house, and there staid
watching three hours and they come not out, so could stay no longer but
left them there, and he is sure it was she, he knowing her well and
describing her very clothes to Mrs. Pierce, which she knows are what she
wears.  Seeing them well at home I homeward, but the horses at Ludgate
Hill made a final stop; so there I 'lighted, and with a linke, it being
about 10 o'clock, walked home, and after singing a Psalm or two and supped
to bed.

16th.  Up, and set my people, Mercer, W. Hewer, Tom and the girle at work
at ruling and stitching my ruled book for the Muster-Masters, and I hard
toward the settling of my Tangier accounts.  At noon dined alone, the girl
Mercer taking physique can eat nothing, and W. Hewer went forth to dinner.
So up to my accounts again, and then comes Mrs. Mercer and fair Mrs.
Turner, a neighbour of hers that my wife knows by their means, to visit
me.  I staid a great while with them, being taken with this pretty woman,
though a mighty silly, affected citizen woman she is.  Then I left them to
come to me at supper anon, and myself out by coach to the old woman in
Pannyer Alley for my ruled papers, and they are done, and I am much more
taken with her black maid Nan.  Thence further to Westminster, thinking to
have met Mrs. Martin, but could not find her, so back and called at
Kirton's to borrow 10s. to pay for my ruled papers, I having not money in
my pocket enough to pay for them.  But it was a pretty consideration that
on this occasion I was considering where I could with most confidence in a
time of need borrow 10s., and I protest I could not tell where to do it
and with some trouble and fear did aske it here.  So that God keepe me
from want, for I shall be in a very bad condition to helpe myself if ever
I should come to want or borrow.  Thence called for my papers and so home,
and there comes Mrs. Turner and Mercer and supped with me, and well
pleased I was with their company, but especially Mrs. Turner's, she being
a very pretty woman of person and her face pretty good, the colour of her
haire very fine and light.  They staid with me talking till about eleven
o'clock and so home, W. Hewer, who supped with me, leading them home.  So
I to bed.

17th.  Up, and to the office, where all the morning.  At noon dined at
home, my brother Balty with me, who is fitting himself to go to sea.  So
after dinner to my accounts and did proceed a good way in settling them,
and thence to the office, where all the afternoon late, writing my letters
and doing business, but, Lord! what a conflict I had with myself, my heart
tempting me 1000 times to go abroad about some pleasure or other,
notwithstanding the weather foule.  However I reproached myself with my
weaknesse in yielding so much my judgment to my sense, and prevailed with
difficulty and did not budge, but stayed within, and, to my great content,
did a great deale of business, and so home to supper and to bed.  This day
I am told that Moll Davis, the pretty girle, that sang and danced so well
at the Duke's house, is dead.

18th.  [Up] and by coach with Sir W. Batten and Sir Thos. Allen to White
Hall, and there after attending the Duke as usual and there concluding of
many things preparatory to the Prince and Generall's going to sea on
Monday next, Sir W. Batten and Sir T. Allen and I to Mr. Lilly's, the
painter's; and there saw the heads, some finished, and all begun, of the
Flaggmen in the late great fight with the Duke of Yorke against the Dutch.
The Duke of Yorke hath them done to hang in his chamber, and very finely
they are done indeed.  Here is the Prince's, Sir G. Askue's, Sir Thomas
Teddiman's, Sir Christopher Mings, Sir Joseph Jordan, Sir William
Barkeley, Sir Thomas Allen, and Captain Harman's, as also the Duke of
Albemarle's; and will be my Lord Sandwich's, Sir W. Pen's, and Sir Jeremy
Smith's.  Being very well satisfied with this sight, and other good
pictures hanging in the house, we parted, and I left them, and [to] pass
away a little time went to the printed picture seller's in the way thence
to the Exchange, and there did see great plenty of fine prints; but did
not buy any, only a print of an old pillar in Rome made for a Navall
Triumph,

     [The columna rostrata erected in the Forum to C. Duilius, who
     obtained a triumph for the first naval victory over the
     Carthaginians, B.C. 261.  Part of the column was discovered in the
     ruins of the Forum near the Arch of Septimius, and transferred to
     the Capitol.--B.]

which for the antiquity of the shape of ships, I buy and keepe.  Thence to
the Exchange, that is, the New Exchange, and looked over some play books
and intend to get all the late new plays.  So to Westminster, and there at
the Swan got a bit of meat and dined alone; and so away toward King's
Street, and spying out of my coach Jane that lived heretofore at Jevons,
my barber's, I went a little further and stopped, and went on foot back,
and overtook her, taking water at Westminster Bridge, and spoke to her,
and she telling me whither she was going I over the water and met her at
Lambeth, and there drank with her; she telling me how he that was so long
her servant, did prove to be a married man, though her master told me
(which she denies) that he had lain with her several times in his house.
There left her 'sans essayer alcune cose con elle', and so away by boat to
the 'Change, and took coach and to Mr. Hales, where he would have
persuaded me to have had the landskipp stand in my picture, but I like it
not and will have it otherwise, which I perceive he do not like so well,
however is so civil as to say it shall be altered.  Thence away to Mrs.
Pierces, who was not at home, but gone to my house to visit me with Mrs.
Knipp.  I therefore took up the little girle Betty and my mayde Mary that
now lives there and to my house, where they had been but were gone, so in
our way back again met them coming back again to my house in Cornehill,
and there stopped laughing at our pretty misfortunes, and so I carried
them to Fish Streete, and there treated them with prawns and lobsters, and
it beginning to grow darke we away, but the jest is our horses would not
draw us up the Hill, but we were fain to 'light and stay till the coachman
had made them draw down to the bottom of the Hill, thereby warming their
legs, and then they came up cheerfully enough, and we got up and I carried
them home, and coming home called at my paper ruler's and there found
black Nan, which pleases me mightily, and having saluted her again and
again away home and to bed .  .  .  .  .  In all my ridings in the coach
and intervals my mind hath been full these three weeks of setting in
musique "It is decreed, &c."

19th.  Lay long in bed, so to the office, where all the morning.  At noon
dined with Sir W. Warren at the Pope's Head.  So back to the office, and
there met with the Commissioners of the Ordnance, where Sir W. Pen being
almost drunk vexed me, and the more because Mr. Chichly observed it with
me, and it was a disparagement to the office.  They gone I to my office.
Anon comes home my wife from Brampton, not looked for till Saturday, which
will hinder me of a little pleasure, but I am glad of her coming. She
tells me Pall's business with Ensum is like to go on, but I must give, and
she consents to it, another 100. She says she doubts my father is in want
of money, for rents come in mighty slowly.  My mother grows very
unpleasant and troublesome and my father mighty infirm through his old
distemper, which altogether makes me mighty thoughtfull.  Having heard all
this and bid her welcome I to the office, where late, and so home, and
after a little more talk with my wife, she to bed and I after her.

20th.  Up, and after an houre or two's talke with my poor wife, who gives
me more and more content every day than other, I abroad by coach to
Westminster, and there met with Mrs. Martin, and she and I over the water
to Stangold, and after a walke in the fields to the King's Head, and there
spent an houre or two with pleasure with her, and eat a tansy and so
parted, and I to the New Exchange, there to get a list of all the modern
plays which I intend to collect and to have them bound up together.
Thence to Mr. Hales's, and there, though against his particular mind, I
had my landskipp done out, and only a heaven made in the roome of it,
which though it do not please me thoroughly now it is done, yet it will do
better than as it was before.  Thence to Paul's Churchyarde, and there
bespoke some new books, and so to my ruling woman's and there did see my
work a doing, and so home and to my office a little, but was hindered of
business I intended by being sent for to Mrs. Turner, who desired some
discourse with me and lay her condition before me, which is bad and poor.
Sir Thomas Harvey intends again to have lodgings in her house, which she
prays me to prevent if I can, which I promised.  Thence to talke generally
of our neighbours.  I find she tells me the faults of all of them, and
their bad words of me and my wife, and indeed do discover more than I
thought.  So I told her, and so will practise that I will have nothing to
do with any of them.  She ended all with a promise of shells to my wife,
very fine ones indeed, and seems to have great respect and honour for my
wife.  So home and to bed.

21st. Up betimes and to the office, there to prepare some things against
the afternoon for discourse about the business of the pursers and settling
the pursers' matters of the fleete according to my proposition. By and by
the office sat, and they being up I continued at the office to finish my
matters against the meeting before the Duke this afternoon, so home about
three to clap a bit of meate in my mouth, and so away with Sir W. Batten
to White Hall, and there to the Duke, but he being to go abroad to take
the ayre, he dismissed us presently without doing any thing till to-morrow
morning.  So my Lord Bruncker and I down to walk in the garden [at White
Hall], it being a mighty hot and pleasant day; and there was the King,
who, among others, talked to us a little; and among other pretty things,
he swore merrily that he believed the ketch that Sir W. Batten bought the
last year at Colchester was of his own getting, it was so thick to its
length.  Another pleasant thing he said of Christopher Pett, commending
him that he will not alter his moulds of his ships upon any man's advice;
"as," says he, "Commissioner Taylor I fear do of his New London, that he
makes it differ, in hopes of mending the Old London, built by him."
"For," says he, "he finds that God hath put him into the right, and so
will keep in it while he is in."  "And," says the King, "I am sure it must
be God put him in, for no art of his owne ever could have done it;" for it
seems he cannot give a good account of what he do as an artist.  Thence
with my Lord Bruncker in his coach to Hide Parke, the first time I have
been there this year.  There the King was; but I was sorry to see my Lady
Castlemaine, for the mourning forceing all the ladies to go in black, with
their hair plain and without any spots, I find her to be a much more
ordinary woman than ever I durst have thought she was; and, indeed, is not
so pretty as Mrs. Stewart, whom I saw there also.  Having done at the Park
he set me down at the Exchange, and I by coach home and there to my
letters, and they being done, to writing a large letter about the business
of the pursers to Sir W. Batten against to-morrow's discourse, and so home
and to bed.

22nd (Lord's day).  Up, and put on my new black coate, long down to my
knees, and with Sir W. Batten to White Hall, where all in deep mourning
for the Queene's mother.  There had great discourse, before the Duke and
Sir W. Coventry begun the discourse of the day about the purser's
business, which I seconded, and with great liking to the Duke, whom
however afterward my Lord Bruncker and Sir W. Pen did stop by some thing
they said, though not much to the purpose, yet because our proposition had
some appearance of certain charge to the King it was ruled that for this
year we should try another the same in every respect with ours, leaving
out one circumstance of allowing the pursers the victuals of all men short
of the complement.  I was very well satisfied with it and am contented to
try it, wishing it may prove effectual.  Thence away with Sir W. Batten in
his coach home, in our way he telling me the certaine newes, which was
afterward confirmed to me this day by several, that the Bishopp of Munster
has made a league [with] the Hollanders, and that our King and Court are
displeased much at it: moreover we are not sure of Sweden.  I home to my
house, and there dined mighty well, my poor wife and Mercer and I.  So
back again walked to White Hall, and there to and again in the Parke, till
being in the shoemaker's stockes.--[A cant expression for tight shoes.]--I
was heartily weary, yet walked however to the Queene's Chappell at St.
James's, and there saw a little mayde baptized; many parts and words
whereof are the same with that of our Liturgy, and little that is more
ceremonious than ours.  Thence walked to Westminster and eat a bit of
bread and drank, and so to Worster House, and there staid, and saw the
Council up, and then back, walked to the Cockepitt, and there took my
leave of the Duke of Albemarle, who is going to-morrow to sea.  He seems
mightily pleased with me, which I am glad of; but I do find infinitely my
concernment in being careful to appear to the King and Duke to continue my
care of his business, and to be found diligent as I used to be.  Thence
walked wearily as far as Fleet Streete and so there met a coach and home
to supper and to bed, having sat a great while with Will Joyce, who come
to see me, and it is the first time I have seen him at my house since the
plague, and find him the same impertinent, prating coxcombe that ever he
was.

23rd.  Being mighty weary last night, lay long this morning, then up and
to the office, where Sir W. Batten, Lord Bruncker and I met, and toward
noon took coach and to White Hall, where I had the opportunity to take
leave of the Prince, and again of the Duke of Albemarle; and saw them kiss
the King's hands and the Duke's; and much content, indeed, there seems to
be in all people at their going to sea, and [they] promise themselves much
good from them.  This morning the House of Parliament do meet, only to
adjourne again till winter.  The plague, I hear, encreases in the towne
much, and exceedingly in the country everywhere.  Thence walked to
Westminster Hall, and after a little stay, there being nothing now left to
keep me there, Betty Howlett being gone, I took coach and away home, in my
way asking in two or three places the worth of pearles, I being now come
to the time that I have long ago promised my wife a necklace.  Dined at
home and took Balty with me to Hales's to show him his sister's picture,
and thence to Westminster, and there I to the Swan and drank, and so back
again alone to Hales's and there met my wife and Mercer, Mrs. Pierce being
sitting, and two or three idle people of her acquaintance more standing
by.  Her picture do come on well.  So staid until she had done and then
set her down at home, and my wife and I and the girle by coach to
Islington, and there eat and drank in the coach and so home, and there
find a girle sent at my desire by Mrs. Michell of Westminster Hall, to be
my girle under the cooke-mayde, Susan.  But I am a little dissatisfied
that the girle, though young, is taller and bigger than Su, and will not,
I fear, be under her command, which will trouble me, and the more because
she is recommended by a friend that I would not have any unkindness with,
but my wife do like very well of her.  So to my accounts and journall at
my chamber, there being bonfires in the streete, for being St. George's
day, and the King's Coronation, and the day of the Prince and Duke's going
to sea.  So having done my business, to bed.

24th.  Up, and presently am told that the girle that came yesterday hath
packed up her things to be gone home again to Enfield, whence she come,
which I was glad of, that we might be at first rid of her altogether
rather than be liable to her going away hereafter.  The reason was that
London do not agree with her.  So I did give her something, and away she
went.  By and by comes Mr. Bland to me, the first time since his coming
from Tangier, and tells me, in short, how all things are out of order
there, and like to be; and the place never likely to come to anything
while the soldiers govern all, and do not encourage trade.  He gone I to
the office, where all the morning, and so to dinner, and there in the
afternoon very busy all day till late, and so home to supper and to bed.

25th.  Up, and to White Hall to the Duke as usual, and did our business
there.  So I away to Westminster (Batty with me, whom I had presented to
Sir W. Coventry) and there told Mrs. Michell of her kinswoman's running
away, which troubled her.  So home, and there find another little girle
come from my wife's mother, likely to do well.  After dinner I to the
office, where Mr. Prin come to meet about the Chest business; and till
company come, did discourse with me a good while alone in the garden about
the laws of England, telling me the many faults in them; and among others,
their obscurity through multitude of long statutes, which he is about to
abstract out of all of a sort; and as he lives, and Parliaments come, get
them put into laws, and the other statutes repealed, and then it will be a
short work to know the law, which appears a very noble good thing.  By and
by Sir W. Batten and Sir W. Rider met with us, and we did something to
purpose about the Chest, and hope we shall go on to do so. They up, I to
present Batty to Sir W. Pen, who at my entreaty did write a most obliging
letter to Harman to use him civilly, but the dissembling of the rogue is
such, that it do not oblige me at all.  So abroad to my ruler's of my
books, having, God forgive me! a mind to see Nan there, which I did, and
so back again, and then out again to see Mrs. Bettons, who were looking
out of the window as I come through Fenchurch Streete. So that indeed I am
not, as I ought to be, able to command myself in the pleasures of my eye.
So home, and with my wife and Mercer spent our evening upon our new leads
by our bedchamber singing, while Mrs. Mary Batelier looked out of the
window to us, and we talked together, and at last bid good night.
However, my wife and I staid there talking of several things with great
pleasure till eleven o'clock at night, and it is a convenience I would not
want for any thing in the world, it being, methinks, better than almost
any roome in my house.  So having, supped upon the leads, to bed.  The
plague, blessed be God! is decreased sixteen this week.

26th.  To the office, where all the morning.  At noon home to dinner, and
in the afternoon to my office again, where very busy all the afternoon and
particularly about fitting of Mr. Yeabsly's accounts for the view of the
Lords Commissioners for Tangier.  At night home to supper and to bed.

27th.  Up (taking Balty with me, who lay at my house last [night] in order
to his going away to-day to sea with the pursers of the Henery, whom I
appointed to call him), abroad to many several places about several
businesses, to my Lord Treasurer's, Westminster, and I know not where.  At
noon to the 'Change a little, and there bespoke some maps to hang in my
new roome (my boy's roome) which will be very-pretty.  Home to dinner, and
after dinner to the hanging up of maps, and other things for the fitting
of the roome, and now it will certainly be one of the handsomest and most
usefull roomes in my house.  So that what with this room and the room on
my leads my house is half as good again as it was. All this afternoon
about this till I was so weary and it was late I could do no more but
finished the room.  So I did not get out to the office all the day long.
At night spent a good deale of time with my wife and Mercer teaching them
a song, and so after supper to bed.

28th.  Up and to the office.  At noon dined at home.  After dinner abroad
with my wife to Hales's to see only our pictures and Mrs. Pierce's, which
I do not think so fine as I might have expected it.  My wife to her
father's, to carry him some ruling work, which I have advised her to let
him do.  It will get him some money.  She also is to look out again for
another little girle, the last we had being also gone home the very same
day she came.  She was also to look after a necklace of pearle, which she
is mighty busy about, I being contented to lay out L80 in one for her. I
home to my business.  By and by comes my wife and presently after, the
tide serving, Balty took leave of us, going to sea, and upon very good
terms, to be Muster-Master of a squadron, which will be worth L100 this
yeare to him, besides keeping him the benefit of his pay in the Guards. He
gone, I very busy all the afternoon till night, among other things,
writing a letter to my brother John, the first I have done since my being
angry with him, and that so sharpe a one too that I was sorry almost to
send it when I had wrote it, but it is preparatory to my being kind to
him, and sending for him up hither when he hath passed his degree of
Master of Arts.  So home to supper and to bed.

29th (Lord's day).  Up, and to church, where Mr. Mills, a lazy, simple
sermon upon the Devil's having no right to any thing in this world.  So
home to dinner, and after dinner I and my boy down by water to Redriffe
and thence walked to Mr. Evelyn's, where I walked in his garden till he
come from Church, with great pleasure reading Ridly's discourse, all my
way going and coming, upon the Civill and Ecclesiastical Law.  He being
come home, he and I walked together in the garden with mighty pleasure, he
being a very ingenious man; and the more I know him, the more I love him.
His chief business with me was to propose having my cozen Thomas Pepys in
Commission of the Peace, which I do not know what to say to till I speake
with him, but should be glad of it and will put him upon it. Thence walked
back again reading and so took water and home, where I find my uncle and
aunt Wight, and supped with them upon my leads with mighty pleasure and
mirthe, and they being gone I mighty weary to bed, after having my haire
of my head cut shorter, even close to my skull, for coolnesse, it being
mighty hot weather.

30th.  Up and, being ready, to finish my journall for four days past.  To
the office, where busy all the morning.  At noon dined alone, my wife gone
abroad to conclude about her necklace of pearle.  I after dinner to even
all my accounts of this month; and, bless God!  I find myself,
notwithstanding great expences of late; viz. L80 now to pay for a
necklace; near L40 for a set of chairs and couch; near L40 for my three
pictures: yet I do gather, and am now worth L5200.  My wife comes home by
and by, and hath pitched upon a necklace with three rows, which is a very
good one, and L80 is the price.  In the evening, having finished my
accounts to my full content and joyed that I have evened them so plainly,
remembering the trouble my last accounts did give me by being let alone a
little longer than ordinary, by which I am to this day at a loss for L50,
I hope I shall never commit such an error again, for I cannot devise where
the L50 should be, but it is plain I ought to be worth L50 more than I am,
and blessed be God the error was no greater.  In the evening with my
[wife] and Mercer by coach to take the ayre as far as Bow, and eat and
drank in the coach by the way and with much pleasure and pleased with my
company.  At night home and up to the leads, but were contrary to
expectation driven down again with a stinke by Sir W. Pen's shying of a
shitten pot in their house of office close by, which do trouble me for
fear it do hereafter annoy me.  So down to sing a little and then to bed.
So ends this month with great layings-out.  Good health and gettings, and
advanced well in the whole of my estate, for which God make me thankful.




     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     Ashamed at myself for this losse of time
     Begun to write idle and from the purpose
     Counterfeit mirthe and pleasure with them, but had but little
     Driven down again with a stinke by Sir W. Pen's shying of a pot
     Great newes of the Swedes declaring for us against the Dutch
     He has been inconvenienced by being too free in discourse
     Mass, and some of their musique, which is not so contemptible
     Reading over my dear "Faber fortunae," of my Lord Bacon's
     Thence to Mrs. Martin's, and did what I would with her
     Through want of money and good conduct
     Too late for them to enjoy it with any pleasure
     Tooke my wife well dressed into the Hall to see and be seen





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Diary of Samuel Pepys, March/April
1665/66, by Samuel Pepys

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***

***** This file should be named 4164.txt or 4164.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/4/1/6/4164/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
