Project Gutenberg's Diary of Samuel Pepys, July 1666, by Samuel Pepys

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Diary of Samuel Pepys, July 1666

Author: Samuel Pepys

Release Date: December 1, 2004 [EBook #4166]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, JULY 1666 ***




Produced by David Widger





                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A. F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                  JULY
                                  1666

July 1st (Sunday).  Up betimes, and to the office receiving letters, two
or three one after another from Sir W. Coventry, and sent as many to him,
being full of variety of business and hurry, but among the chiefest is the
getting of these pressed men out of the City down the river to the fleete.
While I was hard at it comes Sir W. Pen to towne, which I little expected,
having invited my Lady and her daughter Pegg to dine with me to-day; which
at noon they did, and Sir W. Pen with them: and pretty merry we were.  And
though I do not love him, yet I find it necessary to keep in with him; his
good service at Shearnesse in getting out the fleete being much taken
notice of, and reported to the King and Duke [of York], even from the
Prince and Duke of Albemarle themselves, and made the most of to me and
them by Sir W. Coventry: therefore I think it discretion, great and
necessary discretion, to keep in with him.  After dinner to the office
again, where busy, and then down to Deptford to the yard, thinking to have
seen Bagwell's wife, whose husband is gone yesterday back to the fleete,
but I did not see her, so missed what I went for, and so back to the Tower
several times, about the business of the pressed men, and late at it till
twelve at night, shipping of them. But, Lord!  how some poor women did
cry; and in my life I never did see such natural expression of passion as
I did here in some women's bewailing themselves, and running to every
parcel of men that were brought, one after another, to look for their
husbands, and wept over every vessel that went off, thinking they might be
there, and looking after the ship as far as ever they could by
moone-light, that it grieved me to the heart to hear them.  Besides, to
see poor patient labouring men and housekeepers, leaving poor wives and
families, taking up on a sudden by strangers, was very hard, and that
without press-money, but forced against all law to be gone.  It is a great
tyranny.  Having done this I to the Lieutenant of the Tower and bade him
good night, and so away home and to bed.

2nd.  Up betimes, and forced to go to my Lord Mayor's, about the business
of the pressed men; and indeed I find him a mean man of understanding and
dispatch of any publique business.  Thence out of curiosity to Bridewell
to see the pressed men, where there are about 300; but so unruly that I
durst not go among them: and they have reason to be so, having been kept
these three days prisoners, with little or no victuals, and pressed out,
and, contrary to all course of law, without press-money, and men that are
not liable to it.  Here I met with prating Colonel Cox, one of the City
collonells heretofore a great presbyter: but to hear how the fellow did
commend himself, and the service he do the King; and, like an asse, at
Paul's did take me out of my way on purpose to show me the gate (the
little north gate) where he had two men shot close by him on each hand,
and his own hair burnt by a bullet-shot in the insurrection of Venner, and
himself escaped.  Thence home and to the Tower to see the men from
Bridewell shipped.  Being rid of him I home to dinner, and thence to the
Excise office by appointment to meet my Lord Bellasses and the
Commissioners, which we did and soon dispatched, and so I home, and there
was called by Pegg Pen to her house, where her father and mother, and Mrs.
Norton, the second Roxalana, a fine woman, indifferent handsome, good body
and hand, and good mine, and pretends to sing, but do it not excellently.
However I took pleasure there, and my wife was sent for, and Creed come in
to us, and so there we spent the most of the afternoon. Thence weary of
losing so much time I to the office, and thence presently down to
Deptford; but to see what a consternation there is upon the water by
reason of this great press, that nothing is able to get a waterman to
appear almost.  Here I meant to have spoke with Bagwell's mother, but her
face was sore, and so I did not, but returned and upon the water found one
of the vessels loaden with the Bridewell birds in a great mutiny, and they
would not sail, not they; but with good words, and cajoling the ringleader
into the Tower (where, when he was come, he was clapped up in the hole),
they were got very quietly; but I think it is much if they do not run the
vessel on ground.  But away they went, and I to the Lieutenant of the
Tower, and having talked with him a little, then home to supper very late
and to bed weary.

3rd.  Being very weary, lay long in bed, then to the office and there sat
all the day.  At noon dined at home, Balty's wife with us, and in very
good humour I was and merry at dinner, and after dinner a song or two, and
so I abroad to my Lord Treasurer's (sending my sister home by the coach),
while I staid there by appointment to have met my Lord Bellasses and
Commissioners of Excise, but they did not meet me, he being abroad.
However Mr. Finch, one of the Commissioners, I met there, and he and I
walked two houres together in the garden, talking of many things;
sometimes of Mr. Povy, whose vanity, prodigality, neglect of his business,
and committing it to unfit hands hath undone him and outed him of all his
publique employments, and the thing set on foot by an accidental revivall
of a business, wherein he had three or fours years ago, by surprize, got
the Duke of Yorke to sign to the having a sum of money paid out of the
Excise, before some that was due to him, and now the money is fallen
short, and the Duke never likely to be paid.  This being revived hath
undone Povy.  Then we fell to discourse of the Parliament, and the great
men there: and among others, Mr. Vaughan, whom he reports as a man of
excellent judgement and learning, but most passionate and 'opiniastre'.
He had done himself the most wrong (though he values it not), that is, the
displeasure of the King in his standing so long against the breaking of
the Act for a trienniall parliament; but yet do believe him to be a most
loyall gentleman.  He told me Mr. Prin's character; that he is a man of
mighty labour and reading and memory, but the worst judge of matters, or
layer together of what he hath read, in the world; which I do not,
however, believe him in; that he believes him very true to the King in his
heart, but can never be reconciled to episcopacy; that the House do not
lay much weight upon him, or any thing he says.  He told me many fine
things, and so we parted, and I home and hard to work a while at the
office and then home and till midnight about settling my last month's
accounts wherein I have been interrupted by public business, that I did
not state them two or three days ago, but I do now to my great joy find
myself worth above L5600, for which the Lord's name be praised!  So with
my heart full of content to bed.  Newes come yesterday from Harwich, that
the Dutch had appeared upon our coast with their fleete, and we believe
did go to the Gun-fleete, and they are supposed to be there now; but I
have heard nothing of them to-day. Yesterday Dr. Whistler, at Sir W.
Pen's, told me that Alexander Broome, a the great song-maker, is lately
dead.

4th.  Up, and visited very betimes by Mr. Sheply, who is come to town upon
business from Hinchingbrooke, where he left all well.  I out and walked
along with him as far as Fleet Streete, it being a fast day, the usual
fast day for the plague, and few coaches to be had.  Thanks be to God, the
plague is, as I hear, encreased but two this week; but in the country in
several places it rages mightily, and particularly in Colchester, where it
hath long been, and is believed will quite depopulate the place.  To St.
James's, and there did our usual business with the Duke, all of us, among
other things, discoursing about the places where to build ten great ships;
the King and Council have resolved on none to be under third-rates; but it
is impossible to do it, unless we have more money towards the doing it
than yet we have in any view.  But, however, the shew must be made to the
world.  Thence to my Lord Bellasses to take my leave of him, he being
going down to the North to look after the Militia there, for fear of an
invasion.  Thence home and dined, and then to the office, where busy all
day, and in the evening Sir W. Pen come to me, and we walked together, and
talked of the late fight.  I find him very plain, that the whole conduct
of the late fight was ill, and that that of truth's all, and he tells me
that it is not he, but two-thirds of the commanders of the whole fleete
have told him so: they all saying, that they durst not oppose it at the
Council of War, for fear of being called cowards, though it was wholly
against their judgement to fight that day with the disproportion of force,
and then we not being able to use one gun of our lower tier, which was a
greater disproportion than the other.  Besides, we might very well have
staid in the Downs without fighting, or any where else, till the Prince
could have come up to them; or at least till the weather was fair, that we
might have the benefit of our whole force in the ships that we had.  He
says three things must [be] remedied, or else we shall be undone by this
fleete. 1. That we must fight in a line, whereas we fight promiscuously,
to our utter and demonstrable ruine; the Dutch fighting otherwise; and we,
whenever we beat them.   2.  We must not desert ships of our own in
distress, as we did, for that makes a captain desperate, and he will fling
away his ship, when there is no hopes left him of succour. 3.  That ships,
when they are a little shattered, must not take the liberty to come in of
themselves, but refit themselves the best they can, and stay out--many of
our ships coming in with very small disablenesses. He told me that our
very commanders, nay, our very flag-officers, do stand in need of
exercising among themselves, and discoursing the business of commanding a
fleete; he telling me that even one of our flag-men in the fleete did not
know which tacke lost the wind, or which kept it, in the last engagement.
He says it was pure dismaying and fear that made them all run upon the
Galloper, not having their wits about them; and that it was a miracle they
were not all lost.  He much inveighs upon my discoursing of Sir John
Lawson's saying heretofore, that sixty sail would do as much as one
hundred; and says that he was a man of no counsel at all, but had got the
confidence to say as the gallants did, and did propose to himself to make
himself great by them, and saying as they did; but was no man of judgement
in his business, but hath been out in the greatest points that have come
before them.  And then in the business of fore-castles, which he did
oppose, all the world sees now the use of them for shelter of men.  He did
talk very rationally to me, insomuch that I took more pleasure this night
in hearing him discourse, than I ever did in my life in any thing that he
said.  He gone I to the office again, and so after some business home to
supper and to bed.

5th.  Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning busy, then at
noon dined and Mr. Sheply with me, who come to towne the other day.  I
lent him 630 in silver upon 30 pieces in gold.  But to see how apt every
body is to neglect old kindnesses!  I must charge myself with the
ingratitude of being unwilling to lend him so much money without some
pawne, if he should have asked it, but he did not aske it, poor man, and
so no harm done.  After dinner, he gone, I to my office and Lumbard
Streete about money, and then to my office again, very busy, and so till
late, and then a song with my wife and Mercer in the garden, and so with
great content to bed.

6th.  Up, and after doing some business at my office abroad to Lumbard
Street, about the getting of a good sum of money, thence home, in
preparation for my having some good sum in my hands, for fear of a trouble
in the State, that I may not have all I have in the world out of my hands
and so be left a beggar.  Having put that in a way, I home to the office,
and so to the Tower; about shipping of some more pressed men, and that
done, away to Broad Streete, to Sir G. Carteret, who is at a pay of
tickets all alone, and I believe not less than one thousand people in the
streets.  But it is a pretty thing to observe that both there and every
where else, a man shall see many women now-a-days of mean sort in the
streets, but no men; men being so afeard of the press.  I dined with Sir
G. Carteret, and after dinner had much discourse about our publique
business; and he do seem to fear every day more and more what I do; which
is, a general confusion in the State; plainly answering me to the
question, who is it that the weight of the warr depends [upon]? that it is
only Sir W. Coventry.  He tells me, too, the Duke of Albemarle is
dissatisfied, and that the Duchesse do curse Coventry as the man that
betrayed her husband to the sea: though I believe that it is not so.
Thence to Lumbard Streete, and received L2000, and carried it home:
whereof L1000 in gold.  The greatest quantity not only that I ever had of
gold, but that ever I saw together, and is not much above half a 100 lb.
bag full, but is much weightier.  This I do for security sake, and
convenience of carriage; though it costs me above L70 the change of it, at
18 1/2d. per piece.  Being at home, I there met with a letter from Bab
Allen,--[Mrs. Knipp]--to invite me to be god-father to her boy, with Mrs.
Williams, which I consented to, but know not the time when it is to be.
Thence down to the Old Swan, calling at Michell's, he not being within,
and there I did steal a kiss or two of her, and staying a little longer,
he come in, and her father, whom I carried to Westminster, my business
being thither, and so back again home, and very busy all the evening.  At
night a song in the garden and to bed.

7th.  At the office all the morning, at noon dined at home and Creed with
me, and after dinner he and I two or three hours in my chamber discoursing
of the fittest way for a man to do that hath money, and find all he offers
of turning some into gold and leaving some in a friend's hand is nothing
more than what I thought of myself, but is doubtful, as well as I, what is
best to be done of all these or other ways to be thought on.  He tells me
he finds all things mighty dull at Court; and that they now begin to lie
long in bed; it being, as we suppose, not seemly for them to be found
playing and gaming as they used to be; nor that their minds are at ease
enough to follow those sports, and yet not knowing how to employ
themselves (though there be work enough for their thoughts and councils
and pains), they keep long in bed.  But he thinks with me, that there is
nothing in the world can helpe us but the King's personal looking after
his business and his officers, and that with that we may yet do well; but
otherwise must be undone: nobody at this day taking care of any thing, nor
hath any body to call him to account for it.  Thence left him and to my
office all the afternoon busy, and in some pain in my back by some bruise
or other I have given myself in my right testicle this morning, and the
pain lies there and hath done, and in my back thereupon all this day.  At
night into the garden to my wife and Lady Pen and Pegg, and Creed, who
staid with them till to at night.  My Lady Pen did give us a tarte and
other things, and so broke up late and I to bed.  It proved the hottest
night that ever I was in in my life, and thundered and lightened all night
long and rained hard.  But, Lord!  to see in what fears I lay a good
while, hearing of a little noise of somebody walking in the house: so rung
the bell, and it was my mayds going to bed about one o'clock in the
morning.  But the fear of being robbed, having so much money in the house,
was very great, and is still so, and do much disquiet me.

8th (Lord's day).  Up, and pretty well of my pain, so that it did not
trouble me at all, and I do clearly find that my pain in my back was
nothing but only accompanied my bruise in my stones.  To church, wife and
Mercer and I, in expectation of hearing some mighty preacher to-day, Mrs.
Mary Batelier sending us word so; but it proved our ordinary silly
lecturer, which made me merry, and she laughed upon us to see her mistake.
At noon W. Hewer dined with us, and a good dinner, and I expected to have
had newes sent me of Knipp's christening to-day; but, hearing nothing of
it, I did not go, though I fear it is but their forgetfulness and so I may
disappoint them.  To church, after dinner, again, a thing I have not done
a good while before, go twice in one day. After church with my wife and
Mercer and Tom by water through bridge to the Spring Garden at Fox Hall,
and thence down to Deptford and there did a little business, and so back
home and to bed.

9th.  Up betimes, and with Sir W. Pen in his coach to Westminster to Sir
G. Downing's, but missed of him, and so we parted, I by water home, where
busy all the morning, at noon dined at home, and after dinner to my
office, where busy till come to by Lovett and his wife, who have brought
me some sheets of paper varnished on one side, which lies very white and
smooth and, I think, will do our business most exactly, and will come up
to the use that I intended them for, and I am apt to believe will be an
invention that will take in the world.  I have made up a little book of it
to give Sir W. Coventry to-morrow, and am very well pleased with it.  Home
with them, and there find my aunt Wight with my wife come to take her
leave of her, being going for the summer into the country; and there was
also Mrs. Mary Batelier and her sister, newly come out of France, a black,
very black woman, but mighty good-natured people both, as ever I saw.
Here I made the black one sing a French song, which she did mighty
innocently; and then Mrs. Lovett play on the lute, which she do very well;
and then Mercer and I sang; and so, with great pleasure, I left them,
having shewed them my chamber, and L1000 in gold, which they wondered at,
and given them sweetmeats, and shewn my aunt Wight my father's picture,
which she admires.  So I left them and to the office, where Mr. Moore come
to me and talking of my Lord's family business tells me that Mr. Sheply is
ignorantly, we all believe, mistaken in his accounts above L700 more than
he can discharge himself of, which is a mighty misfortune, poor man, and
may undo him, and yet every body believes that he do it most honestly.  I
am troubled for him very much. He gone, I hard at the office till night,
then home to supper and to bed.

10th.  Up, and to the office, where busy all the morning, sitting, and
there presented Sir W. Coventry with my little book made up of Lovett's
varnished paper, which he and the whole board liked very well.  At noon
home to dinner and then to the office; the yarde being very full of women
(I believe above three hundred) coming to get money for their husbands and
friends that are prisoners in Holland; and they lay clamouring and
swearing and cursing us, that my wife and I were afeard to send a
venison-pasty that we have for supper to-night to the cook's to be baked,
for fear of their offering violence to it: but it went, and no hurt done.
Then I took an opportunity, when they were all gone into the foreyarde,
and slipt into the office and there busy all the afternoon, but by and by
the women got into the garden, and come all to my closett window, and
there tormented me, and I confess their cries were so sad for money, and
laying down the condition of their families and their husbands, and what
they have done and suffered for the King, and how ill they are used by us,
and how well the Dutch are used here by the allowance of their masters,
and what their husbands are offered to serve the Dutch abroad, that I do
most heartily pity them, and was ready to cry to hear them, but cannot
helpe them.  However, when the rest were gone, I did call one to me that I
heard complaine only and pity her husband and did give her some money, and
she blessed me and went away.  Anon my business at the office being done I
to the Tower to speak with Sir John Robinson about business, principally
the bad condition of the pressed men for want of clothes, so it is
represented from the fleete, and so to provide them shirts and stockings
and drawers.  Having done with him about that, I home and there find my
wife and the two Mrs. Bateliers walking in the garden.  I with them till
almost 9 at night, and then they and we and Mrs. Mercer, the mother, and
her daughter Anne, and our Mercer, to supper to a good venison-pasty and
other good things, and had a good supper, and very merry, Mistresses
Bateliers being both very good-humoured.  We sang and talked, and then led
them home, and there they made us drink; and, among other things, did show
us, in cages, some birds brought from about Bourdeaux, that are all fat,
and, examining one of them, they are so, almost all fat.  Their name is
[Ortolans], which are brought over to the King for him to eat, and indeed
are excellent things.  We parted from them and so home to bed, it being
very late, and to bed.

11th.  Up, and by water to Sir G. Downing's, there to discourse with him
about the reliefe of the prisoners in Holland; which I did, and we do
resolve of the manner of sending them some.  So I away by coach to St.
James's, and there hear that the Duchesse is lately brought to bed of a
boy.  By and by called to wait on the Duke, the King being present; and
there agreed, among other things, of the places to build the ten new great
ships ordered to be built, and as to the relief of prisoners in Holland.
And then about several stories of the basenesse of the King of Spayne's
being served with officers: they in Flanders having as good common men as
any Prince in the world, but the veriest cowards for the officers, nay for
the generall officers, as the Generall and Lieutenant-generall, in the
whole world.  But, above all things, the King did speake most in contempt
of the ceremoniousnesse of the King of Spayne, that he do nothing but
under some ridiculous form or other, and will not piss but another must
hold the chamber-pot.  Thence to Westminster Hall and there staid a while,
and then to the Swan and kissed Sarah, and so home to dinner, and after
dinner out again to Sir Robert Viner, and there did agree with him to
accommodate some business of tallys so as I shall get in near L2000 into
my own hands, which is in the King's, upon tallys; which will be a
pleasure to me, and satisfaction to have a good sum in my own hands,
whatever evil disturbances should be in the State; though it troubles me
to lose so great a profit as the King's interest of ten per cent. for that
money.  Thence to Westminster, doing several things by the way, and there
failed of meeting Mrs. Lane, and so by coach took up my wife at her
sister's, and so away to Islington, she and I alone, and so through
Hackney, and home late, our discourse being about laying up of some money
safe in prevention to the troubles I am afeard we may have in the state,
and so sleepy (for want of sleep the last night, going to bed late and
rising betimes in the morning) home, but when I come to the office, I
there met with a command from my Lord Arlington, to go down to a galliott
at Greenwich, by the King's particular command, that is going to carry the
Savoy Envoye over, and we fear there may be many Frenchmen there on board;
and so I have a power and command to search for and seize all that have
not passes from one of the Secretarys of State, and to bring them and
their papers and everything else in custody some whither. So I to the
Tower, and got a couple of musquetiers with me, and Griffen and my boy Tom
and so down; and, being come, found none on board but two or three
servants, looking to horses and doggs, there on board, and, seeing no
more, I staid not long there, but away and on shore at Greenwich, the
night being late and the tide against us; so, having sent before, to Mrs.
Clerke's and there I had a good bed, and well received, the whole people
rising to see me, and among the rest young Mrs. Daniel, whom I kissed
again and again alone, and so by and by to bed and slept pretty well,

12th.  But was up again by five o'clock, and was forced to rise, having
much business, and so up and dressed myself (enquiring, was told that Mrs.
Tooker was gone hence to live at London) and away with Poundy to the
Tower, and thence, having shifted myself, but being mighty drowsy for want
of sleep, I by coach to St. James's, to Goring House, there to wait on my
Lord Arlington to give him an account of my night's worke, but he was not
up, being not long since married: so, after walking up and down the house
below,--being the house I was once at Hartlib's sister's wedding, and is a
very fine house and finely furnished,--and then thinking it too much for
me to lose time to wait my Lord's rising, I away to St. James's, and there
to Sir W. Coventry, and wrote a letter to my Lord Arlington giving him an
account of what I have done, and so with Sir W. Coventry into London, to
the office.  And all the way I observed him mightily to make mirth of the
Duke of Albemarle and his people about him, saying, that he was the
happiest man in the world for doing of great things by sorry instruments.
And so particularized in Sir W. Clerke, and Riggs, and Halsey, and others.
And then again said that the only quality eminent in him was, that he did
persevere; and indeed he is a very drudge, and stands by the King's
business.  And this he said, that one thing he was good at, that he never
would receive an excuse if the thing was not done; listening to no
reasoning for it, be it good or bad.  But then I told him, what he
confessed, that he would however give the man, that he employs, orders for
removing of any obstruction that he thinks he shall meet with in the
world, and instanced in several warrants that he issued for breaking open
of houses and other outrages about the business of prizes, which people
bore with either for affection or fear, which he believes would not have
been borne with from the King, nor Duke, nor any man else in England, and
I thinke he is in the right, but it is not from their love of him, but
from something else I cannot presently say.  Sir W. Coventry did further
say concerning Warcupp, his kinsman, that had the simplicity to tell Sir
W. Coventry, that the Duke did intend to go to sea and to leave him his
agent on shore for all things that related to the sea.  But, says Sir W.
Coventry, I did believe but the Duke of Yorke would expect to be his agent
on shore for all sea matters.  And then he begun to say what a great man
Warcupp was, and something else, and what was that but a great lyer; and
told me a story, how at table he did, they speaking about antipathys, say,
that a rose touching his skin any where, would make it rise and pimple;
and, by and by, the dessert coming, with roses upon it, the Duchesse bid
him try, and they did; but they rubbed and rubbed, but nothing would do in
the world, by which his lie was found at then.  He spoke contemptibly of
Holmes and his mermidons, that come to take down the ships from hence, and
have carried them without any necessaries, or any thing almost, that they
will certainly be longer getting ready than if they had staid here.  In
fine, I do observe, he hath no esteem nor kindnesse for the Duke's
matters, but, contrarily, do slight him and them; and I pray God the
Kingdom do not pay too dear by this jarring; though this blockheaded Duke
I did never expect better from.  At the office all the morning, at noon
home and thought to have slept, my head all day being full of business and
yet sleepy and out of order, and so I lay down on my bed in my gowne to
sleep, but I could not, therefore about three o'clock up and to dinner and
thence to the office, where.  Mrs. Burroughs, my pretty widow, was and so
I did her business and sent her away by agreement, and presently I by
coach after and took her up in Fenchurch Streete and away through the
City, hiding my face as much as I could, but she being mighty pretty and
well enough clad, I was not afeard, but only lest somebody should see me
and think me idle.  I quite through with her, and so into the fields
Uxbridge way, a mile or two beyond Tyburne, and then back and then to
Paddington, and then back to Lyssen green, a place the coachman led me to
(I never knew in my life) and there we eat and drank and so back to
Chasing Crosse, and there I set her down.  All the way most excellent
pretty company.  I had her lips as much as I would, and a mighty pretty
woman she is and very modest and yet kinde in all fair ways.  All this
time I passed with mighty pleasure, it being what I have for a long time
wished for, and did pay this day 5s. forfeite for her company.  She being
gone, I to White Hall and there to Lord Arlington's, and met Mr.
Williamson, and find there is no more need of my trouble about the
Galliott, so with content departed, and went straight home, where at the
office did the most at the office in that wearied and sleepy state I
could, and so home to supper, and after supper falling to singing with
Mercer did however sit up with her, she pleasing me with her singing of
"Helpe, helpe," 'till past midnight and I not a whit drowsy, and so to
bed.

13th.  Lay sleepy in bed till 8 in the morning, then up and to the office,
where till about noon, then out to the 'Change and several places, and so
home to dinner.  Then out again to Sir R. Vines, and there to my content
settled the business of two tallys, so as I shall have L2000 almost more
of my owne money in my hand, which pleases me mightily, and so home and
there to the office, where mighty busy, and then home to supper and to
even my Journall and to bed.  Our fleete being now in all points ready to
sayle, but for the carrying of the two or three new ships, which will
keepe them a day or two or three more.  It is said the Dutch is gone off
our coast, but I have no good reason to believe it, Sir W. Coventry not
thinking any such thing.

14th.  Up betimes to the office, to write fair a laborious letter I wrote
as from the Board to the Duke of Yorke, laying out our want of money
again; and particularly the business of Captain Cocke's tenders of hemp,
which my Lord Bruncker brought in under an unknown hand without name.
Wherein his Lordship will have no great successe, I doubt.  That being
done, I down to Thames-streete, and there agreed for four or five tons of
corke, to send this day to the fleete, being a new device to make
barricados with, instead of junke.  By this means I come to see and kiss
Mr. Hill's young wife, and a blithe young woman she is.  So to the office
and at noon home to dinner, and then sent for young Michell and employed
him all the afternoon about weighing and shipping off of the corke, having
by this means an opportunity of getting him 30 or 40s.  Having set him a
doing, I home and to the office very late, very busy, and did indeed
dispatch much business, and so to supper and to bed.  After a song in the
garden, which, and after dinner, is now the greatest pleasure I take, and
indeed do please me mightily, to bed, after washing my legs and feet with
warm water in my kitchen.  This evening I had Davila

     [Enrico Caterino Davila (1576-1631) was one of the chief historical
     writers of Italy, and his "Storia delle guerre civili di Francia"
     covers a period of forty years, from the death of Henri II. to the
     Peace of Vervins in 1598.]

brought home to me, and find it a most excellent history as ever I read.

15th (Lord's day).  Up, and to church, where our lecturer made a sorry
silly sermon, upon the great point of proving the truth of the Christian
religion.  Home and had a good dinner, expecting Mr. Hunt, but there comes
only young Michell and his wife, whom my wife concurs with me to be a
pretty woman, and with her husband is a pretty innocent couple. Mightily
pleasant we were, and I mightily pleased in her company and to find my
wife so well pleased with them also.  After dinner he and I walked to
White Hall, not being able to get a coach.  He to the Abbey, and I to
White Hall, but met with nobody to discourse with, having no great mind to
be found idling there, and be asked questions of the fleete, so walked
only through to the Parke, and there, it being mighty hot and I weary, lay
down by the canaille, upon the grasse, and slept awhile, and was thinking
of a lampoone which hath run in my head this weeke, to make upon the late
fight at sea, and the miscarriages there; but other businesses put it out
of my head.  Having lain there a while, I then to the Abbey and there
called Michell, and so walked in great pain, having new shoes on, as far
as Fleete Streete and there got a coach, and so in some little ease home
and there drank a great deale of small beer; and so took up my wife and
Betty Michell and her husband, and away into the fields, to take the ayre,
as far as beyond Hackny, and so back again, in our way drinking a great
deale of milke, which I drank to take away, my heartburne, wherewith I
have of late been mightily troubled, but all the way home I did break
abundance of wind behind, which did presage no good but a great deal of
cold gotten.  So home and supped and away went Michell and his wife, of
whom I stole two or three salutes, and so to bed in some pain and in fear
of more, which accordingly I met with, for I was in mighty pain all night
long of the winde griping of my belly and making of me shit often and
vomit too, which is a thing not usual with me, but this I impute to the
milke that I drank after so much beer, but the cold, to my washing my feet
the night before.

16th.  Lay in great pain in bed all the morning and most of the afternoon,
being in much pain, making little or no water, and indeed having little
within to make any with.  And had great twinges with the wind all the day
in my belly with wind.  And a looseness with it, which however made it not
so great as I have heretofore had it.  A wonderful dark sky, and shower of
rain this morning, which at Harwich proved so too with a shower of hail as
big as walnuts.  I had some broth made me to drink, which I love, only to
fill up room.  Up in the afternoon, and passed the day with Balty, who is
come from sea for a day or two before the fight, and I perceive could be
willing fairly to be out of the next fight, and I cannot much blame him,
he having no reason by his place to be there; however, would not have him
to be absent, manifestly to avoid being there.  At night grew a little
better and took a glyster of sacke, but taking it by halves it did me not
much good, I taking but a little of it.  However, to bed, and had a pretty
good night of it,

17th.  So as to be able to rise to go to the office and there sat, but now
and then in pain, and without making much water, or freely.  However, it
grew better and better, so as after dinner believing the jogging in a
coach would do me good, I did take my wife out to the New Exchange to buy
things.  She there while I with Balty went and bought a common
riding-cloake for myself, to save my best.  It cost me but 30s., and will
do my turne mighty well.  Thence home and walked in the garden with Sir W.
Pen a while, and saying how the riding in the coach do me good (though I
do not yet much find it), he ordered his to be got ready while I did some
little business at the office, and so abroad he and I after 8 o'clock at
night, as far almost as Bow, and so back again, and so home to supper and
to bed.  This day I did bid Balty to agree with the Dutch paynter, which
he once led me to, to see landskipps, for a winter piece of snow, which
indeed is a good piece, and costs me but 40s., which I would not take the
money again for, it being, I think, very good.  After a little supper to
bed, being in less pain still, and had very good rest.

18th.  Up in good case, and so by coach to St. James's after my fellows,
and there did our business, which is mostly every day to complain of want
of money, and that only will undo us in a little time.  Here, among other
things, before us all, the Duke of Yorke did say, that now at length he is
come to a sure knowledge that the Dutch did lose in the late engagements
twenty-nine captains and thirteen ships.  Upon which Sir W. Coventry did
publickly move, that if his Royal Highness had this of a certainty, it
would be of use to send this down to the fleete, and to cause it to be
spread about the fleete, for the recovering of the spirits of the officers
and seamen; who are under great dejectedness for want of knowing that they
did do any thing against the enemy, notwithstanding all that they did to
us.  Which, though it be true, yet methought was one of the most
dishonourable motions to our countrymen that ever was made; and is worth
remembering.  Thence with Sir W. Pen home, calling at Lilly's, to have a
time appointed when to be drawn among the other Commanders of Flags the
last year's fight.  And so full of work Lilly is, that he was faro to take
his table-book out to see how his time is appointed, and appointed six
days hence for him to come between seven and eight in the morning.  Thence
with him home; and there by appointment I find Dr. Fuller, now Bishop of
Limericke, in Ireland; whom I knew in his low condition at Twittenham.  I
had also by his desire Sir W. Pen, and with him his lady and daughter, and
had a good dinner, and find the Bishop the same good man as ever; and in a
word, kind to us, and, methinks, one of the comeliest and most becoming
prelates in all respects that ever I saw in my life.  During dinner comes
an acquaintance of his, Sir Thomas Littleton; whom I knew not while he was
in my house, but liked his discourse; and afterwards, by Sir W. Pen, do
come to know that he is one of the greatest speakers in the House of
Commons, and the usual second to the great Vaughan.  So was sorry I did
observe him no more, and gain more of his acquaintance.  After dinner,
they being gone, and I mightily pleased with my guests, I down the river
to Greenwich, about business, and thence walked to Woolwich, reading "The
Rivall Ladys" all the way, and find it a most pleasant and fine writ play.
At Woolwich saw Mr. Shelden, it being late, and there eat and drank, being
kindly used by him and Bab, and so by water to Deptford, it being 10
o'clock before I got to Deptford, and dark, and there to Bagwell's, and,
having staid there a while, away home, and after supper to bed.  The Duke
of Yorke said this day that by the letters from the Generals they would
sail with the Fleete this day or to-morrow.

19th.  Up in very good health in every respect, only my late fever got by
my pain do break out about my mouth.  So to the office, where all the
morning sitting.  Full of wants of money, and much stores to buy, for to
replenish the stores, and no money to do it with, nor anybody to trust us
without it.  So at noon home to dinner, Balty and his wife with us.  By
and by Balty takes his leave of us, he going away just now towards the
fleete, where he will pass through one great engagement more before he be
two days older, I believe.  I to the office, where busy all the afternoon,
late, and then home, and, after some pleasant discourse to my wife, to
bed.  After I was in bed I had a letter from Sir W. Coventry that tells me
that the fleete is sailed this morning; God send us good newes of them!

20th.  Up, and finding by a letter late last night that the fleete is
gone, and that Sir W. Pen is ordered to go down to Sheernesse, and finding
him ready to go to St. James's this morning, I was willing to go with him
to see how things go,

     [Sir William Penn's instructions from the Duke of York directing him
     to embark on his Majesty's yacht "Henrietta," and to see to the
     manning of such ships has had been left behind by the fleet, dated
     on this day, 20th July, is printed in Penn's "Memorials of Sir W.
     Penn," vol. ii., p. 406.]

and so with him thither (but no discourse with the Duke), but to White
Hall, and there the Duke of York did bid Sir W. Pen to stay to discourse
with him and the King about business of the fleete, which troubled me a
little, but it was only out of envy, for which I blame myself, having no
reason to expect to be called to advise in a matter I understand not.  So
I away to Lovett's, there to see how my picture goes on to be varnished (a
fine Crucifix),

     [This picture occasioned Pepys trouble long afterwards, having been
     brought as evidence that he was a Papist (see "Life," vol. i., p.
     xxxiii).]

which will be very fine; and here I saw some fine prints, brought from
France by Sir Thomas Crew, who is lately returned.  So home, calling at
the stationer's for some paper fit to varnish, and in my way home met with
Lovett, to whom I gave it, and he did present me with a varnished staffe,
very fine and light to walk with.  So home and to dinner, there coming
young Mrs. Daniel and her sister Sarah, and dined with us; and old Mr.
Hawly, whose condition pities me, he being forced to turne under
parish-clerke at St. Gyles's, I think at the other end of the towne.
Thence I to the office, where busy all the afternoon, and in the evening
with Sir W. Pen, walking with whom in the garden I am of late mighty
great, and it is wisdom to continue myself so, for he is of all the men of
the office at present most manifestly usefull and best thought of. He and
I supped together upon the seat in the garden, and thence, he gone, my
wife and Mercer come and walked and sang late, and then home to bed.

21st. Up and to the office, where all the morning sitting.  At noon walked
in the garden with Commissioner Pett (newly come to towne), who tells me
how infinite the disorders are among the commanders and all officers of
the fleete.  No discipline: nothing but swearing and cursing, and every
body doing what they please; and the Generalls, understanding no better,
suffer it, to the reproaching of this Board, or whoever it will be.  He
himself hath been challenged twice to the field, or something as good, by
Sir Edward Spragge and Captain Seymour.  He tells me that captains carry,
for all the late orders, what men they please; demand and consume what
provisions they please.  So that he fears, and I do no less, that God
Almighty cannot bless us while we keep in this disorder that we are in: he
observing to me too, that there is no man of counsel or advice in the
fleete; and the truth is, the gentlemen captains will undo us, for they
are not to be kept in order, their friends about the King and Duke, and
their own house, is so free, that it is not for any person but the Duke
himself to have any command over them.  He gone I to dinner, and then to
the office, where busy all the afternoon.  At night walked in the garden
with my wife, and so I home to supper and to bed.  Sir W. Pen is gone down
to Sheernesse to-day to see things made ready against the fleete shall
come in again, which makes Pett mad, and calls him dissembling knave, and
that himself takes all the pains and is blamed, while he do nothing but
hinder business and takes all the honour of it to himself, and tells me
plainly he will fling, up his commission rather than bear it.

22nd (Lord's day).  Up, and to my chamber, and there till noon mighty
busy, setting money matters and other things of mighty moment to rights to
the great content of my mind, I finding that accounts but a little let go
can never be put in order by strangers, for I cannot without much
difficulty do it myself.  After dinner to them again till about four
o'clock and then walked to White Hall, where saw nobody almost but walked
up and down with Hugh May, who is a very ingenious man.  Among other
things, discoursing of the present fashion of gardens to make them plain,
that we have the best walks of gravell in the world, France having no nor
Italy; and our green of our bowling allies is better than any they have.
So our business here being ayre, this is the best way, only with a little
mixture of statues, or pots, which may be handsome, and so filled with
another pot of such and such a flower or greene as the season of the year
will bear.  And then for flowers, they are best seen in a little plat by
themselves; besides, their borders spoil the walks of another garden: and
then for fruit, the best way is to have walls built circularly one within
another, to the South, on purpose for fruit, and leave the walking garden
only for that use.  Thence walked through the House, where most people
mighty hush and, methinks, melancholy.  I see not a smiling face through
the whole Court; and, in my conscience, they are doubtfull of the conduct
again of the Generalls, and I pray God they may not make their fears
reasonable.  Sir Richard Fanshaw is lately dead at Madrid.  Guyland is
lately overthrowne wholly in Barbary by the King of Tafiletta.  The fleete
cannot yet get clear of the River, but expect the first wind to be out,
and then to be sure they fight.  The Queene and Maids of Honour are at
Tunbridge.

23rd.  Up, and to my chamber doing several things there of moment, and
then comes Sympson, the Joyner; and he and I with great pains contriving
presses to put my books up in: they now growing numerous, and lying one
upon another on my chairs, I lose the use to avoyde the trouble of
removing them, when I would open a book.  Thence out to the Excise office
about business, and then homewards met Colvill, who tells me he hath L1000
ready for me upon a tally; which pleases me, and yet I know not now what
to do with it, having already as much money as is fit for me to have in
the house, but I will have it.  I did also meet Alderman Backewell, who
tells me of the hard usage he now finds from Mr. Fen, in not getting him a
bill or two paid, now that he can be no more usefull to him; telling me
that what by his being abroad and Shaw's death he hath lost the ball, but
that he doubts not to come to give a kicke at it still, and then he shall
be wiser and keepe it while he hath it.  But he says he hath a good
master, the King, who will not suffer him to be undone, as otherwise he
must have been, and I believe him.  So home and to dinner, where I
confess, reflecting upon the ease and plenty that I live in, of money,
goods, servants, honour, every thing, I could not but with hearty thanks
to Almighty God ejaculate my thanks to Him while I was at dinner, to
myself.  After dinner to the office and there till five or six o'clock,
and then by coach to St. James's and there with Sir W. Coventry and Sir G.
Downing to take the gyre in the Parke.  All full of expectation of the
fleete's engagement, but it is not yet.  Sir W. Coventry says they are
eighty-nine men-of-warr, but one fifth-rate, and that, the Sweepstakes,
which carries forty guns.  They are most infinitely manned.  He tells me
the Loyall London, Sir J. Smith (which, by the way, he commends to be
the-best ship in the world, large and small), hath above eight hundred
men; and moreover takes notice, which is worth notice, that the fleete
hath lane now near fourteen days without any demand for a farthingworth of
any thing of any kind, but only to get men.  He also observes, that with
this excesse of men, nevertheless, they have thought fit to leave behind
them sixteen ships, which they have robbed of their men, which certainly
might have been manned, and they been serviceable in the fight, and yet
the fleete well-manned, according to the excesse of supernumeraries, which
we hear they have.  At least two or three of them might have been left
manned, and sent away with the Gottenburgh ships.  They conclude this to
be much the best fleete, for force of guns, greatnesse and number of ships
and men, that ever England did see; being, as Sir W. Coventry reckons,
besides those left behind, eighty-nine men of warr and twenty fire-ships,
though we cannot hear that they have with them above eighteen.  The French
are not yet joined with the Dutch, which do dissatisfy the Hollanders, and
if they should have a defeat, will undo De Witt; the people generally of
Holland do hate this league with France.  We cannot think of any business,
but lie big with expectation of the issue of this fight, but do conclude
that, this fight being over, we shall be able to see the whole issue of
the warr, good or bad.  So homeward, and walked over the Parke (St.
James's) with Sir G. Downing, and at White Hall took a coach; and there to
supper with much pleasure and to bed.

24th.  Up, and to the office, where little business done, our heads being
full of expectation of the fleete's being engaged, but no certain notice
of it, only Sheppeard in the Duke's yacht left them yesterday morning
within a league of the Dutch fleete, and making after them, they standing
into the sea.  At noon to dinner, and after dinner with Mercer (as of late
my practice is) a song and so to the office, there to set up again my
frames about my Platts, which I have got to be all gilded, and look very
fine, and then to my business, and busy very late, till midnight, drawing
up a representation of the state of my victualling business to the Duke, I
having never appeared to him doing anything yet and therefore I now do it
in writing, I now having the advantage of having had two fleetes
dispatched in better condition than ever any fleetes were yet, I believe;
at least, with least complaint, and by this means I shall with the better
confidence get my bills out for my salary.  So home to bed.

25th.  Up betimes to write fair my last night's paper for the Duke, and so
along with Sir W. Batten by hackney coach to St. James's, where the Duke
is gone abroad with the King to the Parke, but anon come back to White
Hall, and we, after an houre's waiting, walked thither (I having desired
Sir W. Coventry in his chamber to read over my paper about the
victualling, which he approves of, and I am glad I showed it him first, it
makes it the less necessary to show it the Duke at all, if I find it best
to let it alone).  At White Hall we find [the Court] gone to Chappell, it
being St. James's-day.  And by and by, while they are at chappell, and we
waiting chappell being done, come people out of the Parke, telling us that
the guns are heard plain.  And so every body to the Parke, and by and by
the chappell done, and the King and Duke into the bowling-green, and upon
the leads, whither I went, and there the guns were plain to be heard;
though it was pretty to hear how confident some would be in the loudnesse
of the guns, which it was as much as ever I could do to hear them.  By and
by the King to dinner, and I waited there his dining; but, Lord! how
little I should be pleased, I think, to have so many people crowding about
me; and among other things it astonished me to see my Lord Barkeshire
waiting at table, and serving the King drink, in that dirty pickle as I
never saw man in my life.  Here I met Mr. Williams, who in serious
discourse told me he did hope well of this fight because of the equality
of force or rather our having the advantage in number, and also because we
did not go about it with the presumption that we did heretofore, when, he
told me, he did before the last fight look upon us by our pride fated to
be overcome.  He would have me to dine where he was invited to dine, at
the Backe-stayres.  So after the King's meat was taken away, we thither;
but he could not stay, but left me there among two or three of the King's
servants, where we dined with the meat that come from his table; which was
most excellent, with most brave drink cooled in ice (which at this hot
time was welcome), and I drinking no wine, had metheglin for the King's
owne drinking, which did please me mightily.  Thence, having dined mighty
nobly, I away to Mrs. Martin's new lodgings, where I find her, and was
with her close, but, Lord! how big she is already.  She is, at least
seems, in mighty trouble for her husband at sea, when I am sure she cares
not for him, and I would not undeceive her, though I know his ship is one
of those that is not gone, but left behind without men.  Thence to White
Hall again to hear news, but found none; so back toward Westminster, and
there met Mrs. Burroughs, whom I had a mind to meet, but being undressed
did appear a mighty ordinary woman.  Thence by water home, and out again
by coach to Lovett's to see my Crucifix, which is not done.  So to White
Hall again to have met Sir G. Carteret, but he is gone, abroad, so back
homewards, and seeing Mr. Spong took him up, and he and I to Reeves, the
glass maker's, and did set several glasses and had pretty discourse with
him, and so away, and set down Mr. Spong in London, and so home and with
my wife, late, twatling at my Lady Pen's, and so home to supper and to
bed.  I did this afternoon call at my woman that ruled my paper to bespeak
a musique card, and there did kiss Nan.  No news to-night from the fleete
how matters go yet.

26th.  Up, and to the office, where all the morning.  At noon dined at
home: Mr. Hunt and his wife, who is very gallant, and newly come from
Cambridge, because of the sicknesse, with us.  Very merry at table, and
the people I do love mightily, but being in haste to go to White Hall I
rose, and Mr. Hunt with me, and by coach thither, where I left him in the
boarded gallery, and I by appointment to attend the Duke of Yorke at his
closett, but being not come, Sir G. Carteret and I did talke together, and
[he] advises me, that, if I could, I would get the papers of examination
touching the business of the last year's prizes, which concern my Lord
Sandwich, out of Warcupp's hands, who being now under disgrace and poor,
he believes may be brought easily to part with them. My Lord Crew, it
seems, is fearfull yet that maters may be enquired into. This I will
endeavour to do, though I do not thinke it signifies much. By and by the
Duke of Yorke comes and we had a meeting and, among other things, I did
read my declaration of the proceedings of the Victualling hired this
yeare, and desired his Royall Highnesse to give me the satisfaction of
knowing whether his Royall Highnesse were pleased therewith.  He told me
he was, and that it was a good account, and that the business of the
Victualling was much in a better condition than it was the last yeare;
which did much joy me, being said in the company of my fellows, by which I
shall be able with confidence to demand my salary and the rest of the
subsurveyors.  Thence away mightily satisfied to Mrs. Pierces, there to
find my wife.  Mrs. Pierce hath lain in of a boy about a month.  The boy
is dead this day.  She lies in good state, and very pretty she is, but
methinks do every day grow more and more great, and a little too much,
unless they get more money than I fear they do.  Thence with my wife and
Mercer to my Lord Chancellor's new house, and there carried them up to the
leads, where I find my Lord Chamberlain, Lauderdale, Sir Robert Murray,
and others, and do find it the most delightfull place for prospect that
ever was in the world, and even ravishing me, and that is all, in short, I
can say of it.  Thence to Islington to our old house and eat and drank,
and so round by Kingsland home, and there to the office a little and Sir
W. Batten's, but no newes at all from the fleete, and so home to bed.

27th.  Up and to the office, where all the morning busy.  At noon dined at
home and then to the office again, and there walking in the garden with
Captain Cocke till 5 o'clock.  No newes yet of the fleete.  His great
bargaine of Hempe with us by his unknown proposition is disliked by the
King, and so is quite off; of which he is glad, by this means being rid of
his obligation to my Lord Bruncker, which he was tired with, and
especially his mistresse, Mrs. Williams, and so will fall into another way
about it, wherein he will advise only with myself, which do not displease
me, and will be better for him and the King too.  Much common talke of
publique business, the want of money, the uneasinesse that Parliament will
find in raising any, and the ill condition we shall be in if they do not,
and his confidence that the Swede is true to us, but poor, but would be
glad to do us all manner of service in the world. He gone, I away by water
from the Old Swan to White Hall.  The waterman tells me that newes is come
that our ship Resolution is burnt, and that we had sunke four or five of
the enemy's ships.  When I come to White Hall I met with Creed, and he
tells me the same news, and walking with him to the Park I to Sir W.
Coventry's lodging, and there he showed me Captain Talbot's letter,
wherein he says that the fight begun on the 25th; that our White squadron
begun with one of the Dutch squadrons, and then the Red with another so
hot that we put them both to giving way, and so they continued in pursuit
all the day, and as long as he stayed with them: that the Blue fell to the
Zealand squadron; and after a long dispute, he against two or three great
ships, he received eight or nine dangerous shots, and so come away; and
says, he saw the Resolution burned by one of their fire-ships, and four or
five of the enemy's.  But says that two or three of our great ships were
in danger of being fired by our owne fire-ships, which Sir W. Coventry,
nor I, cannot understand.  But upon the whole, he and I walked two or
three turns in the Parke under the great trees, and do doubt that this
gallant is come away a little too soon, having lost never a mast nor
sayle.  And then we did begin to discourse of the young gentlemen
captains, which he was very free with me in speaking his mind of the
unruliness of them; and what a losse the King hath of his old men, and now
of this Hannam, of the Resolution, if he be dead, and that there is but
few old sober men in the fleete, and if these few of the Flags that are so
should die, he fears some other gentlemen captains will get in, and then
what a council we shall have, God knows. He told me how he is disturbed to
hear the commanders at sea called cowards here on shore, and that he was
yesterday concerned publiquely at a dinner to defend them, against
somebody that said that not above twenty of them fought as they should do,
and indeed it is derived from the Duke of Albemarle himself, who wrote so
to the King and Duke, and that he told them how they fought four days, two
of them with great disadvantage.  The Count de Guiche, who was on board De
Ruyter, writing his narrative home in French of the fight, do lay all the
honour that may be upon the English courage above the Dutch, and that he
himself [Sir W. Coventry] was sent down from the King and Duke of Yorke
after the fight, to pray them to spare none that they thought had not done
their parts, and that they had removed but four, whereof Du Tell is one,
of whom he would say nothing; but, it seems, the Duke of Yorke hath been
much displeased at his removal, and hath now taken him into his service,
which is a plain affront to the Duke of Albemarle; and two of the others,
Sir W. Coventry did speake very slenderly of their faults.  Only the last,
which was old Teddiman, he says, is in fault, and hath little to excuse
himself with; and that, therefore, we should not be forward in condemning
men of want of courage, when the Generalls, who are both men of metal, and
hate cowards, and had the sense of our ill successe upon them (and by the
way must either let the world thinke it was the miscarriage of the
Captains or their owne conduct), have thought fit to remove no more of
them, when desired by the King and Duke of Yorke to do it, without respect
to any favour any of them can pretend to in either of them.  At last we
concluded that we never can hope to beat the Dutch with such advantage as
now in number and force and a fleete in want of nothing, and he hath often
repeated now and at other times industriously that many of the Captains
have: declared that they want nothing, and again, that they did lie ten
days together at the Nore without demanding of any thing in the world but
men, and of them they afterward, when they went away, the generalls
themselves acknowledge that they have permitted several ships to carry
supernumeraries, but that if we do not speede well, we must then play
small games and spoile their trade in small parties.  And so we parted,
and I, meeting Creed in the Parke again, did take him by coach and to
Islington, thinking to have met my Lady Pen and wife, but they were gone,
so we eat and drank and away back, setting him down in Cheapside and I
home, and there after a little while making of my tune to "It is decreed,"
to bed.

28th.  Up, and to the office, where no more newes of the fleete than was
yesterday.  Here we sat and at noon to dinner to the Pope's Head, where my
Lord Bruncker and his mistresse dined and Commissioner Pett, Dr.
Charleton, and myself, entertained with a venison pasty by Sir W. Warren.
Here very pretty discourse of Dr. Charleton's, concerning Nature's
fashioning every creature's teeth according to the food she intends them;
and that men's, it is plain, was not for flesh, but for fruit, and that he
can at any time tell the food of a beast unknown by the teeth.  My Lord
Bruncker made one or two objections to it that creatures find their food
proper for their teeth rather than that the teeth were fitted for the
food, but the Doctor, I think, did well observe that creatures do
naturally and from the first, before they have had experience to try, do
love such a food rather than another, and that all children love fruit,
and none brought to flesh, but against their wills at first.  Thence with
my Lord Bruncker to White Hall, where no news.  So to St. James's to Sir
W. Coventry, and there hear only of the Bredah's being come in and gives
the same small account that the other did yesterday, so that we know not
what is done by the body of the fleete at all, but conceive great reason
to hope well.  Thence with my Lord to his coach-house, and there put in
his six horses into his coach, and he and I alone to Highgate.  All the
way going and coming I learning of him the principles of Optickes, and
what it is that makes an object seem less or bigger and how much distance
do lessen an object, and that it is not the eye at all, or any rule in
optiques, that can tell distance, but it is only an act of reason
comparing of one mark with another, which did both please and inform me
mightily.  Being come thither we went to my Lord Lauderdale's house to
speake with him, about getting a man at Leith to joyne with one we employ
to buy some prize goods for the King; we find [him] and his lady and some
Scotch people at supper.  Pretty odd company; though my Lord Bruncker
tells me, my Lord Lauderdale is a man of mighty good reason and judgement.
But at supper there played one of their servants upon the viallin some
Scotch tunes only; several, and the best of their country, as they seemed
to esteem them, by their praising and admiring them: but, Lord! the
strangest ayre that ever I heard in my life, and all of one cast.  But
strange to hear my Lord Lauderdale say himself that he had rather hear a
cat mew, than the best musique in the world; and the better the musique,
the more sicke it makes him; and that of all instruments, he hates the
lute most, and next to that, the baggpipe.  Thence back with my Lord to
his house, all the way good discourse, informing of myself about optiques
still, and there left him and by a hackney home, and after writing three
or four letters, home to supper and to bed.

29th (Lord's day).  Up and all the morning in my chamber making up my
accounts in my book with my father and brother and stating them.  Towards
noon before sermon was done at church comes newes by a letter to Sir W.
Batten, to my hand, of the late fight, which I sent to his house, he at
church.  But, Lord! with what impatience I staid till sermon was done, to
know the issue of the fight, with a thousand hopes and fears and thoughts
about the consequences of either.  At last sermon is done and he come
home, and the bells immediately rung soon as the church was done. But
coming; to Sir W. Batten to know the newes, his letter said nothing of it;
but all the towne is full of a victory.  By and by a letter from Sir W.
Coventry tells me that we have the victory.  Beat them into the Weelings;

     [In a letter from Richard Browne to Williamson, dated Yarmouth, July
     30th, we read, "The Zealanders were engaged with the Blue squadron
     Wednesday and most of Thursday, but at length the Zealanders ran;
     the Dutch fleet escaped to the Weelings and Goree" ("Calendar of
     State Papers," 1665-66, p  591).]

had taken two of their great ships; but by the orders of the Generalls
they are burned.  This being, methought, but a poor result after the
fighting of two so great fleetes, and four days having no tidings of them,
I was still impatient; but could know no more.  So away home to dinner,
where Mr. Spong and Reeves dined with me by invitation.  And after dinner
to our business of my microscope to be shown some of the observables of
that, and then down to my office to looke in a darke room with my glasses
and tube, and most excellently things appeared indeed beyond imagination.
This was our worke all the afternoon trying the several glasses and
several objects, among others, one of my plates, where the lines appeared
so very plain that it is not possible to thinke how plain it was done.
Thence satisfied exceedingly with all this we home and to discourse many
pretty things, and so staid out the afternoon till it began to be dark,
and then they away and I to Sir W. Batten, where the Lieutenant of the
Tower was, and Sir John Minnes, and the newes I find is no more or less
than what I had heard before; only that our Blue squadron, it seems, was
pursued the most of the time, having more ships, a great many, than its
number allotted to her share.  Young Seamour is killed, the only captain
slain.  The Resolution burned; but, as they say, most of her [crew] and
commander saved.  This is all, only we keep the sea, which denotes a
victory, or at least that we are not beaten; but no great matters to brag
of, God knows.  So home to supper and to bed.

30th.  Up, and did some business in my chamber, then by and by comes my
boy's Lute-Master, and I did direct him hereafter to begin to teach him to
play his part on the Theorbo, which he will do, and that in a little time
I believe.  So to the office, and there with Sir W. Warren, with whom I
have spent no time a good while.  We set right our business of the
Lighters, wherein I thinke I shall get L100. At noon home to dinner and
there did practise with Mercer one of my new tunes that I have got Dr.
Childe to set me a base to and it goes prettily.  Thence abroad to pay
several debts at the end of the month, and so to Sir W. Coventry, at St.
James's, where I find him in his new closett, which is very fine, and well
supplied with handsome books.  I find him speak very slightly of the late
victory: dislikes their staying with the fleete up their coast, believing
that the Dutch will come out in fourteen days, and then we with our
unready fleete, by reason of some of the ships being maymed, shall be in
bad condition to fight them upon their owne coast: is much dissatisfied
with the great number of men, and their fresh demands of twenty-four
victualling ships, they going out but the other day as full as they could
stow.  I asked him whether he did never desire an account of the number of
supernumeraries, as I have done several ways, without which we shall be in
great errour about the victuals; he says he has done it again and again,
and if any mistake should happen they must thanke themselves.  He spoke
slightly of the Duke of Albemarle, saying, when De Ruyter come to give him
a broadside--"Now," says he, chewing of tobacco the while, "will this
fellow come and give, me two broadsides, and then he will run;" but it
seems he held him to it two hours, till the Duke himself was forced to
retreat to refit, and was towed off, and De Ruyter staid for him till he
come back again to fight.  One in the ship saying to the Duke, "Sir,
methinks De Ruyter hath given us more: than two broadsides;"--"Well," says
the Duke, "but you shall find him run by and by," and so he did, says Sir
W. Coventry; but after the Duke himself had been first made to fall off.
The Resolution had all brass guns, being the same that Sir J. Lawson had
in her in the Straights.  It is observed that the two fleetes were even in
number to one ship.  Thence home; and to sing with my wife and Mercer in
the garden; and coming in I find my wife plainly dissatisfied with me,
that I can spend so much time with Mercer, teaching her to sing and could
never take the pains with her. Which I acknowledge; but it is because that
the girl do take musique mighty readily, and she do not, and musique is
the thing of the world that I love most, and all the pleasure almost that
I can now take.  So to bed in some little discontent, but no words from
me.

31st.  Good friends in the morning and up to the office, where sitting all
the morning, and while at table we were mightily joyed with newes brought
by Sir J. Minnes and Sir W. Batten of the death of De Ruyter, but when Sir
W. Coventry come, he told us there was no such thing, which quite dashed
me again, though, God forgive me!  I was a little sorry in my heart before
lest it might give occasion of too much glory to the Duke of Albemarle.
Great bandying this day between Sir W. Coventry and my Lord Bruncker about
Captain Cocke, which I am well pleased with, while I keepe from any open
relyance on either side, but rather on Sir W. Coventry's.  At noon had a
haunch of venison boiled and a very good dinner besides, there dining with
me on a sudden invitation the two mayden sisters, Bateliers, and their
elder brother, a pretty man, understanding and well discoursed, much
pleased with his company.  Having dined myself I rose to go to a Committee
of Tangier, and did come thither time enough to meet Povy and Creed and
none else.  The Court being empty, the King being gone to Tunbridge, and
the Duke of Yorke a-hunting.  I had some discourse with Povy, who is
mightily discontented, I find, about his disappointments at Court; and
says, of all places, if there be hell, it is here.  No faith, no truth, no
love, nor any agreement between man and wife, nor friends.  He would have
spoke broader, but I put it off to another time; and so parted.  Then with
Creed and read over with him the narrative of the late [fight], which he
makes a very poor thing of, as it is indeed, and speaks most slightingly
of the whole matter.  Povy discoursed with me about my Lord Peterborough's
L50 which his man did give me from him, the last year's salary I paid him,
which he would have Povy pay him again; but I have not taken it to myself
yet, and therefore will most heartily return him, and mark him out for a
coxcomb.  Povy went down to Mr. Williamson's, and brought me up this
extract out of the Flanders' letters to-day come: That Admiral Everson,
and the Admiral and Vice-Admiral of Freezeland, with many captains and
men, are slain; that De Ruyter is safe, but lost 250 men out of his own
ship; but that he is in great disgrace, and Trump in better favour; that
Bankert's ship is burned, himself hardly escaping with a few men on board
De Haes; that fifteen captains are to be tried the seventh of August; and
that the hangman was sent from Flushing to assist the Council of Warr.
How much of this is true, time will shew.  Thence to Westminster Hall and
walked an hour with Creed talking of the late fight, and observing the
ridiculous management thereof and success of the Duke of Albemarle. Thence
parted and to Mrs. Martin's lodgings, and sat with her a while, and then
by water home, all the way reading the Narrative of the late fight in
order, it may be, to the making some marginal notes upon it. At the Old
Swan found my Betty Michell at the doore, where I staid talking with her a
pretty while, it being dusky, and kissed her and so away home and writ my
letters, and then home to supper, where the, brother and Mary Batelier are
still and Mercer's two sisters.  They have spent the time dancing this
afternoon, and we were very merry, and then after supper into the garden
and there walked, and then home with them and then back again, my wife and
I and the girle, and sang in the garden and then to bed.  Colville was
with me this morning, and to my great joy I could now have all my money
in, that I have in the world.  But the times being open again, I thinke it
is best to keepe some of it abroad. Mighty well, and end this month in
content of mind and body.  The publique matters looking more safe for the
present than they did, and we having a victory over the Dutch just such as
I could have wished, and as the kingdom was fit to bear, enough to give us
the name of conquerors, and leave us masters of the sea, but without any
such great matters done as should give the Duke of Albemarle any honour at
all, or give him cause to rise to his former insolence.




     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     Better the musique, the more sicke it makes him
     Contempt of the ceremoniousnesse of the King of Spayne
     Listening to no reasoning for it, be it good or bad
     Many women now-a-days of mean sort in the streets, but no men
     Milke, which I drank to take away, my heartburne
     No money to do it with, nor anybody to trust us without it
     Rather hear a cat mew, than the best musique in the world
     Says, of all places, if there be hell, it is here
     So to bed in some little discontent, but no words from me
     The gentlemen captains will undo us
     To bed, after washing my legs and feet with warm water
     Venison-pasty that we have for supper to-night to the cook's
     With a shower of hail as big as walnuts
     World sees now the use of them for shelter of men (fore-castles)





End of Project Gutenberg's Diary of Samuel Pepys, July 1666, by Samuel Pepys

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, JULY 1666 ***

***** This file should be named 4166.txt or 4166.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/4/1/6/4166/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
