Project Gutenberg's Diary of Samuel Pepys, October 1666, by Samuel Pepys

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Diary of Samuel Pepys, October 1666

Author: Samuel Pepys

Release Date: December 1, 2004 [EBook #4168]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***




Produced by David Widger





                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A. F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                 OCTOBER
                                  1666

October 1st, 1666.   Up, and all the morning at the office, getting the
list of all the ships and vessels employed since the war, for the
Committee of Parliament.  At noon with it to Sir W. Coventry's chamber,
and there dined with him and [Sir] W. Batten, and [Sir] W. Pen, and after
dinner examined it and find it will do us much right in the number of men
rising to near the expense we delivered to the Parliament.  [Sir] W.
Coventry and I (the others going before the Committee) to Lord Bruncker's
for his hand, and find him simply mighty busy in a council of the Queen's.
He come out and took in the papers to sign, and sent them mighty wisely
out again.  Sir W. Coventry away to the Committee, and I to the Mercer's,
and there took a bill of what I owe of late, which comes to about L17.
Thence to White Hall, and there did hear Betty Michell was at this end of
the towne, and so without breach of vowe did stay to endeavour to meet
with her and carry her home; but she did not come, so I lost my whole
afternoon.  But pretty!  how I took another pretty woman for her, taking
her a clap on the breech, thinking verily it had been her.  Staid till
[Sir] W. Batten and [Sir] W. Pen come out, and so away home by water with
them, and to the office to do some business, and then home, and my wife do
tell me that W. Hewer tells her that Mercer hath no mind to come.  So I
was angry at it, and resolved with her to have Falconbridge's girle, and I
think it will be better for us, and will please me better with singing.
With this resolution, to supper and to bed.

2nd.  Up, and am sent for to Sir G. Carteret, and to him, and there he
tells me how our lists are referred to a Sub-committee to consider and
examine, and that I am ordered to be there this afternoon.  So I away
thence to my new bookbinder to see my books gilding in the backs, and then
to White Hall to the House, and spoke to Sir W. Coventry, where he told me
I must attend the Committee in the afternoon, and received some hints of
more work to do.  So I away to the 'Chequer, and thence to an alehouse,
and found Mr. Falconbridge, and agreed for his kinswoman to come to me.
He says she can dress my wife, and will do anything we would have her to
do, and is of a good spirit and mighty cheerful.  He is much pleased
therewith, and so we shall be.  So agreed for her coming the next week.
So away home, and eat a short dinner, and then with Sir W. Pen to White
Hall, and do give his boy my book of papers to hold while he went into the
Committee Chamber in the Inner Court of Wards, and I walked without with
Mr. Slingsby, of the Tower, who was there, and who did in walking inform
me mightily in several things; among others, that the heightening or
lowering of money is only a cheat, and do good to some particular men,
which, if I can but remember how, I am now by him fully convinced of.
Anon Sir W. Pen went away, telling me that Sir W. Coventry that was within
had told him that the fleete is all come into the buoy of the Nore, and
that he must hasten down to them, and so went away, and I into the
Committee Chamber before the Committee sat, and there heard Birch
discourse highly and understandingly about the Navy business and a
proposal made heretofore to farm the Navy; but Sir W. Coventry did
abundantly answer him, and is a most excellent person.  By and by the
Committee met, and I walked out, and anon they rose and called me in, and
appointed me to attend a Committee of them to-morrow at the office to
examine our lists.  This put me into a mighty fear and trouble; they doing
it in a very ill humour, methought.  So I away and called on my Lord
Bruncker to desire him to be there to-morrow, and so home, having taken up
my wife at Unthanke's, full of trouble in mind to think what I shall be
obliged to answer, that am neither fully fit, nor in any measure concerned
to take the shame and trouble of this office upon me, but only from the
inability and folly of the Comptroller that occasions it.  When come home
I to Sir W. Pen's, to his boy, for my book, and there find he hath it not,
but delivered it to the doorekeeper of the Committee for me. This, added
to my former disquiet, made me stark mad, considering all the nakedness of
the office lay open in papers within those covers.  I could not tell in
the world what to do, but was mad on all sides, and that which made me
worse Captain Cocke was there, and he did so swear and curse at the boy
that told me.  So Cocke, Griffin, and the boy with me, they to find the
housekeeper of the Parliament, Hughes, while I to Sir W. Coventry, but
could hear nothing of it there.  But coming to our rendezvous at the Swan
Taverne, in Ding Streete, I find they have found the housekeeper, and the
book simply locked up in the Court.  So I staid and drank, and rewarded
the doore-keeper, and away home, my heart lighter by all this, but to bed
very sad notwithstanding, in fear of what will happen to-morrow upon their
coming.

3rd.  Waked betimes, mightily troubled in mind, and in the most true
trouble that I ever was in my life, saving in the business last year of
the East India prizes.  So up, and with Mr. Hater and W. Hewer and Griffin
to consider of our business, and books and papers necessary for this
examination; and by and by, by eight o'clock, comes Birch, the first, with
the lists and books of accounts delivered in.  He calls me to work, and
there he and I begun, when, by and by, comes Garraway,

     [William Garway, elected M.P. for Chichester, March 26th, 1661, and
     in 1674 he was appointed by the House to confer with Lord
     Shaftesbury respecting the charge against Pepys being popishly
     affected.  See note to the Life, vol. i., p, xxxii, and for his
     character, October 6th, 1666]

the first time I ever saw him, and Sir W. Thompson and Mr. Boscawen. They
to it, and I did make shift to answer them better than I expected. Sir W.
Batten, Lord Bruncker, [Sir] W. Pen, come in, but presently went out; and
[Sir] J. Minnes come in, and said two or three words from the purpose, but
to do hurt; and so away he went also, and left me all the morning with
them alone to stand or fall.  At noon Sir W. Batten comes to them to
invite them (though fast day) to dinner, which they did, and good company
they were, but especially Garraway.  Here I have news brought me of my
father's coming to town, and I presently to him, glad to see him, poor
man, he being come to town unexpectedly to see us and the city. I could
not stay with him, but after dinner to work again, only the Committee and
I, till dark night, and by that time they cast up all the lists, and found
out what the medium of men was borne all the war, of all sorts, and ended
with good peace, and much seeming satisfaction; but I find them wise and
reserved, and instructed to hit all our blots, as among others, that we
reckon the ships full manned from the beginning. They gone, and my heart
eased of a great deale of fear and pain, and reckoning myself to come off
with victory, because not overcome in anything or much foiled, I away to
Sir W. Coventry's chamber, but he not within, then to White Hall, and
there among the ladies, and saw my Lady Castlemaine never looked so ill,
nor Mrs. Stewart neither, as in this plain, natural dress.  I was not
pleased with either of them.  Away, not finding [Sir] W. Coventry, and so
home, and there find my father and my brother come to towne--my father
without my expectation; but glad I am to see him.  And so to supper with
him, and to work again at the office; then home, to set up all my folio
books, which are come home gilt on the backs, very handsome to the eye,
and then at midnight to bed.  This night [Sir] W. Pen told me [Sir] W.
Batten swears he will have nothing to do with the Privateer if his son do
not go Lieutenant, which angers me and him; but we will be even with him,
one way or other.

4th.  Up, and mighty betimes, to [Sir] W. Coventry, to give him an account
of yesterday's work, which do give him good content.  He did then tell me
his speech lately to the House in his owne vindication about the report of
his selling of places, he having a small occasion offered him by chance,
which he did desire, and took, and did it to his content, and, he says, to
the House's seeming to approve of it by their hum.  He confessed how long
he had done it, and how he desired to have something else; and, since
then, he had taken nothing, and challenged all the world.  I was glad of
this also.  Thence up to the Duke of York, by appointment, with fellow
officers, to complaine, but to no purpose, of want of money, and so away.
I to Sir G. Carteret, to his lodging, and here discoursed much of the want
of money and our being designed for destruction.  How the King hath lost
his power, by submitting himself to this way of examining his accounts,
and is become but as a private man. He says the King is troubled at it,
but they talk an entry shall be made, that it is not to be brought into
example; that the King must, if they do not agree presently, make them a
courageous speech, which he says he may do, the City of London being now
burned, and himself master of an army, better than any prince before him,
and so I believe.  Thence home, about noon, to dinner.  After dinner the
book binder come, and I sent by him some more books to gild.  I to the
office all day, and spent most of it with Sir W. Warren, whom I have had
no discourse with a great while, and when all is done I do find him a
mighty wise man as any I know, and his counsel as much to be followed.
Late with Mr. Hater upon comparing the charge and husbandry of the last
Dutch war with ours now, and do find good roome to think we have done
little worse than they, whereof good use may and will be made.  So home to
supper, and to bed.

5th.  Up, and with my father talking awhile, then to the office, and there
troubled with a message from Lord Peterborough about money; but I did give
as kind answer as I could, though I hate him.  Then to Sir G. Carteret to
discourse about paying of part of the great ships come in, and so home
again to compare the comparison of the two Dutch wars' charges for [Sir]
W. Coventry, and then by water (and saw old Mr. Michell digging like a
painfull father for his son) to him, and find him at dinner.  After dinner
to look over my papers, and comparing them with some notes of his and
brought me, the sight of some good Navy notes of his which I shall get.
Then examined and liked well my notes, and away together to White Hall, in
the way discoursing the inconvenience of the King's being thus subject to
an account, but it will be remedied for the time to come, he thinks, if we
can get this over, and I find he will have the Comptroller's business
better done, swearing he will never be for a wit to be employed on
business again.  Thence I home, and back again to White Hall, and meeting
Sir H. Cholmly to White Hall; there walked till night that the Committee
come down, and there Sir W. Coventry tells me that the Subcommittee have
made their report to the Grand Committee, and in pretty kind terms, and
have agreed upon allowing us L4 per head, which I am sure will do the
business, but he had endeavoured to have got more, but this do well, and
he and I are both mighty glad it is come to this, and the heat of the
present business seems almost over.  But I have more worke cut out for me,
to prepare a list of the extraordinaries, not to be included within the
L4, against Monday.  So I away from him, and met with the
Vice-Chamberlain, and I told him when I had this evening in coming hither
met with Captain Cocke, and he told me of a wild motion made in the House
of Lords by the Duke of Buckingham for all men that had cheated the King
to be declared traitors and felons, and that my Lord Sandwich was named.
This put me into a great pain, so the Vice-Chamberlain, who had heard
nothing of it, having been all day in the City, away with me to White
Hall; and there come to me and told me that, upon Lord Ashly's asking
their direction whether, being a peere, he should bring in his accounts to
the Commons, which they did give way to, the Duke of Buckingham did move
that, for the time to come, what I have written above might be declared by
some fuller law than heretofore.  Lord Ashly answered, that it was not the
fault of the present laws, but want of proof; and so said the Lord
Chancellor.  He answered, that a better law, he thought, might be made so
the House laughing, did refer it to him to bring in a Bill to that
purpose, and this was all.  So I away with joyful heart home, calling on
Cocke and telling him the same.  So I away home to the office to clear my
Journall for five days, and so home to supper and to bed, my father who
had staid out late and troubled me thereat being come home well and gone
to bed, which pleases me also.  This day, coming home, Mr. Kirton's
kinsman, my bookseller, come in my way; and so I am told by him that Mr.
Kirton is utterly undone, and made 2 or L3000 worse than nothing, from
being worth 7 or L8,000.  That the goods laid in the Churchyarde fired
through the windows those in St. Fayth's church; and those coming to the
warehouses' doors fired them, and burned all the books and the pillars of
the church, so as the roof falling down, broke quite down, which it did
not do in the other places of the church, which is alike pillared (which I
knew not before); but being not burned, they stand still.  He do believe
there is above; L50,000 of books burned; all the great booksellers almost
undone: not only these, but their warehouses at their Hall, and under
Christchurch, and elsewhere being all burned.  A great want thereof there
will be of books, specially Latin books and foreign books; and, among
others, the Polyglottes and new Bible, which he believes will be presently
worth L40 a-piece.

6th.  Up, and having seen my brother in his cassocke, which I am not the
most satisfied in, being doubtfull at this time what course to have him
profess too soon.  To the office and there busy about a list of the
extraordinaries of the charge of the fleete this war; and was led to go to
the office of the ordnance to be satisfied in something, and find their
accounts and books kept in mighty good order, but that they can give no
light, nor will the nature of their affairs permit it to tell what the
charge of the ordnance comes to a man a month.  So home again and to
dinner, there coming Creed to me; but what with business and my hatred to
the man, I did not spend any time with him, but after dinner [my] wife and
he and I took coach and to Westminster, but he 'light about Paul's, and
set her at her tailor's, and myself to St. James's, but there missing
[Sir] W. Coventry, returned and took up my wife, and calling at the
Exchange home, whither Sir H. Cholmly come to visit me, but my business
suffered me not to stay with him.  So he gone I by water to Westminster
Hall and thence to St. James's, and there found [Sir] W. Coventry waiting
for me, and I did give him a good account to his mind of the business he
expected about extraordinaries and then fell to other talke, among others,
our sad condition contracted by want of a Comptroller;

     [As Sir John Minnes performed the duties inefficiently, it was
     considered necessary to take the office from him: See January 21st.]

and it was his words, that he believes, besides all the shame and trouble
he hath brought on the office, the King had better have given L100,000
than ever have had him there.  He did discourse about some of these
discontented Parliament-men, and says that Birch is a false rogue, but
that Garraway is a man that hath not been well used by the Court, though
very stout to death, and hath suffered all that is possible for the King
from the beginning.  But discontented as he is, yet he never knew a
Session of Parliament but he hath done some good deed for the King before
it rose.  I told him the passage Cocke told me of his having begged a
brace of bucks of the Lord Arlington for him, and when it come to him, he
sent it back again.  Sir W. Coventry told me, it is much to be pitied that
the King should lose the service of a man so able and faithfull; and that
he ought to be brought over, but that it is always observed, that by
bringing over one discontented man, you raise up three in his room; which
is a State lesson I never knew before.  But when others discover your
fear, and that discontent procures favour, they will be discontented too,
and impose on you.  Thence to White Hall and got a coach and home, and
there did business late, and so home and set up my little books of one of
my presses come home gilt, which pleases me mightily, and then to bed.
This morning my wife told me of a fine gentlewoman my Lady Pen tells her
of, for L20 per annum, that sings, dances, plays on four or five
instruments and many other fine things, which pleases me mightily: and she
sent to have her see her, which she did this afternoon; but sings basely,
and is a tawdry wench that would take L8, but [neither] my wife nor I
think her fit to come.

7th (Lord's day).  Up, and after visiting my father in his chamber, to
church, and then home to dinner.  Little Michell and his wife come to dine
with us, which they did, and then presently after dinner I with Sir J.
Minnes to White Hall, where met by Sir W. Batten and Lord Bruncker, to
attend the King and Duke of York at the Cabinet; but nobody had determined
what to speak of, but only in general to ask for money.  So I was forced
immediately to prepare in my mind a method of discoursing. And anon we
were called in to the Green Room, where the King, Duke of York, Prince
Rupert, Lord Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, Duke of Albemarle, [Sirs] G.
Carteret, W. Coventry, Morrice.  Nobody beginning, I did, and made a
current, and I thought a good speech, laying open the ill state of the
Navy: by the greatness of the debt; greatness of work to do against next
yeare; the time and materials it would take; and our incapacity, through a
total want of money.  I had no sooner done, but Prince Rupert rose up and
told the King in a heat, that whatever the gentleman had said, he had
brought home his fleete in as good a condition as ever any fleete was
brought home; that twenty boats would be as many as the fleete would want:
and all the anchors and cables left in the storm might be taken up again.
This arose from my saying, among other things we had to do, that the
fleete was come in--the greatest fleete that ever his Majesty had yet
together, and that in as bad condition as the enemy or weather could put
it; and to use Sir W. Pen's words, who is upon the place taking a survey,
he dreads the reports he is to receive from the Surveyors of its defects.
I therefore did only answer, that I was sorry for his Highness's offence,
but that what I said was but the report we received from those entrusted
in the fleete to inform us.  He muttered and repeated what he had said;
and so, after a long silence on all hands, nobody, not so much as the Duke
of Albemarle, seconding the Prince, nor taking notice of what he said, we
withdrew.  I was not a little troubled at this passage, and the more when
speaking with Jacke Fenn about it, he told me that the Prince will be
asking now who this Pepys is, and find him to be a creature of my Lord
Sandwich's, and therefore this was done only to disparage him.  Anon they
broke, up, and Sir W. Coventry come out; so I asked his advice.  He told
me he had said something to salve it, which was, that his Highnesse had,
he believed, rightly informed the King that the fleete is come in good
condition to have staid out yet longer, and have fought the enemy, but yet
that Mr. Pepys his meaning might be, that, though in so good condition, if
they should come in and lie all the winter, we shall be very loth to send
them to sea for another year's service with[out] great repairs.  He said
it would be no hurt if I went to him, and showed him the report himself
brought up from the fleete, where every ship, by the Commander's report,
do need more or less, and not to mention more of Sir W. Pen for doing him
a mischief. So I said I would, but do not think that all this will redound
to my hurt, because the truth of what I said will soon appear.  Thence,
having been informed that, after all this pains, the King hath found out
how to supply us with 5 or L6000, when L100,000 were at this time but
absolutely necessary, and we mentioned L50,000.  This is every day a
greater and greater omen of ruine.  God fit us for it!  Sir J. Minnes and
I home (it raining) by coach, calling only on Sir G. Cartefet at his
lodging (who is I find troubled at my Lord Treasurer and Sir Ph. Warwicke
bungling in his accounts), and come home to supper with my father, and
then all to bed.  I made my brother in his cassocke to say grace this day,
but I like his voice so ill that I begin to be sorry he hath taken this
order upon him.

8th.  Up and to my office, called up by Commissioner Middleton, newly come
to town, but staid not with me; so I to my office busy all the morning.
Towards noon, by water to Westminster Hall, and there by several hear that
the Parliament do resolve to do something to retrench Sir G. Carteret's
great salary; but cannot hear of any thing bad they can lay to his charge.
The House did this day order to be engrossed the Bill against importing
Irish cattle; a thing, it seems, carried on by the Western Parliament-men,
wholly against the sense of most of the rest of the House; who think if
you do this, you give the Irish again cause to rebel.  Thus plenty on both
sides makes us mad.  The Committee of the Canary Company of both factions
come to me for my Cozen Roger that is of the Committee.  Thence with [Sir]
W. Coventry when the House rose and [Sir] W. Batten to St. James's, and
there agreed of and signed our paper of extraordinaries, and there left
them, and I to Unthanke's, where Mr. Falconbridge's girle is, and by and
by comes my wife, who likes her well, though I confess I cannot (though
she be of my finding out and sings pretty well), because she will be
raised from so mean a condition to so high all of a sudden; but she will
be much to our profit, more than Mercer, less expense.  Here we bespoke
anew gowne for her, and to come to us on Friday.  She being gone, my wife
and I home by coach, and then I presently by water with Mr. Pierce to
Westminster Hall, he in the way telling me how the Duke of York and Duke
of Albemarle do not agree.  The Duke of York is wholly given up to this
bitch of Denham.  The Duke of Albemarle and Prince Rupert do less agree.
So that we are all in pieces, and nobody knows what will be done the next
year.  The King hath yesterday in Council declared his resolution of
setting a fashion for clothes, which he will never alter.

     [There are several references to this new fashion of dress
     introduced by the king, Pepys saw the Duke of York put on the vest
     on the 13th, and he says Charles II. himself put it on on the 15th.
     On November 4th Pepys dressed himself in the new vest and coat.  See
     notes, October 15th and November 22nd.]

It will be a vest, I know not well how; but it is to teach the nobility
thrift, and will do good.  By and by comes down from the Committee [Sir]
W. Coventry, and I find him troubled at several things happened this
afternoon, which vexes me also; our business looking worse and worse, and
our worke growing on our hands.  Time spending, and no money to set
anything in hand with; the end thereof must be speedy ruine.  The Dutch
insult and have taken off Bruant's head,

     [Captain Du Buat, a Frenchman in the Dutch service, plotted with two
     magistrates of Rotterdam to obtain a peace with England as the
     readiest means of pressing the elevation of the Prince of Orange to
     the office of Captain-General.  He was brought before the Supreme
     Court of Holland, condemned, and executed.  He had been one of the
     household of the Prince of Orange who were dismissed by De Witt.]

which they have not dared to do (though found guilty of the fault he did
die for, of something of the Prince of Orange's faction) till just now,
which speaks more confidence in our being worse than before.  Alderman
Maynell, I hear, is dead.  Thence returned in the darke by coach all
alone, full of thoughts of the consequences of this ill complexion of
affairs, and how to save myself and the little I have, which if I can do,
I have cause to bless God that I am so well, and shall be well contented
to retreat to Brampton, and spend the rest of my days there.  So to my
office, and did some business, and finished my Journall with resolutions,
if God bless me, to apply myself soberly to settle all matters for myself,
and expect the event of all with comfort.  So home to supper and to bed.

9th.  Up and to the office, where we sat the first day since the fire, I
think.  At noon home, and my uncle Thomas was there, and dined with my
brother and I (my father and I were gone abroad), and then to the office
again in the afternoon, and there close all day long, and did much
business.  At night to Sir W. Batten, where Sir R. Ford did occasion some
discourse of sending a convoy to the Maderas; and this did put us upon
some new thoughts of sending our privateer thither on merchants' accounts,
which I have more mind to, the profit being certain and occasion honest
withall.  So home, and to supper with my father, and then to set my
remainder of my books gilt in order with much pleasure, and so late to
bed.

10th (Fast-day for the fire).  Up with Sir W. Batten by water to White
Hall, and anon had a meeting before the Duke of York, where pretty to see
how Sir W. Batten, that carried the surveys of all the fleete with him, to
shew their ill condition to the Duke of York, when he found the Prince
there, did not speak one word, though the meeting was of his asking--for
nothing else.  And when I asked him, he told me he knew the Prince too
well to anger him, so that he was afeard to do it.  Thence with him to
Westminster, to the parish church, where the Parliament-men, and
Stillingfleete in the pulpit.  So full, no standing there; so he and I to
eat herrings at the Dog Taverne.  And then to church again, and there was
Mr. Frampton in the pulpit, they cry up so much, a young man, and of a
mighty ready tongue.  I heard a little of his sermon, and liked it; but
the crowd so great, I could not stay.  So to the Swan, and 'baise la
fille', and drank, and then home by coach, and took father, wife, brother,
and W. Hewer to Islington, where I find mine host dead.  Here eat and
drank, and merry; and so home, and to the office a while, and then to Sir
W. Batten to talk a while, and with Captain Cocke into the office to hear
his newes, who is mighty conversant with Garraway and those people, who
tells me what they object as to the maladministration of things as to
money.  But that they mean well, and will do well; but their reckonings
are very good, and show great faults, as I will insert here.  They say the
king hath had towards this war expressly thus much

     Royal Ayde.................................... L2,450,000
     More..........................................  1,250,000
     Three months' tax given the King by a power of
          raising a month's tax of L70,000 every
          year for three years.....................  0,210,000
     Customes, out of which the King did promise
          to pay L240,000, which for two years
          comes to.................................. 0,480,000
     Prizes, which they moderately reckon at........ 0,300,000
     A debt declared by the Navy, by us............. 0,900,000
                                                    ----------
                                                     5,590,000

     The whole charge of the Navy, as we state it
          for two years and a month, hath been but.. 3,200,000

          So what is become of all this sum?........ 2,390,000

He and I did bemoan our public condition.  He tells me the Duke of
Albemarle is under a cloud, and they have a mind at Court to lay him
aside.  This I know not; but all things are not right with him, and I am
glad of it, but sorry for the time.  So home to supper, and to bed, it
being my wedding night,

     [See Life, vol. i., p. xxi., where the register of St. Margaret's
     parish, Westminster, is quoted to the effect that Pepys was married
     December 1st, 1655.  It seems incomprehensible that both husband and
     wife should have been wrong as to the date of their wedding day, but
     Mrs. Pepys was unquestionably wrong as to the number of years, for
     they had been married nearly eleven.]

but how many years I cannot tell; but my wife says ten.

11th.  Up, and discoursed with my father of my sending some money for
safety into the country, for I am in pain what to do with what I have. I
did give him money, poor man, and he overjoyed.  So left him, and to the
office, where nothing but sad evidences of ruine coming on us for want of
money.  So home to dinner, which was a very good dinner, my father,
brother, wife and I, and then to the office again, where I was all the
afternoon till very late, busy, and then home to supper and to bed.

     Memorandum.  I had taken my Journall during the fire and the
     disorders following in loose papers until this very day, and could
     not get time to enter them in my book till January 18, in the
     morning, having made my eyes sore by frequent attempts this winter
     to do it.  But now it is done, for which I thank God, and pray never
     the like occasion may happen.

12th.  Up, and after taking leave of my poor father, who is setting out
this day for Brampton by the Cambridge coach, he having taken a journey to
see the city burned, and to bring my brother to towne, I out by water; and
so coach to St. James's, the weather being foul; and there, from Sir W.
Coventry, do hear how the House have cut us off L150,000 of our wear and
tear, for that which was saved by the King while the fleete lay in harbour
in winter.  However, he seems pleased, and so am I, that they have abated
no more, and do intend to allow of 28,000 men for the next year; and this
day have appointed to declare the sum they will give the King,

     [The parliament voted this day a supply of L1,800,000 sterling.
     See below.]

and to propose the way of raising it; so that this is likely to be the
great day.  This done in his chamber, I with him to Westminster Hall, and
there took a few turns, the Hall mighty full of people, and the House
likely to be very full to-day about the money business.  Here I met with
several people, and do find that people have a mighty mind to have a fling
at the Vice-Chamberlain, if they could lay hold of anything, his place
being, indeed, too much for such, they think, or any single subject of no
greater parts and quality than he, to enjoy.  But I hope he may weather
all, though it will not be by any dexterity of his, I dare say, if he do
stand, but by his fate only, and people's being taken off by other things.
Thence home by coach, mighty dirty weather, and then to the Treasurer's
office and got a ticket paid for my little Michell, and so again by coach
to Westminster, and come presently after the House rose.  So to the Swan,
and there sent for a piece of meat and dined alone and played with Sarah,
and so to the Hall a while, and thence to Mrs. Martin's lodging and did
what I would with her.  She is very big, and resolves I must be godfather.
Thence away by water with Cropp to Deptford.  It was almost night before I
got thither.  So I did only give directions concerning a press that I have
making there to hold my turning and joyner's tooles that were lately given
me, which will be very handsome, and so away back again, it being now
dark, and so home, and there find my wife come home, and hath brought her
new girle I have helped her to, of Mr. Falconbridge's.  She is wretched
poor; and but ordinary favoured; and we fain to lay out seven or eight
pounds worth of clothes upon her back, which, methinks, do go against my
heart; and I do not think I can ever esteem her as I could have done
another that had come fine and handsome; and which is more, her voice, for
want of use, is so furred, that it do not at present please me; but her
manner of singing is such, that I shall, I think, take great pleasure in
it.  Well, she is come, and I wish us good fortune in her.  Here I met
with notice of a meeting of the Commissioners for Tangier tomorrow, and so
I must have my accounts ready for them, which caused me to confine myself
to my chamber presently and set to the making up my accounts, which I find
very clear, but with much difficulty by reason of my not doing them
sooner, things being out of my mind.

13th.  It cost me till four o'clock in the morning, and, which was pretty
to think, I was above an hour, after I had made all right, in casting up
of about twenty sums, being dozed with much work, and had for forty times
together forgot to carry the 60 which I had in my mind, in one
denomination which exceeded 60; and this did confound me for above an hour
together.  At last all even and done, and so to bed.  Up at seven, and so
to the office, after looking over my last night's work.  We sat all the
morning.  At noon by coach with my Lord Bruncker and 'light at the Temple,
and so alone I to dinner at a cooke's, and thence to my Lord Bellasses,
whom I find kind; but he had drawn some new proposal to deliver to the
Lords Commissioners to-day, wherein one was, that the garrison would not
be well paid without some goldsmith's undertaking the paying of the bills
of exchange for Tallys.  He professing so much kindness to me, and saying
that he would not be concerned in the garrison without me; and that if he
continued in the employment, no man should have to do with the money but
myself.  I did ask his Lordship's meaning of the proposition in his paper.
He told me he had not much considered it, but that he meant no harm to me.
I told him I thought it would render me useless; whereupon he did very
frankly, after my seeming denials for a good while, cause it to be writ
over again, and that clause left out, which did satisfy me abundantly.  It
being done, he and I together to White Hall, and there the Duke of York
(who is gone over to all his pleasures again, and leaves off care of
business, what with his woman, my Lady Denham, and his hunting three times
a week) was just come in from hunting.  So I stood and saw him dress
himself, and try on his vest, which is the King's new fashion, and will be
in it for good and all on Monday next, and the whole Court: it is a
fashion, the King says; he will never change.  He being ready, he and my
Lord Chancellor, and Duke of Albemarle, and Prince Rupert, Lord Bellasses,
Sir H. Cholmly, Povy, and myself, met at a Committee for Tangier.  My Lord
Bellasses's propositions were read and discoursed of, about reducing the
garrison to less charge; and indeed I am mad in love with my Lord
Chancellor, for he do comprehend and speak out well, and with the greatest
easinesse and authority that ever I saw man in my life.  I did never
observe how much easier a man do speak when he knows all the company to be
below him, than in him; for though he spoke, indeed, excellent welt, yet
his manner and freedom of doing it, as if he played with it, and was
informing only all the rest of the company, was mighty pretty.  He did
call again and again upon Mr. Povy for his accounts.  I did think fit to
make the solemn tender of my accounts that I intended.  I said something
that was liked, touching the want of money, and the bad credit of our
tallys.  My Lord Chancellor moved, that without any trouble to any of the
rest of the Lords, I might alone attend the King, when he was with his
private Council; and open the state of the garrison's want of credit; and
all that could be done, should.  Most things moved were referred to
Committees, and so we broke up.  And at the end Sir W. Coventry come; so I
away with him, and he discoursed with me something of the Parliament's
business.  They have voted giving the [King] for next year L1,800,000;
which, were it not for his debts, were a great sum.  He says, he thinks
the House may say no more to us for the present, but that we must mend our
manners against the next tryall, and mend them we will.  But he thinks it
not a fit time to be found making of trouble among ourselves, meaning
about Sir J. Minnes, who most certainly must be removed, or made a
Commissioner, and somebody else Comptroller.  But he tells me that the
House has a great envy at Sir G. Carteret, and that had he ever thought
fit in all his discourse to have touched upon the point of our want of
money and badness of payment, it would have been laid hold on to Sir G.
Carteret's hurt; but he hath avoided it, though without much reason for
it, most studiously, and in short did end thus, that he has never shewn so
much of the pigeon in all his life as in his innocence to Sir G. Carteret
at this time; which I believe, and will desire Sir G. Carteret to thank
him for it.  So we broke up and I by coach home, calling for a new pair of
shoes, and so, little being to do at the office, did go home, and after
spending a little in righting some of my books, which stood out of order,
I to bed.

14th (Lord's day).  Lay long in bed, among other things, talking of my
wife's renewing her acquaintance with Mrs. Pierce, which, by my wife's ill
using her when she was here last, hath been interrupted.  Herein we were a
little angry together, but presently friends again; and so up, and I to
church, which was mighty full, and my beauties, Mrs. Lethulier and fair
Batelier, both there.  A very foul morning, and rained; and sent for my
cloake to go out of the church with.  So dined, and after dinner (a good
discourse thereat to my brother) he and I by water to White Hall, and he
to Westminster Abbey.  Here I met with Sir Stephen Fox, who told me how
much right I had done myself, and how well it is represented by the
Committee to the House, my readinesse to give them satisfaction in
everything when they were at the office.  I was glad of this.  He did
further discourse of Sir W. Coventry's, great abilities, and how necessary
it were that I were of the House to assist him.  I did not owne it, but do
myself think it were not unnecessary if either he should die, or be
removed to the Lords, or any thing to hinder his doing the like service
the next trial, which makes me think that it were not a thing very unfit;
but I will not move in it.  He and I parted, I to Mrs. Martin's, thinking
to have met Mrs. Burrows, but she was not there, so away and took my
brother out of the Abbey and home, and there to set some accounts right,
and to the office to even my Journall, and so home to supper and to bed.

15th.  Called up, though a very rainy morning, by Sir H. Cholmley, and he
and I most of the morning together evening of accounts, which I was very
glad of.  Then he and I out to Sir Robt. Viner's, at the African house
(where I had not been since he come thither); but he was not there; but I
did some business with his people, and then to Colvill's, who, I find,
lives now in Lyme Streete, and with the same credit as ever, this fire
having not done them any wrong that I hear of at all.  Thence he and I
together to Westminster Hall, in our way talking of matters and passages
of state, the viciousness of the Court; the contempt the King brings
himself into thereby; his minding nothing, but doing all things just as
his people about him will have it; the Duke of York becoming a slave to
this whore Denham, and wholly minds her; that there really was amours
between the Duchesse and Sidney; a that there is reason to fear that, as
soon as the Parliament have raised this money, the King will see that he
hath got all that he can get, and then make up a peace.  He tells me, what
I wonder at, but that I find it confirmed by Mr. Pierce, whom I met
by-and-by in the Hall, that Sir W. Coventry is of the caball with the Duke
of York, and Bruncker, with this Denham; which is a shame, and I am sorry
for it, and that Sir W. Coventry do make her visits; but yet I hope it is
not so.  Pierce tells me, that as little agreement as there is between the
Prince--[Rupert]--and Duke of Albemarle, yet they are likely to go to sea
again; for the first will not be trusted alone, and nobody will go with
him but this Duke of Albemarle.  He tells me much how all the commanders
of the fleete and officers that are sober men do cry out upon their bad
discipline, and the ruine that must follow it if it continue.  But that
which I wonder most at, it seems their secretaries have been the most
exorbitant in their fees to all sorts of the people, that it is not to be
believed that they durst do it, so as it is believed they have got L800
apiece by the very vacancies in the fleete.  He tells me that Lady
Castlemayne is concluded to be with child again; and that all the people
about the King do make no scruple of saying that the King do lie with Mrs.
Stewart, who, he says, is a most excellent-natured lady. This day the King
begins to put on his vest, and I did see several persons of the House of
Lords and Commons too, great courtiers, who are in it; being a long
cassocke close to the body, of black cloth, and pinked with white silke
under it, and a coat over it, and the legs ruffled with black riband like
a pigeon's leg; and, upon the whole, I wish the King may keep it, for it
is a very fine and handsome garment.

     [Evelyn describes the new fashion as "a comely dress after ye
     Persian mode" (see "Diary," October 18th, 1666).  He adds that he
     had described the "comelinesse and usefulnesse" of the Persian
     clothing in his pamphlet entitled "Tyrannus, or the Mode."  "I do
     not impute to this discourse the change which soone happen'd, but
     it was an identity I could not but take notice of."  Rugge, in his
     "Diurnal," thus describes the new Court costume "1666, Oct. 11.  In
     this month His Majestie and whole Court changed the fashion of their
     clothes-viz. a close coat of cloth, pinkt with a white taffety under
     the cutts.  This in length reached the calf of the leg, and upon
     that a sercoat cutt at the breast, which hung loose and shorter than
     the vest six inches.  The breeches the Spanish cut, and buskins some
     of cloth, some of leather, but of the same colour as the vest or
     garment; of never the like fashion since William the Conqueror."  It
     is represented in a portrait of Lord Arlington, by Sir P. Lely,
     formerly belonging to Lord de Clifford, and engraved in Lodge's
     "Portraits."  Louis XIV. ordered his servants to wear the dress.
     See November 22.]

Walking with Pierce in the Court of Wards out comes Sir W. Coventry, and
he and I talked of business.  Among others I proposed the making Sir J.
Minnes a Commissioner, and make somebody else Comptroller.  He tells me it
is the thing he hath been thinking of, and hath spoke to the Duke of York
of it.  He believes it will be done; but that which I fear is that Pen
will be Comptroller, which I shall grudge a little.  The Duke of
Buckingham called him aside and spoke a good while with him.  I did
presently fear it might be to discourse something of his design to blemish
my Lord of Sandwich, in pursuance of the wild motion he made the other day
in the House.  Sir W. Coventry, when he come to me again, told me that he
had wrought a miracle, which was, the convincing the Duke of Buckingham
that something--he did not name what--that he had intended to do was not
fit to be done, and that the Duke is gone away of that opinion.  This
makes me verily believe it was something like what I feared.  By and by
the House rose, and then we parted, and I with Sir G. Carteret, and walked
in the Exchequer Court, discoursing of businesses. Among others, I
observing to him how friendly Sir W. Coventry had carried himself to him
in these late inquiries, when, if he had borne him any spleen, he could
have had what occasion he pleased offered him, he did confess he found the
same thing, and would thanke him for it.  I did give him some other
advices, and so away with him to his lodgings at White Hall to dinner,
where my Lady Carteret is, and mighty kind, both of them, to me.  Their
son and my Lady Jemimah will be here very speedily.  She tells me the
ladies are to go into a new fashion shortly, and that is, to wear short
coats, above their ancles; which she and I do not like, but conclude this
long trayne to be mighty graceful.  But she cries out of the vices of the
Court, and how they are going to set up plays already; and how, the next
day after the late great fast, the Duchesse of York did give the King and
Queene a play.  Nay, she told me that they have heretofore had plays at
Court the very nights before the fast for the death of the late King: She
do much cry out upon these things, and that which she believes will undo
the whole nation; and I fear so too.  After dinner away home, Mr. Brisband
along with me as far as the Temple, and there looked upon a new booke, set
out by one Rycault, secretary to my Lord Winchelsea, of the policy and
customs of the Turks, which is, it seems, much cried up.  But I could not
stay, but home, where I find Balty come back, and with him some
muster-books, which I am glad of, and hope he will do me credit in his
employment.  By and by took coach again and carried him home, and my wife
to her tailor's, while I to White Hall to have found out Povy, but miss
him and so call in my wife and home again, where at Sir W. Batten's I met
Sir W. Pen, lately come from the fleete at the Nore; and here were many
good fellows, among others Sir R. Holmes, who is exceeding kind to me,
more than usual, which makes me afeard of him, though I do much wish his
friendship.  Thereupon, after a little stay, I withdrew, and to the office
and awhile, and then home to supper and to my chamber to settle a few
papers, and then to bed.  This day the great debate was in Parliament, the
manner of raising the L1,800,000 they voted [the King] on Friday; and at
last, after many proposals, one moved that the Chimney-money might be
taken from the King, and an equal revenue of something else might be found
for the King, and people be enjoyned to buy off this tax of Chimney-money
for ever at eight years' purchase, which will raise present money, as they
think, L1,600,000, and the State be eased of an ill burthen and the King
be supplied of something as food or better for his use.  The House seems
to like this, and put off the debate to to-morrow.

16th.  Up, and to the office, where sat to do little business but hear
clamours for money.  At noon home to dinner, and to the office again,
after hearing my brother play a little upon the Lyra viall, which he do so
as to show that he hath a love to musique and a spirit for it, which I am
well pleased with.  All the afternoon at the office, and at night with Sir
W. Batten, Sir W. Pen, [and Sir] J. Minnes, at [Sir] W. Pen's lodgings,
advising about business and orders fit presently to make about discharging
of ships come into the river, and which to pay first, and many things in
order thereto.  But it vexed me that, it being now past seven o'clock, and
the businesses of great weight, and I had done them by eight o'clock, and
sending them to be signed, they were all gone to bed, and Sir W. Pen,
though awake, would not, being in bed, have them brought to him to sign;
this made me quite angry.  Late at work at the office, and then home to
supper and to bed.  Not come to any resolution at the Parliament to-day
about the manner of raising this L1,800,000.

17th.  Up, and busy about public and private business all the morning at
the office.  At noon home to dinner, alone with my brother, with whom I
had now the first private talke I have had, and find he hath preached but
twice in his life.  I did give him some advice to study pronunciation; but
I do fear he will never make a good speaker, nor, I fear, any general good
scholar, for I do not see that he minds optickes or mathematiques of any
sort, nor anything else that I can find.  I know not what he may be at
divinity and ordinary school-learning.  However, he seems sober, and that
pleases me.  After dinner took him and my wife and Barker (for so is our
new woman called, and is yet but a sorry girle), and set them down at
Unthanke's, and so to White Hall, and there find some of my brethren with
the Duke of York, but so few I put off the meeting.  So staid and heard
the Duke discourse, which he did mighty scurrilously, of the French, and
with reason, that they should give Beaufort orders when he was to bring,
and did bring, his fleete hither, that his rendezvous for his fleete, and
for all sluggs to come to, should be between Calais and Dover; which did
prove the taking of La Roche[lle], who, among other sluggs behind, did, by
their instructions, make for that place, to rendezvous with the fleete;
and Beaufort, seeing them as he was returning, took them for the English
fleete, and wrote word to the King of France that he had passed by the
English fleete, and the English fleete durst not meddle with him. The
Court is all full of vests, only my Lord St. Albans not pinked but plain
black; and they say the King says the pinking upon white makes them look
too much like magpyes, and therefore hath bespoke one of plain velvet.
Thence to St. James's by coach, and spoke, at four o'clock or five, with
Sir W. Coventry, newly come from the House, where they have sat all this
day and not come to an end of the debate how the money shall be raised.
He tells me that what I proposed to him the other day was what he had
himself thought on and determined, and that he believes it will speedily
be done--the making Sir J. Minnes a Commissioner, and bringing somebody
else to be Comptroller, and that (which do not please me, I confess, for
my own particulars, so well as Sir J. Minnes) will, I fear, be Sir W. Pen,
for he is the only fit man for it.  Away from him and took up my wife, and
left her at Temple Bar to buy some lace for a petticoat, and I took coach
and away to Sir R. Viner's about a little business, and then home, and by
and by to my chamber, and there late upon making up an account for the
Board to pass to-morrow, if I can get them, for the clearing all my
imprest bills, which if I can do, will be to my very good satisfaction.
Having done this, then to supper and to bed.

18th.  Up, and to the office, where we sat all the morning.  The waters so
high in the roads, by the late rains, that our letters come not in till
to-day, and now I understand that my father is got well home, but had a
painful journey of it.  At noon with Lord Bruncker to St. Ellen's, where
the master of the late Pope's Head Taverne is now set up again, and there
dined at Sir W. Warren's cost, a very good dinner.  Here my Lord Bruncker
proffered to carry me and my wife into a play at Court to-night, and to
lend me his coach home, which tempted me much; but I shall not do it.
Thence rose from table before dinner ended, and homewards met my wife, and
so away by coach towards Lovett's (in the way wondering at what a good
pretty wench our Barker makes, being now put into good clothes, and
fashionable, at my charge; but it becomes her, so that I do not now think
much of it, and is an example of the power of good clothes and dress),
where I stood godfather.  But it was pretty, that, being a Protestant, a
man stood by and was my Proxy to answer for me.  A priest christened it,
and the boy's name is Samuel.  The ceremonies many, and some foolish.  The
priest in a gentleman's dress, more than my owne; but is a Capuchin, one
of the Queene-mother's priests.  He did give my proxy and the woman proxy
(my Lady Bills, absent, had a proxy also) good advice to bring up the
child, and, at the end, that he ought never to marry the child nor the
godmother, nor the godmother the child or the godfather: but, which is
strange, they say that the mother of the child and the godfather may
marry.  By and by the Lady Bills come in, a well-bred but crooked woman.
The poor people of the house had good wine, and a good cake; and she a
pretty woman in her lying-in dress.  It cost me near 40s. the whole
christening: to midwife 20s., nurse 10s., mayde 2s. 6d., and the coach 5s.
I was very well satisfied with what I have done, and so home and to the
office, and thence to Sir W. Batten's, and there hear how the business of
buying off the Chimney-money is passed in the House; and so the King to be
satisfied some other way, and the King supplied with the money raised by
this purchasing off of the chimnies.  So home, mightily pleased in mind
that I have got my bills of imprest cleared by bills signed this day, to
my good satisfaction.  To supper, and to bed.

19th.  Up, and by coach to my Lord Ashly's, and thence (he being gone
out), to the Exchequer chamber, and there find him and my Lord Bellasses
about my Lord Bellasses' accounts, which was the business I went upon.
This was soon ended, and then I with Creed back home to my house, and
there he and I did even accounts for salary, and by that time dinner was
ready, and merry at dinner, and then abroad to Povy's, who continues as
much confounded in all his business as ever he was; and would have had me
paid money, as like a fool as himself, which I troubled him in refusing;
but I did persist in it.  After a little more discourse, I left them, and
to White Hall, where I met with Sir Robert Viner, who told me a little of
what, in going home, I had seen; also a little of the disorder and mutiny
among the seamen at the Treasurer's office, which did trouble me then and
all day since, considering how many more seamen will come to towne every
day, and no money for them.  A Parliament sitting, and the Exchange close
by, and an enemy to hear of, and laugh at it.

     [The King of Denmark was induced to conclude a treaty with the
     United Provinces, a secret article of which bound him to declare war
     against England.  The order in council for the printing and
     publishing a declaration of war against Denmark is dated "Whitehall,
     Sept.  19, 1666;" annexed is "A True Declaration of all
     transactions between his Majesty of Great Britain and the King of
     Denmark, with a declaration of war against the said king, and the
     motives that obliged his Majesty thereunto" ("Calendar of State
     Papers," 1666-67, p. 140).]

Viner too, and Backewell, were sent for this afternoon; and was before the
King and his Cabinet about money; they declaring they would advance no
more, it being discoursed of in the House of Parliament for the King to
issue out his privy-seals to them to command them to trust him, which
gives them reason to decline trusting.  But more money they are persuaded
to lend, but so little that (with horrour I speake it), coming after the
Council was up, with Sir G. Carteret, Sir W. Coventry, Lord Bruncker, and
myself, I did lay the state of our condition before the Duke of York, that
the fleete could not go out without several things it wanted, and we could
not have without money, particularly rum and bread, which we have promised
the man Swan to helpe him to L200 of his debt, and a few other small sums
of L200 a piece to some others, and that I do foresee the Duke of York
would call us to an account why the fleete is not abroad, and we cannot
answer otherwise than our want of money; and that indeed we do not do the
King any service now, but do rather abuse and betray his service by being
there, and seeming to do something, while we do not.  Sir G. Carteret
asked me (just in these words, for in this and all the rest I set down the
very words for memory sake, if there should be occasion) whether L50 or
L60 would do us any good; and when I told him the very rum man must have
L200, he held up his eyes as if we had asked a million. Sir W. Coventry
told the Duke of York plainly he did rather desire to have his commission
called in than serve in so ill a place, where he cannot do the King
service, and I did concur in saying the same.  This was all very plain,
and the Duke of York did confess that he did not see how we could do
anything without a present supply of L20,000, and that he would speak to
the King next Council day, and I promised to wait on him to put him in
mind of it.  This I set down for my future justification, if need be, and
so we broke up, and all parted, Sir W. Coventry being not very well, but I
believe made much worse by this night's sad discourse. So I home by coach,
considering what the consequence of all this must be in a little time.
Nothing but distraction and confusion; which makes me wish with all my
heart that I were well and quietly settled with what little I have got at
Brampton, where I might live peaceably, and study, and pray for the good
of the King and my country.  Home, and to Sir W. Batten's, where I saw my
Lady, who is now come down stairs after a great sickness.  Sir W. Batten
was at the pay to-day, and tells me how rude the men were, but did go away
quietly, being promised pay on Wednesday next. God send us money for it!
So to the office, and then to supper and to bed.  Among other things
proposed in the House to-day, to give the King in lieu of chimneys, there
was the bringing up of sealed paper, such as Sir J. Minnes shewed me
to-night, at Sir W. Batten's, is used in Spayne, and brings the King a
great revenue; but it shows what shifts we are put to too much.

20th.  Up, and all the morning at the office, where none met but myself.
So I walked a good while with Mr. Gawden in the garden, who is lately come
from the fleete at the buoy of the Nore, and he do tell me how all the
sober commanders, and even Sir Thomas Allen himself, do complain of the
ill government of the fleete.  How Holmes and Jennings have commanded all
the fleete this yeare, that nothing is done upon deliberation, but if a
sober man give his opinion otherwise than the Prince would have it the
Prince would cry,  "Damn him, do you follow your orders, and that is
enough for you."  He tells me he hears of nothing but of swearing and
drinking and whoring, and all manner of profaneness, quite through the
whole fleete.  He being gone, there comes to me Commissioner Middleton,
whom I took on purpose to walk in the garden with me, and to learn what he
observed when the fleete was at Portsmouth.  He says that the fleete was
in such a condition, as to discipline, as if the Devil had commanded it;
so much wickedness of all sorts.  Enquiring how it come to pass that so
many ships miscarried this year, he tells me that he enquired; and the
pilots do say, that they dare not do nor go but as the Captains will have
them; and if they offer to do otherwise, the Captains swear they will run
them through.  He says that he heard Captain Digby (my Lord of Bristoll's
son, a young fellow that never was but one year, if that, in the fleete)
say that he did hope he should not see a tarpaulin have the command of a
ship within this twelve months.  He observed while he was on board the
Admirall, when the fleete was at Portsmouth, that there was a faction
there.  Holmes commanded all on the Prince's side, and Sir Jeremy Smith on
the Duke's, and every body that come did apply themselves to one side or
other; and when the Duke of Albemarle was gone away to come hither, then
Sir Jeremy Smith did hang his head, and walked in the Generall's ship but
like a private commander.  He says he was on board The Prince, when the
newes come of the burning of London; and all the Prince said was, that now
Shipton's prophecy was out; and he heard a young commander presently
swear, that now a citizen's wife that would not take under half a piece
before, would be occupied for half-a-crowne: and made mighty sport of it.
He says that Hubberd that commanded this year the Admiral's ship is a
proud conceited fellow (though I thought otherwise of him), and fit to
command a single ship but not a fleete, and he do wonder that there hath
not been more mischief this year than there hath.  He says the fleete come
to anchor between the Horse and the Island, so that when they came to
weigh many of the ships could not turn, but run foul of the Horse, and
there stuck, but that the weather was good.  He says that nothing can do
the King more disservice, nor please the standing officers of the ship
better than these silly commanders that now we have, for they sign to
anything that their officers desire of them, nor have judgment to
contradict them if they would.  He told me other good things, which made
me bless God that we have received no greater disasters this year than we
have, though they have been the greatest that ever was known in England
before, put all their losses of the King's ships by want of skill and
seamanship together from the beginning.  He being gone, comes Sir G.
Carteret, and he and I walked together awhile, discoursing upon the sad
condition of the times, what need we have, and how impossible it is to get
money.  He told me my Lord Chancellor the other day did ask him how it
come to pass that his friend Pepys do so much magnify all things to worst,
as I did on Sunday last, in the bad condition of the fleete.  Sir G.
Carteret tells me that he answered him, that I was but the mouth of the
rest, and spoke what they have dictated to me; which did, as he says,
presently take off his displeasure.  So that I am well at present with
him, but I must have a care not to be over busy in the office again, and
burn my fingers.  He tells me he wishes he had sold his place at some good
rate to somebody or other at the beginning of the warr, and that he would
do it now, but no body will deale with him for it.  He tells me the Duke
of Albemarle is very much discontented, and the Duke of York do not, it
seems, please him.  He tells me that our case as to money is not to be
made good at present, and therefore wishes a good and speedy peace before
it be too late, and from his discourse methinks I find that there is
something moving towards it.  Many people at the office, but having no
more of the office I did put it off till the next meeting.  Thence, with
Sir G. Carteret, home to dinner, with him, my Lady and Mr. Ashburnham, the
Cofferer.  Here they talk that the Queene hath a great mind to alter her
fashion, and to have the feet seen, which she loves mightily; and they do
believe that it [will] come into it in a little time.  Here I met with the
King's declaration about his proceedings with the King of Denmarke, and
particularly the business of Bergen; but it is so well writ, that, if it
be true, the King of Denmarke is one of the most absolute wickednesse in
the world for a person of his quality.  After dinner home, and there met
Mr. Povy by appointment, and there he and I all the afternoon, till late
at night, evening of all accounts between us, which we did to both our
satisfaction; but that which troubles me most is, that I am to refund to
the ignoble Lord Peterborough what he had given us six months ago, because
we did not supply him with money; but it is no great matter.  He gone I to
the office, and there did some business; and so home, my mind in good ease
by having done with Povy in order to the adjusting of all my accounts in a
few days.  So home to supper and to bed.

21st (Lord's day).  Up, and with my wife to church, and her new woman
Barker with her the first time.  The girle will, I think, do very well.
Here a lazy sermon, and so home to dinner, and took in my Lady Pen and Peg
(Sir William being below with the fleete), and mighty merry we were, and
then after dinner presently (it being a mighty cool day) I by coach to
White Hall, and there attended the Cabinet, and was called in before the
King and them to give an account of our want of money for Tangier, which
troubles me that it should be my place so often and so soon after one
another to come to speak there of their wants--the thing of the world that
they love least to hear of, and that which is no welcome thing to be the
solicitor for--and to see how like an image the King sat and could not
speak one word when I had delivered myself was very strange; only my Lord
Chancellor did ask me, whether I thought it was in nature at this time to
help us to anything.  So I was referred to another meeting of the Lords
Commissioners for Tangier and my Lord Treasurer, and so went away, and by
coach home, where I spent the evening in reading Stillingfleet's defence
of the Archbishopp, the part about Purgatory, a point I had never
considered before, what was said for it or against it, and though I do
believe we are in the right, yet I do not see any great matter in this
book.  So to supper; and my people being gone, most of them, to bed, my
boy and Jane and I did get two of my iron chests out of the cellar into my
closett, and the money to my great satisfaction to see it there again, and
the rather because the damp cellar spoils all my chests.  This being done,
and I weary, to bed.  This afternoon walking with Sir H. Cholmly long in
the gallery, he told me, among many other things, how Harry Killigrew is
banished the Court lately, for saying that my Lady Castlemayne was a
little lecherous girle when she was young .  .  .  . This she complained
to the King of, and he sent to the Duke of York, whose servant he is, to
turn him away.  The Duke of York hath done it, but takes it ill of my Lady
that he was not complained to first.  She attended him to excute it, but
ill blood is made by it.  He told me how Mr. Williamson stood in a little
place to have come into the House of Commons, and they would not choose
him; they said, "No courtier."  And which is worse, Bab May went down in
great state to Winchelsea with the Duke of York's letters, not doubting to
be chosen; and there the people chose a private gentleman in spite of him,
and cried out they would have no Court pimp to be their burgesse; which
are things that bode very ill. This afternoon I went to see and sat a good
while with Mrs. Martin, and there was her sister Doll, with whom, contrary
to all expectation, I did what I would, and might have done anything else.

22nd.  Up, and by coach to Westminster Hall, there thinking to have met
Betty Michell, who I heard yesterday staid all night at her father's, but
she was gone.  So I staid a little and then down to the bridge by water,
and there overtook her and her father.  So saluted her and walked over
London Bridge with them and there parted, the weather being very foul, and
so to the Tower by water, and so heme, where I find Mr. Caesar playing the
treble to my boy upon the Theorbo, the first time I heard him, which
pleases me mightily.  After dinner I carried him and my wife towards
Westminster, by coach, myself 'lighting at the Temple, and there, being a
little too soon, walked in the Temple Church, looking with pleasure on the
monuments and epitaphs, and then to my Lord Belasses, where Creed and Povy
by appointment met to discourse of some of their Tangier accounts between
my Lord and Vernatty, who will prove a very knave.  That being done I away
with Povy to White Hall, and thence I to Unthanke's, and there take up my
wife, and so home, it being very foule and darke.  Being there come, I to
the settling of some of my money matters in my chests, and evening some
accounts, which I was at late, to my extraordinary content, and especially
to see all things hit so even and right and with an apparent profit and
advantage since my last accounting, but how much I cannot particularly yet
come to adjudge.

23rd.  Up, and to the office all the morning.  At noon Sir W. Batten told
me Sir Richard Ford would accept of one-third of my profit of our private
man-of-war, and bear one-third of the charge, and be bound in the
Admiralty, so I shall be excused being bound, which I like mightily of,
and did draw up a writing, as well as I could, to that purpose and signed
and sealed it, and so he and Sir R. Ford are to go to enter into bond this
afternoon.  Home to dinner, and after dinner, it being late, I down by
water to Shadwell, to see Betty Michell, the first time I was ever at
their new dwelling since the fire, and there find her in the house all
alone.  I find her mighty modest.  But had her lips as much as I would,
and indeed she is mighty pretty, that I love her exceedingly.  I paid her
L10 1s. that I received upon a ticket for her husband, which is a great
kindness I have done them, and having kissed her as much as I would, I
away, poor wretch, and down to Deptford to see Sir J. Minnes ordering of
the pay of some ships there, which he do most miserably, and so home.
Bagwell's wife, seeing me come the fields way, did get over her pales to
come after and talk with me, which she did for a good way, and so parted,
and I home, and to the office, very busy, and so to supper and to bed.

24th.  Up, and down to the Old Swan, and there find little Michell come to
his new shop that he hath built there in the room of his house that was
burned.  I hope he will do good here.  I drank and bade him joy, for I
love him and his wife well, him for his care, and her for her person, and
so to White Hall, where we attended the Duke; and to all our complaints
for want of money, which now we are tired out with making, the Duke only
tells us that he is sorry for it, and hath spoke to the King of it, and
money we shall have as soon as it can be found; and though all the issue
of the war lies upon it, yet that is all the answer we can get, and that
is as bad or worse than nothing.  Thence to Westminster Hall, where the
term is begun, and I did take a turn or two, and so away by coach to Sir
R. Viner's, and there received some money, and then home and to dinner.
After dinner to little business, and then abroad with my wife, she to see
her brother, who is sick, and she believes is from some discontent his
wife hath given him by her loose carriage, which he is told, and he hath
found has been very suspicious in his absence, which I am sorry for.  I to
the Hall and there walked long, among others talking with Mr. Hayes,
Prince Rupert's Secretary, a very ingenious man, and one, I think, fit to
contract some friendship with.  Here I staid late, walking to and again,
hearing how the Parliament proceeds, which is mighty slowly in the
settling of the money business, and great factions growing every day among
them.  I am told also how Holmes did last Sunday deliver in his articles
to the King and Cabinet against [Sir Jeremy] Smith, and that Smith hath
given in his answer, and lays his not accompanying the fleete to his
pilot, who would not undertake to carry the ship further; which the pilot
acknowledges.  The thing is not accommodated, but only taken up, and both
sides commanded to be quiet; but no peace like to be.  The Duke of
Albemarle is Smith's friend, and hath publiquely swore that he would never
go to sea again unless Holmes's commission were taken from him.

     [In the instructions given to Sir Thomas Clifford (August 5th, 1666)
     to be communicated to Prince Rupert and the Duke of Albemarle, we
     read: "to tell them that the complaint of Sir Jeremy Smith's
     misbehaviour in the late engagement being so universal, unless he
     have fully satisfied the generals he should be brought to trial by
     court-martial, and there purged or condemned."  The Duke of
     Albemarle answered the king (August 14th?): "Wishes to clear a
     gallant man falsely accused, Sir Jeremiah Smith, who had more men
     killed and hurt, and his ship received more shot than any in the
     fleet.  There is not a more spirited man serves in the fleet" On
     October 27th H. Muddiman wrote to Sir Edward Stradling: "Sir Jeremy
     Smith has got as much credit by his late examination as his enemies
     wished him disgrace, the King and Duke of York being fully satisfied
     of his valour in the engagement.  It appears that he had 147 men
     killed and wounded, while the most eminent of his accusers had but
     two or three."  With regard to Sir Jeremy's counter-charges, we
     read: "Nov. 3.  The King having maturely considered the charges
     brought against Sir Rob. Holmes by Sir Jeremy Smith, finds no cause
     to suspect Sir Robert of cowardice in the fight with the Dutch of
     June 25 and 26, but thinks that on the night of the 26th he yielded
     too easily to the opinion of his pilot, without consulting those of
     the other ships, muzzled his ship, and thus obliged the squadron to
     do the same, and so the enemy, which might have been driven into the
     body of the king's fleet, then returning from the pursuit, was
     allowed to escape" ("Calendar of State Papers," 1666-67, pp.  14,
     40, 222, 236).]

I find by Hayes that they did expect great glory in coming home in so good
condition as they did with the fleete, and therefore I the less wonder
that the Prince was distasted with my discourse the other day about the
bad state of the fleete.  But it pleases me to hear that he did expect
great thanks, and lays the fault of the want of it upon the fire, which
deadened everything, and the glory of his services.  About seven at night
home, and called my wife, and, it being moonshine, took her into the
garden, and there layed open our condition as to our estate, and the
danger of my having it [his money] all in the house at once, in case of
any disorder or troubles in the State, and therefore resolved to remove
part of it to Brampton, and part some whither else, and part in my owne
house, which is very necessary, and will tend to our safety, though I
shall not think it safe out of my owne sight.  So to the office, and then
to supper and to bed.

25th.  Up betimes and by water to White Hall, and there with Sir G.
Carteret to Sir W. Coventry, who is come to his winter lodgings at White
Hall, and there agreed upon a method of paying of tickets; and so I back
again home and to the office, where we sate all the morning, but to little
purpose but to receive clamours for money.  At noon home to dinner, where
the two Mrs. Daniels come to see us, and dined with us. After dinner I out
with my wife to Mrs. Pierces, where she hath not been a great while, from
some little unkindness of my wife's to her when she was last here, but she
received us with mighty respect and discretion, and was making herself
mighty fine to go to a great ball to-night at Court, being the Queene's
birthday; so the ladies for this one day do wear laces, but to put them
off again to-morrow.  Thence I to my Lord Bruncker's, and with him to Mrs.
Williams's where we met Knipp.  I was glad to see the jade.  Made her
sing; and she told us they begin at both houses to act on Monday next.
But I fear, after all this sorrow, their gains will be but little.  Mrs.
Williams says, the Duke's house will now be much the better of the two,
because of their women; which I am glad to hear.  Thence with Lord
Bruncker to White Hall and there spoke with Sir W. Coventry about some
office business, and then I away to Mrs. Pierces, and there saw her new
closet, which is mighty rich and fine.  Her daughter Betty grows mighty
pretty.  Thence with my wife home and to do business at the office.  Then
to Sir W. Batten's, who tells me that the House of Parliament makes mighty
little haste in settling the money, and that he knows not when it will be
done; but they fall into faction, and libells have been found in the
House.  Among others, one yesterday, wherein they reckon up divers great
sums to be given away by the King, among others, L10,000 to Sir W.
Coventry, for weare and teare (the point he stood upon to advance that sum
by, for them to give the King); Sir G. Carteret L50,000 for something
else, I think supernumerarys; and so to Matt. Wren L5000 for passing the
Canary Company's patent; and so a great many other sums to other persons.
So home to supper and to bed.

26th.  Up, and all the morning and most of the afternoon within doors,
beginning to set my accounts in order from before this fire, I being
behindhand with them ever since; and this day I got most of my tradesmen
to bring in their bills and paid them.  Dined at home, and busy again
after dinner, and then abroad by water to Westminster Hall, where I walked
till the evening, and then out, the first time I ever was abroad with Doll
Lane, to the Dog tavern, and there drank with her, a bad face, but good
bodied girle.  Did nothing but salute and play with her and talk, and
thence away by coach, home, and so to do a little more in my accounts, and
then to supper and to bed.  Nothing done in the House yet as to the
finishing of the bill for money, which is a mighty sad thing, all lying at
stake for it.

27th.  Up, and there comes to see me my Lord Belasses, which was a great
honour.  He tells me great newes, yet but what I suspected, that Vernatty
is fled, and so hath cheated him and twenty more, but most of all, I
doubt, Mr. Povy.  Thence to talk about publique business; he tells me how
the two Houses begin to be troublesome; the Lords to have quarrels one
with another.  My Lord Duke of Buckingham having said to the Lord
Chancellor (who is against the passing of the Bill for prohibiting the
bringing over of Irish cattle), that whoever was against the Bill, was
there led to it by an Irish interest, or an Irish understanding, which is
as much as to say he is a Poole; this bred heat from my Lord Chancellor,
and something he [Buckingham] said did offend my Lord of Ossory (my Lord
Duke' of Ormond's son), and they two had hard words, upon which the latter
sends a challenge to the former; of which the former complains to the
House, and so the business is to be heard on Monday next.  Then as to the
Commons; some ugly knives, like poignards, to stab people with, about two
or three hundred of them were brought in yesterday to the House, found in
one of the house's rubbish that was burned, and said to be the house of a
Catholique.  This and several letters out of the country, saying how high
the Catholiques are everywhere and bold in the owning their religion, have
made the Commons mad, and they presently voted that the King be desired to
put all Catholiques out of employment, and other high things; while the
business of money hangs in the hedge.  So that upon the whole, God knows
we are in a sad condition like to be, there being the very beginnings of
the late troubles.  He gone, I at the office all the morning.  At noon
home to dinner, where Mrs. Pierce and her boy and Knipp, who sings as
well, and is the best company in the world, dined with us, and infinite
merry.  The playhouses begin to play next week. Towards evening I took
them out to the New Exchange, and there my wife bought things, and I did
give each of them a pair of Jesimy

     [Jessemin (Jasminum), the flowers of which are of a delicate sweet
     smell, and often used to perfume gloves.  Edmund Howes, Stows
     continuator, informs us that sweet or perfumed gloves were first
     brought into England by the Earl of Oxford on his return from Italy,
     in the fifteenth year of Queen Elizabeth, during whose reign, and
     long afterwards, they were very fashionable.  They are frequently
     mentioned by Shakespeare.  Autolyctis, in the "Winter's Tale," has
     among his wares--"Gloves as sweet as damask roses."--B.]

plain gloves, and another of white.  Here Knipp and I walked up and down
to see handsome faces, and did see several.  Then carried each of them
home, and with great pleasure and content, home myself, where, having writ
several letters, I home, and there, upon some serious discourse between my
wife and I upon the business, I called to us my brother, and there broke
to him our design to send him into the country with some part of our
money, and so did seriously discourse the whole thing, and then away to
supper and to bed.  I pray God give a blessing to our resolution, for I do
much fear we shall meet with speedy distractions for want of money.

28th (Lord's day).  Up, and to church with my wife, and then home, and
there is come little Michell and his wife, I sent for them, and also tomes
Captain Guy to dine with me, and he and I much talk together.  He cries
out of the discipline of the fleete, and confesses really that the true
English valour we talk of is almost spent and worn out; few of the
commanders doing what they should do, and he much fears we shall therefore
be beaten the next year.  He assures me we were beaten home the last June
fight, and that the whole fleete was ashamed to hear of our bonefires.  He
commends Smith, and cries out of Holmes for an idle, proud, conceited,
though stout fellow.  He tells me we are to owe the losse of so many ships
on the sands, not to any fault of the pilots, but to the weather; but in
this I have good authority to fear there was something more.  He says the
Dutch do fight in very good order, and we in none at all.  He says that in
the July fight, both the Prince and Holmes had their belly-fulls, and were
fain to go aside; though, if the wind had continued, we had utterly beaten
them.  He do confess the whole to be governed by a company of fools, and
fears our ruine.  After dinner he gone, I with my brother to White Hall
and he to Westminster Abbey.  I presently to Mrs. Martin's, and there met
widow Burroughes and Doll, and did tumble them all the afternoon as I
pleased, and having given them a bottle of wine I parted and home by boat
(my brother going by land), and thence with my wife to sit and sup with my
uncle and aunt Wight, and see Woolly's wife, who is a pretty woman, and
after supper, being very merry, in abusing my aunt with Dr. Venner, we
home, and I to do something in my accounts, and so to bed.  The Revenge
having her forecastle blown up with powder to the killing of some men in
the River, and the Dyamond's being overset in the careening at Sheernesse,
are further marks of the method all the King's work is now done in.  The
Foresight also and another come to disasters in the same place this week
in the cleaning; which is strange.

29th.  Up, and to the office to do business, and thither comes to me Sir
Thomas Teddiman, and he and I walked a good while in the garden together,
discoursing of the disorder and discipline of the fleete, wherein he told
me how bad every thing is; but was very wary in speaking any thing to the
dishonour of the Prince or Duke of Albemarle, but do magnify my Lord
Sandwich much before them both, for ability to serve the King, and do
heartily wish for him here.  For he fears that we shall be undone the next
year, but that he will, however, see an end of it.  To prevent the
necessity of his dining with me I was forced to pretend occasion of going
to Westminster, so away I went, and Mr. Barber, the clerk, having a
request to make to me to get him into employment, did walk along with me,
and by water to Westminster with me, he professing great love to me, and
an able clerk he is.  When I come thither I find the new Lord Mayor Bolton
a-swearing at the Exchequer, with some of the Aldermen and Livery; but,
Lord!  to see how meanely they now look, who upon this day used to be all
little lords, is a sad sight and worthy consideration.  And every body did
reflect with pity upon the poor City, to which they are now coming to
choose and swear their Lord Mayor, compared with what it heretofore was.
Thence by coach (having in the Hall bought me a velvet riding cap, cost me
20s.) to my taylor's, and there bespoke a plain vest, and so to my
goldsmith to bid him look out for some gold for me; and he tells me that
ginnys, which I bought 2,000 of not long ago, and cost me but 18 1/2d.
change, will now cost me 22d.; and but very few to be had at any price.
However, some more I will have, for they are very convenient, and of easy
disposal.  So home to dinner and to discourse with my brother upon his
translation of my Lord Bacon's "Faber Fortunae," which I gave him to do
and he has done it, but meanely; I am not pleased with it at all, having
done it only literally, but without any life at all.  About five o'clock I
took my wife (who is mighty fine, and with a new fair pair of locks, which
vex me, though like a foole I helped her the other night to buy them), and
to Mrs. Pierces, and there staying a little I away before to White Hall,
and into the new playhouse there, the first time I ever was there, and the
first play I have seen since before the great plague.  By and by Mr.
Pierce comes, bringing my wife and his, and Knipp.  By and by the King and
Queene, Duke and Duchesse, and all the great ladies of the Court; which,
indeed, was a fine sight.  But the play being "Love in a Tub," a silly
play, and though done by the Duke's people, yet having neither Betterton
nor his wife, and the whole thing done ill, and being ill also, I had no
manner of pleasure in the play. Besides, the House, though very fine, yet
bad for the voice, for hearing. The sight of the ladies, indeed, was
exceeding noble; and above all, my Lady Castlemayne.  The play done by ten
o'clock.  I carried them all home, and then home myself, and well
satisfied with the sight, but not the play, we with great content to bed.

30th.  Up, and to the office, where sat all the morning, and at noon home
to dinner, and then to the office again, where late, very busy, and
dispatching much business.  Mr. Hater staying most of the afternoon
abroad, he come to me, poor man, to make excuse, and it was that he had
been looking out for a little house for his family.  His wife being much
frightened in the country with the discourses of troubles and disorders
like to be, and therefore durst not be from him, and therefore he is
forced to bring her to towne that they may be together.  This is now the
general apprehension of all people; particulars I do not know, but my owne
fears are also great, and I do think it time to look out to save
something, if a storm should come.  At night home to supper, and singing
with my wife, who hath lately begun to learn, and I think will come to do
something, though her eare is not good, nor I, I confess, have patience
enough to teach her, or hear her sing now and then a note out of tune, and
am to blame that I cannot bear with that in her which is fit I should do
with her as a learner, and one that I desire much could sing, and so
should encourage her.  This I was troubled at, for I do find that I do put
her out of heart, and make her fearfull to sing before me.  So after
supper to bed.

31st.  Out with Sir W. Batten toward White Hall, being in pain in my cods
by being squeezed the other night in a little coach when I carried Pierce
and his wife and my people.  But I hope I shall be soon well again.  This
day is a great day at the House, so little to do with the Duke of York,
but soon parted.  Coming out of the Court I met Colonell Atkins, who tells
me the whole city rings to-day of Sir Jeremy Smith's killing of Holmes in
a duell, at which I was not much displeased, for I fear every day more and
more mischief from the man, if he lives; but the thing is not true, for in
my coach I did by and by meet Sir Jer. Smith going to Court.  So I by
coach to my goldsmith, there to see what gold I can get, which is but
little, and not under 22d.  So away home to dinner, and after dinner to my
closett, where I spent the whole afternoon till late at evening of all my
accounts publique and private, and to my great satisfaction I do find that
I do bring my accounts to a very near balance, notwithstanding all the
hurries and troubles I have been put to by the late fire, that I have not
been able to even my accounts since July last before; and I bless God I do
find that I am worth more than ever I yet was, which is L6,200, for which
the Holy Name of God be praised!  and my other accounts of Tangier in a
very plain and clear condition, that I am not liable to any trouble from
them; but in fear great I am, and I perceive the whole city is, of some
distractions and disorders among us, which God of his goodness prevent!
Late to supper with my wife and brother, and then to bed.  And thus ends
the month with an ill aspect, the business of the Navy standing wholly
still.  No credit, no goods sold us, nobody will trust.  All we have to do
at the office is to hear complaints for want of money.  The Duke of York
himself for now three weeks seems to rest satisfied that we can do nothing
without money, and that all must stand still till the King gets money,
which the Parliament have been a great while about; but are so
dissatisfied with the King's management, and his giving himself up to
pleasures, and not minding the calling to account any of his officers, and
they observe so much the expense of the war, and yet that after we have
made it the most we can, it do not amount to what they have given the King
for the warn that they are backward of giving any more. However,
L1,800,000 they have voted, but the way of gathering it has taken up more
time than is fit to be now lost: The seamen grow very rude, and every
thing out of order; commanders having no power over their seamen, but the
seamen do what they please.  Few stay on board, but all coming running up
hither to towne, and nobody can with justice blame them, we owing them so
much money; and their familys must starve if we do not give them money, or
they procure upon their tickets from some people that will trust them.  A
great folly is observed by all people in the King's giving leave to so
many merchantmen to go abroad this winter, and some upon voyages where it
is impossible they should be back again by the spring, and the rest will
be doubtfull, but yet we let them go; what the reason of State is nobody
can tell, but all condemn it.  The Prince and Duke of Albemarle have got
no great credit by this year's service.  Our losses both of reputation and
ships having been greater than is thought have ever been suffered in all
ages put together before; being beat home, and fleeing home the first
fight, and then losing so many ships then and since upon the sands, and
some falling into the enemy's hands, and not one taken this yeare, but the
Ruby, French prize, now at the end of the yeare, by the Frenchmen's
mistake in running upon us.  Great folly in both Houses of Parliament,
several persons falling together by the eares, among others in the House
of Lords, the Duke of Buckingham and my Lord Ossory.  Such is our case,
that every body fears an invasion the next yeare; and for my part, I do
methinks foresee great unhappiness coming upon us, and do provide for it
by laying by something against a rainy day, dividing what I have, and
laying it in several places, but with all faithfulness to the King in all
respects; my grief only being that the King do not look after his business
himself, and thereby will be undone both himself and his nation, it being
not yet, I believe, too late if he would apply himself to it, to save all,
and conquer the Dutch; but while he and the Duke of York mind their
pleasure, as they do and nothing else, we must be beaten.  So late with my
mind in good condition of quiet after the settling all my accounts, and to
bed.




     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     Being there, and seeming to do something, while we do not
     Bill against importing Irish cattle
     Bringing over one discontented man, you raise up three
     But how many years I cannot tell; but my wife says ten
     But pretty!  how I took another pretty woman for her
     Catholiques are everywhere and bold
     Did tumble them all the afternoon as I pleased
     Discoursing upon the sad condition of the times
     Exceeding kind to me, more than usual, which makes me afeard
     Fashion, the King says; he will never change
     I did what I would, and might have done anything else
     King be desired to put all Catholiques out of employment
     King hath lost his power, by submitting himself to this way
     So home to supper, and to bed, it being my wedding night
     The very rum man must have L200
     Time spending, and no money to set anything in hand





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Diary of Samuel Pepys, October 1666
by Samuel Pepys

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***

***** This file should be named 4168.txt or 4168.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/4/1/6/4168/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
