Project Gutenberg's Diary of Samuel Pepys, November 1666, by Samuel Pepys

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Diary of Samuel Pepys, November 1666

Author: Samuel Pepys

Release Date: December 1, 2004 [EBook #4169]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***




Produced by David Widger





                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A. F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                NOVEMBER
                                  1666

November 1st.  Up, and was presented by Burton, one of our smith's wives,
with a very noble cake, which I presently resolved to have my wife go with
to-day, and some wine, and house-warme my Betty Michell, which she readily
resolved to do.  So I to the office and sat all the morning, where little
to do but answer people about want of money; so that there is little
service done the King by us, and great disquiet to ourselves; I am sure
there is to me very much, for I do not enjoy myself as I would and should
do in my employment if my pains could do the King better service, and with
the peace that we used to do it.  At noon to dinner, and from dinner my
wife and my brother, and W. Hewer and Barker away to Betty Michell's, to
Shadwell, and I to my office, where I took in Mrs. Bagwell and did what I
would with her, and so she went away, and I all the afternoon till almost
night there, and then, my wife being come back, I took her and set her at
her brother's, who is very sicke, and I to White Hall, and there all alone
a pretty while with Sir W. Coventry at his chamber.  I find him very
melancholy under the same considerations of the King's service that I am.
He confesses with me he expects all will be undone, and all ruined; he
complains and sees perfectly what I with grief do, and said it first
himself to me that all discipline is lost in the fleete, no order nor no
command, and concurs with me that it is necessary we do again and again
represent all things more and more plainly to the Duke of York, for a
guard to ourselves hereafter when things shall come to be worse.  He says
the House goes on slowly in finding of money, and that the discontented
party do say they have not done with us, for they will have a further bout
with us as to our accounts, and they are exceedingly well instructed where
to hit us. I left him with a thousand sad reflections upon the times, and
the state of the King's matters, and so away, and took up my wife and
home, where a little at the office, and then home to supper, and talk with
my wife (with whom I have much comfort) and my brother, and so to bed.

2nd.  Up betimes, and with Sir W. Batten to Woolwich, where first we went
on board the Ruby, French prize, the only ship of war we have taken from
any of our enemies this year.  It seems a very good ship, but with
galleries quite round the sterne to walk in as a balcone, which will be
taken down.  She had also about forty good brass guns, but will make
little amends to our loss in The Prince.  Thence to the Ropeyarde and the
other yards to do several businesses, he and I also did buy some apples
and pork; by the same token the butcher commended it as the best in
England for cloath and colour.  And for his beef, says he, "Look how fat
it is; the lean appears only here and there a speck, like beauty-spots."
Having done at Woolwich, we to Deptford (it being very cold upon the
water), and there did also a little more business, and so home, I reading
all the why to make end of the "Bondman" (which the oftener I read the
more I like), and begun "The Duchesse of Malfy;" which seems a good play.
At home to dinner, and there come Mr. Pierce, surgeon, to see me, and
after I had eat something, he and I and my wife by coach to Westminster,
she set us down at White Hall, and she to her brother's.  I up into the
House, and among other things walked a good while with the Serjeant
Trumpet, who tells me, as I wished, that the King's Italian here is about
setting three parts for trumpets, and shall teach some to sound them, and
believes they will be admirable musique.  I also walked with Sir Stephen
Fox an houre, and good discourse of publique business with him, who seems
very much satisfied with my discourse, and desired more of my
acquaintance.  Then comes out the King and Duke of York from the Council,
and so I spoke awhile to Sir W. Coventry about some office business, and
so called my wife (her brother being now a little better than he was), and
so home, and I to my chamber to do some business, and then to supper and
to bed.

3rd.  This morning comes Mr. Lovett, and brings me my print of the
Passion, varnished by him, and the frame black, which indeed is very fine,
though not so fine as I expected; however, pleases me exceedingly. This,
and the sheets of paper he prepared for me, come to L3, which I did give
him, and though it be more than is fit to lay out on pleasure, yet, it
being ingenious, I did not think much of it.  He gone, I to the office,
where all the morning to little purpose, nothing being before us but
clamours for money: So at noon home to dinner, and after dinner to hang up
my new varnished picture and set my chamber in order to be made clean, and
then to; the office again, and there all the afternoon till late at night,
and so to supper and to bed.

4th (Lord's day).  Comes my taylor's man in the morning, and brings my
vest home, and coate to wear with it, and belt, and silver-hilted sword.
So I rose and dressed myself, and I like myself mightily in it, and so do
my wife.  Then, being dressed, to church; and after church pulled my Lady
Pen and Mrs. Markham into my house to dinner, and Sir J. Minnes he got
Mrs. Pegg along with him.  I had a good dinner for them, and very merry;
and after dinner to the waterside, and so, it being very cold, to White
Hall, and was mighty fearfull of an ague, my vest being new and thin, and
the coat cut not to meet before upon my breast.  Here I waited in the
gallery till the Council was up, and among others did speak with Mr.
Cooling, my Lord Chamberlain's secretary, who tells me my Lord Generall is
become mighty low in all people's opinion, and that he hath received
several slurs from the King and Duke of York.  The people at Court do see
the difference between his and the Prince's management, and my Lord
Sandwich's.  That this business which he is put upon of crying out against
the Catholiques and turning them out of all employment, will undo him,
when he comes to turn-out the officers out of the Army, and this is a
thing of his own seeking.  That he is grown a drunken sot, and drinks with
nobody but Troutbecke, whom nobody else will keep company with.  Of whom
he told me this story: That once the Duke of Albemarle in his drink taking
notice as of a wonder that Nan Hide should ever come to be Duchesse of
York, "Nay," says Troutbecke, "ne'er wonder at that; for if you will give
me another bottle of wine, I will tell you as great, if not greater, a
miracle."   And what was that, but that our dirty Besse (meaning his
Duchesse) should come to be Duchesse of Albemarle?  Here we parted, and so
by and by the Council rose, and out comes Sir G. Carteret and Sir W.
Coventry, and they and my Lord Bruncker and I went to Sir G. Carteret's
lodgings, there to discourse about some money demanded by Sir W. Warren,
and having done that broke up.  And Sir G. Carteret and I alone together a
while, where he shows a long letter, all in cipher, from my Lord Sandwich
to him.  The contents he hath not yet found out, but he tells me that my
Lord is not sent for home, as several people have enquired after of me.
He spoke something reflecting upon me in the business of pursers, that
their present bad behaviour is what he did foresee, and had convinced me
of, and yet when it come last year to be argued before the Duke of York I
turned and said as the rest did.  I answered nothing to it, but let it go,
and so to other discourse of the ill state of things, of which all people
are full of sorrow and observation, and so parted, and then by water,
landing in Southwarke, home to the Tower, and so home, and there began to
read "Potter's Discourse upon 1666," which pleases me mightily, and then
broke off and to supper and to bed.

5th (A holyday).  Lay long; then up, and to the office, where vexed to
meet with people come from the fleete at the Nore, where so many ships are
laid up and few going abroad, and yet Sir Thomas Allen hath sent up some
Lieutenants with warrants to presse men for a few ships to go out this
winter, while every day thousands appear here, to our great trouble and
affright, before our office and the ticket office, and no Captains able to
command one-man aboard.  Thence by water to Westminster, and there at the
Swan find Sarah is married to a shoemaker yesterday, so I could not see
her, but I believe I shall hereafter at good leisure. Thence by coach to
my Lady Peterborough, and there spoke with my Lady, who had sent to speak
with me.  She makes mighty moan of the badness of the times, and her
family as to money.  My Lord's passionateness for want thereof, and his
want of coming in of rents, and no wages from the Duke of York.  No money
to be had there for wages nor disbursements, and therefore prays my
assistance about his pension.  I was moved with her story, which she
largely and handsomely told me, and promised I would try what I could do
in a few days, and so took leave, being willing to keep her Lord fair with
me, both for his respect to my Lord Sandwich and for my owne sake
hereafter, when I come to pass my accounts.  Thence to my Lord Crew's, and
there dined, and mightily made of, having not, to my shame, been there in
8 months before.  Here my Lord and Sir Thomas Crew, Mr. John, and Dr.
Crew, and two strangers.  The best family in the world for goodness and
sobriety.  Here beyond my expectation I met my Lord Hinchingbroke, who is
come to towne two days since from Hinchingbroke, and brought his sister
and brother Carteret with him, who are at Sir G. Carteret's.  After dinner
I and Sir Thomas Crew went aside to discourse of public matters, and do
find by him that all the country gentlemen are publickly jealous of the
courtiers in the Parliament, and that they do doubt every thing that they
propose; and that the true reason why the country gentlemen are for a
land-tax and against a general excise, is, because they are fearful that
if the latter be granted they shall never get it down again; whereas the
land-tax will be but for so much; and when the war ceases, there will be
no ground got by the Court to keep it up. He do much cry out upon our
accounts, and that all that they have had from the King hath been but
estimates both from my Lord Treasurer and us, and from all people else, so
that the Parliament is weary of it.  He says the House would be very glad
to get something against Sir G. Carteret, and will not let their inquiries
die till they have got something.  He do, from what he hath heard at the
Committee for examining the burning of the City, conclude it as a thing
certain that it was done by plots; it being proved by many witnesses that
endeavours were made in several places to encrease the fire, and that both
in City and country it was bragged by several Papists that upon such a day
or in such a time we should find the hottest weather that ever was in
England, and words of plainer sense.  But my Lord Crew was discoursing at
table how the judges have determined in the case whether the landlords or
the tenants (who are, in their leases, all of them generally tied to
maintain and uphold their houses) shall bear the losse of the fire; and
they say that tenants should against all casualties of fire beginning
either in their owne or in their neighbour's; but, where it is done by an
enemy, they are not to do it.  And this was by an enemy, there having been
one convicted and hanged upon this very score.  This is an excellent salvo
for the tenants, and for which I am glad, because of my father's house.
After dinner and this discourse I took coach, and at the same time find my
Lord Hinchingbroke and Mr. John Crew and the Doctor going out to see the
ruins of the City; so I took the Doctor into my hackney coach (and he is a
very fine sober gentleman), and so through the City.  But, Lord!  what
pretty and sober observations he made of the City and its desolation; till
anon we come to my house, and there I took them upon Tower Hill to shew
them what houses were pulled down there since the fire; and then to my
house, where I treated them with good wine of several sorts, and they took
it mighty respectfully, and a fine company of gentlemen they are; but
above all I was glad to see my Lord Hinchingbroke drink no wine at all.
Here I got them to appoint Wednesday come se'nnight to dine here at my
house, and so we broke up and all took coach again, and I carried the
Doctor to Chancery Lane, and thence I to White Hall, where I staid walking
up and down till night, and then got almost into the play house, having
much mind to go and see the play at Court this night; but fearing how I
should get home, because of the bonefires and the lateness of the night to
get a coach, I did not stay; but having this evening seen my Lady Jemimah,
who is come to towne, and looks very well and fat, and heard how Mr. John
Pickering is to be married this week, and to a fortune with L5000, and
seen a rich necklace of pearle and two pendants of dyamonds, which Sir G.
Carteret hath presented her with since her coming to towne, I home by
coach, but met not one bonefire through the whole town in going round by
the wall, which is strange, and speaks the melancholy disposition of the
City at present, while never more was said of, and feared of, and done
against the Papists than just at this time.  Home, and there find my wife
and her people at cards, and I to my chamber, and there late, and so to
supper and to bed.

6th.  Up, and to the office, where all the morning sitting.  At noon home
to dinner, and after dinner down alone by water to Deptford, reading
"Duchesse of Malfy," the play, which is pretty good, and there did some
business, and so up again, and all the evening at the office.  At night
home, and there find Mr. Batelier, who supped with us, and good company he
is, and so after supper to bed.

7th.  Up, and with Sir W. Batten to White Hall, where we attended as usual
the Duke of York and there was by the folly of Sir W. Batten prevented in
obtaining a bargain for Captain Cocke, which would, I think have [been] at
this time (during our great want of hempe), both profitable to the King
and of good convenience to me; but I matter it not, it being done only by
the folly, not any design, of Sir W. Batten's. Thence to Westminster Hall,
and, it being fast day, there was no shops open, but meeting with Doll
Lane, did go with her to the Rose taverne, and there drank and played with
her a good while.  She went away, and I staid a good while after, and was
seen going out by one of our neighbours near the office and two of the
Hall people that I had no mind to have been seen by, but there was no hurt
in it nor can be alledged from it. Therefore I am not solicitous in it,
but took coach and called at Faythorne's, to buy some prints for my wife
to draw by this winter, and here did see my Lady Castlemayne's picture,
done by him from Lilly's, in red chalke and other colours, by which he
hath cut it in copper to be printed.  The picture in chalke is the finest
thing I ever saw in my life, I think; and did desire to buy it; but he
says he must keep it awhile to correct his copper-plate by, and when that
is done he will sell it me.  Thence home and find my wife gone out with my
brother to see her brother.  I to dinner and thence to my chamber to read,
and so to the office (it being a fast day and so a holiday), and then to
Mrs. Turner's, at her request to speake and advise about Sir Thomas
Harvy's coming to lodge there, which I think must be submitted to, and
better now than hereafter, when he gets more ground, for I perceive he
intends to stay by it, and begins to crow mightily upon his late being at
the payment of tickets; but a coxcombe he is and will never be better in
the business of the Navy.  Thence home, and there find Mr. Batelier come
to bring my wife a very fine puppy of his mother's spaniel, a very fine
one indeed, which my wife is mighty proud of.  He staid and supped with
us, and they to cards.  I to my chamber to do some business, and then out
to them to play and were a little merry, and then to bed.  By the Duke of
York his discourse to-day in his chamber, they have it at Court, as well
as we here, that a fatal day is to be expected shortly, of some great
mischiefe to the remainder of this day; whether by the Papists, or what,
they are not certain.  But the day is disputed; some say next Friday,
others a day sooner, others later, and I hope all will prove a foolery.
But it is observable how every body's fears are busy at this time.

8th.  Up, and before I went to the office I spoke with Mr. Martin for his
advice about my proceeding in the business of the private man-of-war, he
having heretofore served in one of them, and now I have it in my thoughts
to send him purser in ours.  After this discourse I to the office, where I
sat all the morning, Sir W. Coventry with us, where he hath not been a
great while, Sir W. Pen also, newly come from the Nore, where he hath been
some time fitting of the ships out.  At noon home to dinner and then to
the office awhile, and so home for my sword, and there find Mercer come to
see her mistresse.  I was glad to see her there, and my wife mighty kind
also, and for my part, much vexed that the jade is not with us still.
Left them together, designing to go abroad to-morrow night to Mrs. Pierces
to dance; and so I to Westminster Hall, and there met Mr. Grey, who tells
me the House is sitting still (and now it was six o'clock), and likely to
sit till midnight; and have proceeded fair to give the King his supply
presently; and herein have done more to-day than was hoped for.  So to
White Hall to Sir W. Coventry, and there would fain have carried Captain
Cocke's business for his bargain of hemp, but am defeated and
disappointed, and know hardly how to carry myself in it between my
interest and desire not to offend Sir W. Coventry.  Sir W. Coventry did
this night tell me how the business is about Sir J. Minnes; that he is to
be a Commissioner, and my Lord Bruncker and Sir W. Pen are to be
Controller joyntly, which I am very glad of, and better than if they were
either of them alone; and do hope truly that the King's business will be
better done thereby, and infinitely better than now it is.  Thence by
coach home, full of thoughts of the consequence of this alteration in our
office, and I think no evil to me.  So at my office late, and then home to
supper and to bed.  Mr. Grey did assure me this night, that he was told
this day, by one of the greater Ministers of State in England, and one of
the King's Cabinet, that we had little left to agree on between the Dutch
and us towards a peace, but only the place of treaty; which do astonish me
to hear, but I am glad of it, for I fear the consequence of the war.  But
he says that the King, having all the money he is like to have, we shall
be sure of a peace in a little time.

9th.  Up and to the office, where did a good deale of business, and then
at noon to the Exchange and to my little goldsmith's, whose wife is very
pretty and modest, that ever I saw any.  Upon the 'Change, where I seldom
have of late been, I find all people mightily at a losse what to expect,
but confusion and fears in every man's head and heart.  Whether war or
peace, all fear the event will be bad.  Thence home and with my brother to
dinner, my wife being dressing herself against night; after dinner I to my
closett all the afternoon, till the porter brought my vest back from the
taylor's, and then to dress myself very fine, about 4 or 5 o'clock, and by
that time comes Mr. Batelier and Mercer, and away by coach to Mrs.
Pierces, by appointment, where we find good company: a fair lady, my Lady
Prettyman, Mrs. Corbet, Knipp; and for men, Captain Downing, Mr. Lloyd,
Sir W. Coventry's clerk, and one Mr. Tripp, who dances well.  After some
trifling discourse, we to dancing, and very good sport, and mightily
pleased I was with the company.  After our first bout of dancing, Knipp
and I to sing, and Mercer and Captain Downing (who loves and understands
musique) would by all means have my song of "Beauty, retire." which Knipp
had spread abroad; and he extols it above any thing he ever heard, and,
without flattery, I know it is good in its kind.  This being done and
going to dance again, comes news that White Hall was on fire; and
presently more particulars, that the Horse-guard was on fire;

     ["Nov. 9th.  Between seven and eight at night, there happened a fire
     in the Horse Guard House, in the Tilt Yard, over against Whitehall,
     which at first arising, it is supposed, from some snuff of a candle
     falling amongst the straw, broke out with so sudden a flame, that at
     once it seized the north-west part of that building; but being so
     close under His Majesty's own eye, it was, by the timely help His
     Majesty and His Royal Highness caused to be applied, immediately
     stopped, and by ten o'clock wholly mastered, with the loss only of
     that part of the building it had at first seized."--The London
     Gazette, No. 103.--B.]

and so we run up to the garret, and find it so; a horrid great fire; and
by and by we saw and heard part of it blown up with powder.  The ladies
begun presently to be afeard: one fell into fits.  The whole town in an
alarme.  Drums beat and trumpets, and the guards every where spread,
running up and down in the street.  And I begun to have mighty
apprehensions how things might be at home, and so was in mighty pain to
get home, and that that encreased all is that we are in expectation, from
common fame, this night, or to-morrow, to have a massacre, by the having
so many fires one after another, as that in the City, and at same time
begun in Westminster, by the Palace, but put out; and since in Southwarke,
to the burning down some houses; and now this do make all people conclude
there is something extraordinary in it; but nobody knows what.  By and by
comes news that the fire has slackened; so then we were a little cheered
up again, and to supper, and pretty merry.  But, above all, there comes in
the dumb boy that I knew in Oliver's time, who is mightily acquainted
here, and with Downing; and he made strange signs of the fire, and how the
King was abroad, and many things they understood, but I could not, which I
wondering at, and discoursing with Downing about it, "Why," says he, "it
is only a little use, and you will understand him, and make him understand
you with as much ease as may be."  So I prayed him to tell him that I was
afeard that my coach would be gone, and that he should go down and steal
one of the seats out of the coach and keep it, and that would make the
coachman to stay.  He did this, so that the dumb boy did go down, and,
like a cunning rogue, went into the coach, pretending to sleep; and, by
and by, fell to his work, but finds the seats nailed to the coach.  So he
did all he could, but could not do it; however, stayed there, and stayed
the coach till the coachman's patience was quite spent, and beat the dumb
boy by force, and so went away.  So the dumb boy come up and told him all
the story, which they below did see all that passed, and knew it to be
true.  After supper, another dance or two, and then newes that the fire is
as great as ever, which put us all to our wit's-end; and I mightily
[anxious] to go home, but the coach being gone, and it being about ten at
night, and rainy dirty weather, I knew not what to do; but to walk out
with Mr. Batelier, myself resolving to go home on foot, and leave the
women there.  And so did; but at the Savoy got a coach, and come back and
took up the women; and so, having, by people come from the fire,
understood that the fire was overcome, and all well, we merrily parted,
and home.  Stopped by several guards and constables quite through the
town, round the wall, as we went, all being in armes.  We got well home
.  .  .  . Being come home, we to cards, till two in the morning, and
drinking lamb's-wool.

     [A beverage consisting of ale mixed with sugar, nutmeg, and the pulp
     of roasted apples.  "A cupp of lamb's-wool they dranke unto him
     then."  The King and the Miller of Mansfield (Percy's "Reliques,"
     Series III., book ii., No. 20).]

So to bed.

10th.  Up and to the office, where Sir W. Coventry come to tell us that
the Parliament did fall foul of our accounts again yesterday; and we must
arme to have them examined, which I am sorry for: it will bring great
trouble to me, and shame upon the office.  My head full this morning how
to carry on Captain Cocke's bargain of hemp, which I think I shall by my
dexterity do, and to the King's advantage as well as my own.  At noon with
my Lord Bruncker and Sir Thomas Harvy, to Cocke's house, and there Mrs.
Williams and other company, and an excellent dinner.  Mr. Temple's wife;
after dinner, fell to play on the harpsicon, till she tired everybody,
that I left the house without taking leave, and no creature left standing
by her to hear her.  Thence I home and to the office, where late doing of
business, and then home.  Read an hour, to make an end of Potter's
Discourse of the Number 666, which I like all along, but his close is most
excellent; and, whether it be right or wrong, is mighty ingenious.  Then
to supper and to bed.  This is the fatal day that every body hath
discoursed for a long time to be the day that the Papists, or I know not
who, had designed to commit a massacre upon; but, however, I trust in God
we shall rise to-morrow morning as well as ever.  This afternoon Creed
comes to me, and by him, as, also my Lady Pen, I hear that my Lady Denham
is exceeding sick, even to death, and that she says, and every body else
discourses, that she is poysoned; and Creed tells me, that it is said that
there hath been a design to poison the King.  What the meaning of all
these sad signs is, the Lord knows; but every day things look worse and
worse.  God fit us for the worst!

11th (Lord's day).  Up, and to church, myself and wife, where the old
dunce Meriton, brother to the known Meriton; of St. Martin's, Westminster,
did make a very good sermon, beyond my expectation.  Home to dinner, and
we carried in Pegg Pen, and there also come to us little Michell and his
wife, and dined very pleasantly.  Anon to church, my wife and I and Betty
Michell, her husband being gone to Westminster .  .  .  . Alter church
home, and I to my chamber, and there did finish the putting time to my
song of "It is decreed," and do please myself at last and think it will be
thought a good song.  By and by little Michell comes and takes away his
wife home, and my wife and brother and I to my uncle Wight's, where my
aunt is grown so ugly and their entertainment so bad that I am in pain to
be there; nor will go thither again a good while, if sent for, for we were
sent for to-night, we had not gone else. Wooly's wife, a silly woman, and
not very handsome, but no spirit in her at all; and their discourse mean,
and the fear of the troubles of the times hath made them not to bring
their plate to town, since it was carried out upon the business of the
fire, so that they drink in earth and a wooden can, which I do not like.
So home, and my people to bed. I late to finish my song, and then to bed
also, and the business of the firing of the city, and the fears we have of
new troubles and violences, and the fear of fire among ourselves, did keep
me awake a good while, considering the sad condition I and my family
should be in.  So at last to sleep.

12th.  Lay long in bed, and then up, and Mr. Carcasse brought me near 500
tickets to sign, which I did, and by discourse find him a cunning,
confident, shrewd man, but one that I do doubt hath by his discourse of
the ill will he hath got with my Lord Marquess of Dorchester (with whom he
lived), he hath had cunning practices in his time, and would not now spare
to use the same to his profit.  That done I to the office; whither by and
by comes Creed to me, and he and I walked in the garden a little, talking
of the present ill condition of things, which is the common subject of all
men's discourse and fears now-a-days, and particularly of my Lady Denham,
whom everybody says is poisoned, and he tells me she hath said it to the
Duke of York; but is upon the mending hand, though the town says she is
dead this morning.  He and I to the 'Change.  There I had several little
errands, and going to Sir R. Viner's, I did get such a splash and spots of
dirt upon my new vest, that I was out of countenance to be seen in the
street.  This day I received 450 pieces of gold more of Mr. Stokes, but
cost me 22 1/2d.  change; but I am well contented with it,--I having now
near L2800 in gold, and will not rest till I get full L3000, and then will
venture my fortune for the saving that and the rest. Home to dinner,
though Sir R. Viner would have staid us to dine with him, he being
sheriffe; but, poor man, was so out of countenance that he had no wine
ready to drink to us, his butler being out of the way, though we know him
to be a very liberal man.  And after dinner I took my wife out, intending
to have gone and have seen my Lady Jemimah, at White Hall, but so great a
stop there was at the New Exchange, that we could not pass in half an
houre, and therefore 'light and bought a little matter at the Exchange,
and then home, and then at the office awhile, and then home to my chamber,
and after my wife and all the mayds abed but Jane, whom I put confidence
in--she and I, and my brother, and Tom, and W. Hewer, did bring up all the
remainder of my money, and my plate-chest, out of the cellar, and placed
the money in my study, with the rest, and the plate in my dressing-room;
but indeed I am in great pain to think how to dispose of my money, it
being wholly unsafe to keep it all in coin in one place. 'But now I have
it all at my hand, I shall remember it better to think of disposing of it.
This done, by one in the morning to bed.  This afternoon going towards
Westminster, Creed and I did stop, the Duke of York being just going away
from seeing of it, at Paul's, and in the Convocation House Yard did there
see the body of Robert Braybrooke, Bishop of London, that died 1404:  He
fell down in his tomb out of the great church into St. Fayth's this late
fire, and is here seen his skeleton with the flesh on; but all tough and
dry like a spongy dry leather, or touchwood all upon his bones.  His head
turned aside.  A great man in his time, and Lord Chancellor; and his
skeletons now exposed to be handled and derided by some, though admired
for its duration by others.  Many flocking to see it.

13th.  At the office all the morning, at noon home to dinner, and out to
Bishopsgate Street, and there bought some drinking-glasses, a case of
knives, and other things, against tomorrow, in expectation of my Lord
Hinchingbroke's coming to dine with me.  So home, and having set some
things in the way of doing, also against to-morrow, I to my, office, there
to dispatch business, and do here receive notice from my Lord
Hinchingbroke that he is not well, and so not in condition to come to dine
with me to-morrow, which I am not in much trouble for, because of the
disorder my house is in, by the bricklayers coming to mend the chimney in
my dining-room for smoking, which they were upon almost till midnight, and
have now made it very pretty, and do carry smoke exceeding well.  This
evening come all the Houblons to me, to invite me to sup with them
to-morrow night.  I did take them home, and there we sat and talked a good
while, and a glass of wine, and then parted till to-morrow night. So at
night, well satisfied in the alteration of my chimney, to bed.

14th.  Up, and by water to White Hall, and thence to Westminster, where I
bought several things, as a hone, ribbon, gloves, books, and then took
coach and to Knipp's lodging, whom I find not ready to go home with me. So
I away to do a little business, among others to call upon Mr. Osborne for
my Tangier warrant for the last quarter, and so to the Exchange for some
things for my wife, and then to Knipp's again, and there staid reading of
Waller's verses, while she finished dressing, her husband being by.  I had
no other pastime.  Her lodging very mean, and the condition she lives in;
yet makes a shew without doors, God bless us! I carried him along with us
into the City, and set him down in Bishopsgate Street, and then home with
her.  She tells me how Smith, of the Duke's house, hath killed a man upon
a quarrel in play; which makes every body sorry, he being a good actor,
and, they say, a good man, however this happens.  The ladies of the Court
do much bemoan him, she says.  Here she and we alone at dinner to some
good victuals, that we could not put off, that was intended for the great
dinner of my Lord Hinchingbroke's, if he had come.  After dinner I to
teach her my new recitative of "It is decreed," of which she learnt a good
part, and I do well like it and believe shall be well pleased when she
hath it all, and that it will be found an agreeable thing.  Then carried
her home, and my wife and I intended to have seen my Lady Jemimah at White
Hall, but the Exchange Streete was so full of coaches, every body, as they
say, going thither to make themselves fine against tomorrow night, that,
after half an hour's stay, we could not do any [thing], only my wife to
see her brother, and I to go speak one word with Sir G. Carteret about
office business, and talk of the general complexion of matters, which he
looks upon, as I do, with horrour, and gives us all for an undone people.
That there is no such thing as a peace in hand, nor possibility of any
without our begging it, they being as high, or higher, in their terms than
ever, and tells me that, just now, my Lord Hollis had been with him, and
wept to think in what a condition we are fallen.  He shewed me my Lord
Sandwich's letter to him, complaining of the lack of money, which Sir G.
Carteret is at a loss how in the world to get the King to supply him with,
and wishes him, for that reason, here; for that he fears he will be
brought to disgrace there, for want of supplies.  He says the House is yet
in a bad humour; and desiring to know whence it is that the King stirs
not, he says he minds it not, nor will be brought to it, and that his
servants of the House do, instead of making the Parliament better, rather
play the rogue one with another, and will put all in fire.  So that, upon
the whole, we are in a wretched condition, and I went from him in full
apprehensions of it.  So took up my wife, her brother being yet very bad,
and doubtful whether he will recover or no, and so to St. Ellen's [St.
Helen's], and there sent my wife home, and myself to the Pope's Head,
where all the Houblons were, and Dr. Croone,

     [William Croune, or Croone, of Emanuel College, Cambridge, chosen
     Rhetoric Professor at Gresham College, 1659, F.R.S. and M.D. Died
     October 12th, 1684, and was interred at St. Mildred's in the
     Poultry.  He was a prominent Fellow of the Royal Society and first
     Registrar.  In accordance with his wishes his widow (who married Sir
     Edwin Sadleir, Bart.) left by will one-fifth of the clear rent of
     the King's Head tavern in or near Old Fish Street, at the corner of
     Lambeth Hill, to the Royal Society for the support of a lecture and
     illustrative experiments for the advancement of natural knowledge on
     local motion.  The Croonian lecture is still delivered before the
     Royal Society.]

and by and by to an exceeding pretty supper, excellent discourse of all
sorts, and indeed [they] are a set of the finest gentlemen that ever I met
withal in my life.  Here Dr. Croone told me, that, at the meeting at
Gresham College to-night, which, it seems, they now have every Wednesday
again, there was a pretty experiment of the blood of one dogg let out,
till he died, into the body of another on one side, while all his own run
out on the other side.

     [At the meeting on November 14th, "the experiment of transfusing the
     blood of one dog into another was made before the Society by Mr.
     King and Mr. Thomas Coxe upon a little mastiff and a spaniel with
     very good success, the former bleeding to death, and the latter
     receiving the blood of the other, and emitting so much of his own,
     as to make him capable of receiving that of the other."  On November
     21st the spaniel "was produced and found very well" (Birch's
     "History of the Royal Society," vol.  ii., pp.  123, 125).  The
     experiment of transfusion of blood, which occupied much of the
     attention of the Royal Society in its early days, was revived within
     the last few years.]

The first died upon the place, and the other very well, and likely to do
well.  This did give occasion to many pretty wishes, as of the blood of a
Quaker to be let into an Archbishop, and such like; but, as Dr. Croone
says, may, if it takes, be of mighty use to man's health, for the amending
of bad blood by borrowing from a better body.  After supper, James Houblon
and another brother took me aside and to talk of some businesses of their
owne, where I am to serve them, and will, and then to talk of publique
matters, and I do find that they and all merchants else do give over trade
and the nation for lost, nothing being done with care or foresight, no
convoys granted, nor any thing done to satisfaction; but do think that the
Dutch and French will master us the next yeare, do what we can: and so do
I, unless necessity makes the King to mind his business, which might yet
save all.  Here we sat talking till past one in the morning, and then
home, where my people sat up for me, my wife and all, and so to bed.

15th.  This [morning] come Mr. Shepley (newly out of the country) to see
me; after a little discourse with him, I to the office, where we sat all
the morning, and at noon home, and there dined, Shepley with me, and after
dinner I did pay him L70, which he had paid my father for my use in the
country.  He being gone, I took coach and to Mrs. Pierce's, where I find
her as fine as possible, and himself going to the ball at night at Court,
it being the Queen's birth-day, and so I carried them in my coach, and
having set them into the house, and gotten Mr. Pierce to undertake the
carrying in my wife, I to Unthanke's, where she appointed to be, and there
told her, and back again about business to White Hall, while Pierce went
and fetched her and carried her in.  I, after I had met with Sir W.
Coventry and given him some account of matters, I also to the ball, and
with much ado got up to the loft, where with much trouble I could see very
well.  Anon the house grew full, and the candles light, and the King and
Queen and all the ladies set: and it was, indeed, a glorious sight to see
Mrs. Stewart in black and white lace, and her head and shoulders dressed
with dyamonds, and the like a great many great ladies more, only the Queen
none; and the King in his rich vest of some rich silke and silver
trimming, as the Duke of York and all the dancers were, some of cloth of
silver, and others of other sorts, exceeding rich.  Presently after the
King was come in, he took the Queene, and about fourteen more couple there
was, and began the Bransles.  As many of the men as I can remember
presently, were, the King, Duke of York, Prince Rupert, Duke of Monmouth,
Duke of Buckingham, Lord Douglas,' Mr. [George] Hamilton, Colonell
Russell, Mr. Griffith, Lord Ossory, Lord Rochester; and of the ladies, the
Queene, Duchess of York, Mrs. Stewart, Duchess of Monmouth, Lady Essex
Howard, Mrs. Temples Swedes Embassadress, Lady Arlington; Lord George
Barkeley's daughter, and many others I remember not; but all most
excellently dressed in rich petticoats and gowns, and dyamonds, and
pearls.  After the Bransles, then to a Corant, and now and then a French
dance; but that so rare that the Corants grew tiresome, that I wished it
done.  Only Mrs. Stewart danced mighty finely, and many French dances,
specially one the King called the New Dance, which was very pretty; but
upon the whole matter, the business of the dancing of itself was not
extraordinary pleasing.  But the clothes and sight of the persons was
indeed very pleasing, and worth my coming, being never likely to see more
gallantry while I live, if I should come twenty times.  About twelve at
night it broke up, and I to hire a coach with much difficulty, but Pierce
had hired a chair for my wife, and so she being gone to his house, he and
I, taking up Barker at Unthanke's, to his house, whither his wife was come
home a good while ago and gone to bed. So away home with my wife, between
displeased with the dull dancing, and satisfied at the clothes and
persons.  My Lady Castlemayne, without whom all is nothing, being there,
very rich, though not dancing.  And so after supper, it being very cold,
to bed.

16th.  Up again betimes to attend the examination of Mr. Gawden's,
accounts, where we all met, but I did little but fit myself for the
drawing my great letter to the Duke of York of the state of the Navy for
want of money.  At noon to the 'Change, and thence back to the new taverne
come by us; the Three Tuns, where D. Gawden did feast us all with a chine
of beef and other good things, and an infinite dish of fowl, but all
spoiled in the dressing.  This noon I met with Mr. Hooke, and he tells me
the dog which was filled with another dog's blood, at the College the
other day, is very well, and like to be so as ever, and doubts not its
being found of great use to men; and so do Dr. Whistler, who dined with us
at the taverne.  Thence home in the evening, and I to my preparing my
letter, and did go a pretty way in it, staying late upon it, and then home
to supper and to bed, the weather being on a sudden set in to be very
cold.

17th.  Up, and to the office, where all the morning.  At noon home to
dinner, and in the afternoon shut myself in my chamber, and there till
twelve at night finishing my great letter to the Duke of York, which do
lay the ill condition of the Navy so open to him, that it is impossible if
the King and he minds any thing of their business, but it will operate
upon them to set all matters right, and get money to carry on the war,
before it be too late, or else lay out for a peace upon any termes. It was
a great convenience to-night that what I had writ foule in short hand, I
could read to W. Hewer, and he take it fair in short hand, so as I can
read it to-morrow to Sir W. Coventry, and then come home, and Hewer read
it to me while I take it in long-hand to present, which saves me much
time.  So to bed.

18th (Lord's day).  Up by candle-light and on foote to White Hall, where
by appointment I met Lord Bruncker at Sir W. Coventry's chamber, and there
I read over my great letter, and they approved it: and as I do do our
business in defence of the Board, so I think it is as good a letter in the
manner, and believe it is the worst in the matter of it, as ever come from
any office to a Prince.  Back home in my Lord Bruncker's coach, and there
W. Hewer and I to write it over fair; dined at noon, and Mercer with us,
and mighty merry, and then to finish my letter; and it being three o'clock
ere we had done, when I come to Sir W. Batten; he was in a huffe, which I
made light of, but he signed the letter, though he would not go, and liked
the letter well.  Sir W. Pen, it seems, he would not stay for it: so,
making slight of Sir W. Pen's putting so much weight upon his hand to Sir
W. Batten, I down to the Tower Wharf, and there got a sculler, and to
White Hall, and there met Lord Bruncker, and he signed it, and so I
delivered it to Mr. Cheving,

     [William Chiffinch, pimp to Charles II. and receiver of the secret
     pensions paid by the French Court.  He succeeded his brother, Thomas
     Chiffinch (who died in April, 1666), as Keeper of the King's Private
     Closet (see note, vol. v., p. 265).  He is introduced by Scott into
     his "Peveril of the Peak."]

and he to Sir W. Coventry, in the cabinet, the King and councill being
sitting, where I leave it to its fortune, and I by water home again, and
to my chamber, to even my Journall; and then comes Captain Cocke to me,
and he and I a great deal of melancholy discourse of the times, giving all
over for gone, though now the Parliament will soon finish the Bill for
money.  But we fear,  if we had it, as matters are now managed, we shall
never make the best  of it, but consume it all to no purpose or a bad one.
He being gone, I again to my Journall and finished it, and so to supper
and to bed.

19th.  Lay pretty long in bed talking with pleasure with my wife, and then
up and all the morning at my own chamber fitting some Tangier matters
against the afternoon for a meeting.  This morning also came Mr. Caesar,
and I heard him on the lute very finely, and my boy begins to play well.
After dinner I carried and set my wife down at her brother's, and then to
Barkeshire-house, where my Lord Chancellor hath been ever since the fire,
but he is not come home yet, so I to Westminster Hall, where the Lords
newly up and the Commons still sitting.  Here I met with Mr. Robinson, who
did give me a printed paper wherein he states his pretence to the post
office, and intends to petition the Parliament in it.  Thence I to the
Bull-head tavern, where I have not been since Mr. Chetwind and the time of
our club, and here had six bottles of claret filled, and I sent them to
Mrs. Martin, whom I had promised some of my owne, and, having none of my
owne, sent her this.  Thence to my Lord Chancellor's, and there Mr. Creed
and Gawden, Cholmley, and Sir G. Carteret walking in the Park over against
the house.  I walked with Sir G. Carteret, who I find displeased with the
letter I have drawn and sent in yesterday, finding fault with the account
we give of the ill state of the Navy, but I said little, only will justify
the truth of it.  Here we walked to and again till one dropped away after
another, and so I took coach to White Hall, and there visited my Lady
Jemimah, at Sir G. Carteret's lodgings.  Here was Sir Thomas Crew, and he
told me how hot words grew again to-day in the House of Lords between my
Lord Ossory and Ashly, the former saying that something said by the other
was said like one of Oliver's Council.  Ashly said that he must give him
reparation, or he would take it his owne way.  The House therefore did
bring my Lord Ossory to confess his fault, and ask pardon for it, as he
was also to my Lord Buckingham, for saying that something was not truth
that my Lord Buckingham had said.  This will render my Lord Ossory very
little in a little time.  By and by away, and calling my wife went home,
and then a little at Sir W. Batten's to hear news, but nothing, and then
home to supper, whither Captain Cocke, half foxed, come and sat with us,
and so away, and then we to bed.

20th.  Called up by Mr. Sheply, who is going into the country to-day to
Hinchingbroke, I sent my service to my Lady, and in general for newes:
that the world do think well of my Lord, and do wish he were here again,
but that the publique matters of the State as to the war are in the worst
condition that is possible.  By and by Sir W. Warren, and with him half an
hour discoursing of several businesses, and some I hope will bring me a
little profit.  He gone, and Sheply, I to the office a little, and then to
church, it being thanksgiving-day for the cessation of the plague; but,
Lord! how the towne do say that it is hastened before the plague is quite
over, there dying some people still,

     [According to the Bills of Mortality seven persons died in London of
     the plague during the week November 20th to 27th; and for some weeks
     after deaths continued from this cause.]

but only to get ground for plays to be publickly acted, which the Bishops
would not suffer till the plague was over; and one would thinke so, by the
suddenness of the notice given of the day, which was last Sunday, and the
little ceremony.  The sermon being dull of Mr. Minnes, and people with
great indifferency come to hear him.  After church home, where I met Mr.
Gregory, who I did then agree with to come to teach my wife to play on the
Viall, and he being an able and sober man, I am mightily glad of it.  He
had dined, therefore went away, and I to dinner, and after dinner by coach
to Barkeshire-house, and there did get a very great meeting; the Duke of
York being there, and much business done, though not in proportion to the
greatness of the business, and my Lord Chancellor sleeping and snoring the
greater part of the time.  Among other things I declared the state of our
credit as to tallys to raise money by, and there was an order for payment
of L5000 to Mr. Gawden, out of which I hope to get something against
Christmas.  Here we sat late, and here I did hear that there are some
troubles like to be in Scotland, there being a discontented party already
risen, that have seized on the Governor of Dumfreeze and imprisoned him,

     [William Fielding, writing to Sir Phil. Musgrave from Carlisle on
     November 15th, says: "Major Baxter, who has arrived from Dumfries,
     reports that this morning a great number of horse and foot came into
     that town, with drawn swords and pistols, gallopped up to Sir Jas.
     Turner's lodgings, seized him in his bed, carried him without
     clothes to the marketplace, threatened to cut him to pieces, and
     seized and put into the Tollbooth all the foot soldiers that were
     with him; they also secured the minister of Dumfries.  Many of the
     party were lairds and county people from Galloway--200 horse well
     mounted, one minister was with them who had swords and pistols, and
     200 or 300 foot, some with clubs, others with scythes."  On November
     17th Rob. Meine wrote to Williamson: "On the 15th 120 fanatics from
     the Glenkins, Deray; and neighbouring parishes in Dumfriesshire,
     none worth L10 except two mad fellows, the lairds of Barscob and
     Corsuck, came to Dumfries early in the morning, seized Sir Jas.
     Turner, commander of a company of men in Dumfriesshire, and carried
     him, without violence to others, to a strong house in Maxwell town,
     Galloway, declaring they sought only revenge against the tyrant who
     had been severe with them for not keeping to church, and had laid
     their families waste" ("Calendar of State Papers," 1666-67, pp. 262,
     268).]

but the story is yet very uncertain, and therefore I set no great weight
on it.  I home by Mr. Gawden in his coach, and so with great pleasure to
spend the evening at home upon my Lyra Viall, and then to supper and to
bed.  With mighty peace of mind and a hearty desire that I had but what I
have quietly in the country, but, I fear, I do at this day see the best
that either I or the rest of our nation will ever see.

21st.  Up, with Sir W. Batten to Charing Cross, and thence I to wait on
Sir Philip Howard, whom I find dressing himself in his night-gown and
turban like a Turke, but one of the finest persons that ever I saw in my
life.  He had several gentlemen of his owne waiting on him, and one
playing finely on the gittar: he discourses as well as ever I heard man,
in few words and handsome.  He expressed all kindness to Balty, when I
told him how sick he is: he says that, before he comes to be mustered
again, he must bring a certificate of his swearing the oaths of Allegiance
and Supremacy, and having taken the Sacrament according to the rites of
the Church of England.  This, I perceive, is imposed on all, and he will
be ready to do.  I pray God he may have his health again to be able to do
it.  Being mightily satisfied with his civility, I away to Westminster
Hall, and there walked with several people, and all the discourse is about
some trouble in Scotland I heard of yesterday, but nobody can tell the
truth of it.  Here was Betty Michell with her mother. I would have carried
her home, but her father intends to go with her, so I lost my hopes.  And
thence I to the Excise Office about some tallies, and then to the
Exchange, where I did much business, and so home to dinner, and then to
the office, where busy all the afternoon till night, and then home to
supper, and after supper an hour reading to my wife and brother something
in Chaucer with great pleasure, and so to bed.

22nd.  Up, and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and my Lord
Bruncker did show me Hollar's new print of the City, with a pretty
representation of that part which is burnt, very fine indeed; and tells me
that he was yesterday sworn the King's servant, and that the King hath
commanded him to go on with his great map of the City, which he was upon
before the City was burned, like Gombout of Paris, which I am glad of. At
noon home to dinner, where my wife and I fell out, I being displeased with
her cutting away a lace handkercher sewed about the neck down to her
breasts almost, out of a belief, but without reason, that it is the
fashion.  Here we did give one another the lie too much, but were
presently friends, and then I to my office, where very late and did much
business, and then home, and there find Mr. Batelier, and did sup and play
at cards awhile.  But he tells me the newes how the King of France hath,
in defiance to the King of England, caused all his footmen to be put into
vests, and that the noblemen of France will do the like; which, if true,
is the greatest indignity ever done by one Prince to another, and would
incite a stone to be revenged; and I hope our King will, if it be so, as
he tells me it is:

     [Planche throws some doubt on this story in his "Cyclopaedia of
     Costume" (vol. ii., p. 240), and asks the question, "Was Mr.
     Batelier hoaxing the inquisitive secretary, or was it the idle
     gossip of the day, as untrustworthy as such gossip is in general?"
     But the same statement was made by the author of the "Character of a
     Trimmer," who wrote from actual knowledge of the Court: "About this
     time a general humour, in opposition to France, had made us throw
     off their fashion, and put on vests, that we might look more like a
     distinct people, and not be under the servility of imitation, which
     ever pays a greater deference to the original than is consistent
     with the equality all independent nations should pretend to.  France
     did not like this small beginning of ill humours, at least of
     emulation; and wisely considering, that it is a natural
     introduction, first to make the world their apes, that they may be
     afterwards their slaves.  It was thought, that one of the
     instructions Madame [Henrietta, Duchess of Orleans] brought along
     with her, was to laugh us out of these vests; which she performed so
     effectually, that in a moment, like so many footmen who had quitted
     their master's livery, we all took it again, and returned to our old
     service; so that the very time of doing it gave a very critical
     advantage to France, since it looked like an evidence of our
     returning to her interest, as well as to their fashion. "The
     Character of a Trimmer" ("Miscellanies by the Marquis of Halifax,"
     1704, p. 164).  Evelyn reports that when the king expressed his
     intention never to alter this fashion, "divers courtiers and
     gentlemen gave his Majesty gold by way of wager that he would not
     persist in this resolution" ("Diary," October 18th, 1666).]

being told by one that come over from Paris with my Lady Fanshaw, who is
come over with the dead body of her husband, and that saw it before he
come away.  This makes me mighty merry, it being an ingenious kind of
affront; but yet it makes me angry, to see that the King of England is
become so little as to have the affront offered him.  So I left my people
at cards, and so to my chamber to read, and then to bed.  Batelier did
bring us some oysters to-night, and some bottles of new French wine of
this year, mighty good, but I drank but little.  This noon Bagwell's wife
was with me at the office, and I did what I would, and at night comes Mrs.
Burroughs, and appointed to meet upon the next holyday and go abroad
together.

23rd.  Up, and with Sir J. Minnes to White Hall, where we and the rest
attended the Duke of York, where, among other things, we had a complaint
of Sir William Jennings against his lieutenant, Le Neve, one that had been
long the Duke's page, and for whom the Duke of York hath great kindness.
It was a drunken quarrel, where one was as blameable as the other.  It was
referred to further examination, but the Duke of York declared, that as he
would not favour disobedience, so neither drunkenness, and therein he said
very well.  Thence with Sir W. Coventry to Westminster Hall, and there
parted, he having told me how Sir J. Minnes do disagree from the
proposition of resigning his place, and that so the whole matter is again
at a stand, at which I am sorry for the King's sake, but glad that Sir W.
Pen is again defeated, for I would not have him come to be Comptroller if
I could help it, he will be so cruel proud.  Here I spoke with Sir G.
Downing about our prisoners in Holland, and their being released; which he
is concerned in, and most of them are. Then, discoursing of matters of the
House of Parliament, he tells me that it is not the fault of the House,
but the King's own party, that have hindered the passing of the Bill for
money, by their popping in of new projects for raising it: which is a
strange thing; and mighty confident he is, that what money is raised, will
be raised and put into the same form that the last was, to come into the
Exchequer; and, for aught I see, I must confess I think it is the best
way.  Thence down to the Hall, and there walked awhile, and all the talk
is about Scotland, what news thence; but there is nothing come since the
first report, and so all is given over for nothing.  Thence home, and
after dinner to my chamber with Creed, who come and dined with me, and he
and I to reckon for his salary, and by and by comes in Colonel Atkins, and
I did the like with him, and it was Creed's design to bring him only for
his own ends, to seem to do him a courtesy, and it is no great matter.
The fellow I hate, and so I think all the world else do.  Then to talk of
my report I am to make of the state of our wants of money to the Lord
Treasurer, but our discourse come to little.  However, in the evening, to
be rid of him, I took coach and saw him to the Temple and there 'light,
and he being gone, with all the haste back again and to my chamber late to
enter all this day's matters of account, and to draw up my report to my
Lord Treasurer, and so to bed.  At the Temple I called at Playford's, and
there find that his new impression of his ketches

     [John Hilton's "Catch that catch can, or a Choice Collection of
     Catches, Rounds and Canons for 3 or 4 voyces," was first published
     by Playford in 1651 or 1652.  The book was republished "with large
     additions by John Playford" in 1658.  The edition referred to in the
     text was published in 1667 with a second title of "The Musical
     Companion."  The book was republished in 1672-73.]

are not yet out, the fire having hindered it, but his man tells me that it
will be a very fine piece, many things new being added to it.

24th.  Up, and to the office, where we sat all the morning.  At noon rose
and to my closet, and finished my report to my Lord Treasurer of our
Tangier wants, and then with Sir J. Minnes by coach to Stepney to the
Trinity House, where it is kept again now since the burning of their other
house in London.  And here a great many met at Sir Thomas Allen's feast,
of his being made an Elder Brother; but he is sick, and so could not be
there.  Here was much good company, and very merry; but the discourse of
Scotland, it seems, is confirmed, and that they are 4000 of them in armes,
and do declare for King and Covenant, which is very ill news.  I pray God
deliver us from the ill consequences we may justly fear from it.  Here was
a good venison pasty or two and other good victuals; but towards the
latter end of the dinner I rose, and without taking leave went away from
the table, and got Sir J. Minnes' coach and away home, and thence with my
report to my Lord Treasurer's, where I did deliver it to Sir Philip
Warwicke for my Lord, who was busy, my report for him to consider against
to-morrow's council.  Sir Philip Warwicke, I find, is full of trouble in
his mind to see how things go, and what our wants are; and so I have no
delight to trouble him with discourse, though I honour the man with all my
heart, and I think him to be a very able and right honest man.  So away
home again, and there to my office to write my letters very late, and then
home to supper, and then to read the late printed discourse of witches by
a member of Gresham College, and then to bed; the discourse being well
writ, in good stile, but methinks not very convincing.  This day Mr.
Martin is come to tell me his wife is brought to bed of a girle, and I
promised to christen it next Sunday.

25th (Lord's day).  Up, and with Sir J. Minnes by coach to White Hall, and
there coming late, I to rights to the chapel, where in my usual place I
heard one of the King's chaplains, one Mr. Floyd, preach.  He was out two
or three times in his prayer, and as many in his sermon, but yet he made a
most excellent good sermon, of our duty to imitate the lives and practice
of Christ and the saints departed, and did it very handsomely and
excellent stile; but was a little overlarge in magnifying the graces of
the nobility and prelates, that we have seen in our memorys in the world,
whom God hath taken from us.  At the end of the sermon an excellent
anthem; but it was a pleasant thing, an idle companion in our pew, a
prating, bold counsellor that hath been heretofore at the Navy Office, and
noted for a great eater and drinker, not for quantity, but of the best,
his name Tom Bales, said, "I know a fitter anthem for this sermon,"
speaking only of our duty of following the saints, and I know not what.
"Cooke should have sung, 'Come, follow, follow me.'"  I After sermon up
into the gallery, and then to Sir G. Carteret's to dinner; where much
company.  Among others, Mr. Carteret and my Lady Jemimah, and here was
also Mr. [John] Ashburnham, the great man, who is a pleasant man, and that
hath seen much of the world, and more of the Court.  After dinner Sir G.
Carteret and I to another room, and he tells me more and more of our want
of money and in how ill condition we are likely to be soon in, and that he
believes we shall not have a fleete at sea the next year.  So do I
believe; but he seems to speak it as a thing expected by the King and as
if their matters were laid accordingly.  Thence into the Court and there
delivered copies of my report to my Lord Treasurer, to the Duke of York,
Sir W. Coventry, and others, and attended there till the Council met, and
then was called in, and I read my letter.  My Lord Treasurer declared that
the King had nothing to give till the Parliament did give him some money.
So the King did of himself bid me to declare to all that would take our
tallys for payment, that he should, soon as the Parliament's money do come
in, take back their tallys, and give them money: which I giving him
occasion to repeat to me, it coming from him against the 'gre'

     [Apparently a translation of the French 'contre le gre', and
     presumably an expression in common use.  "Against the grain" is
     generally supposed to have its origin in the use of a plane against
     the grain of the wood.]

I perceive, of my Lord Treasurer, I was content therewith, and went out,
and glad that I have got so much.  Here staid till the Council rose,
walking in the gallery.  All the talke being of Scotland, where the
highest report, I perceive, runs but upon three or four hundred in armes;
but they believe that it will grow more, and do seem to apprehend it much,
as if the King of France had a hand in it.  My Lord Lauderdale do make
nothing of it, it seems, and people do censure him for it, he from the
beginning saying that there was nothing in it, whereas it do appear to be
a pure rebellion; but no persons of quality being in it, all do hope that
it cannot amount to much.  Here I saw Mrs. Stewart this afternoon,
methought the beautifullest creature that ever I saw in my life, more than
ever I thought her so, often as I have seen her; and I begin to think do
exceed my Lady Castlemayne, at least now.  This being St. Catherine's day,
the Queene was at masse by seven o'clock this morning; and.  Mr.
Ashburnham do say that he never saw any one have so much zeale in his life
as she hath: and, the question being asked by my Lady Carteret, much
beyond the bigotry that ever the old Queen-mother had.  I spoke with Mr.
Maya who tells me that the design of building the City do go on apace, and
by his description it will be mighty handsome, and to the satisfaction of
the people; but I pray God it come not out too late.  The Council up,
after speaking with Sir W. Coventry a little, away home with Captain Cocke
in his coach, discourse about the forming of his contract he made with us
lately for hempe, and so home, where we parted, and I find my uncle Wight
and Mrs. Wight and Woolly, who staid and supped, and mighty merry
together, and then I to my chamber to even my journal, and then to bed.
I will remember that Mr. Ashburnham to-day at dinner told how the rich
fortune Mrs. Mallett reports of her servants; that my Lord Herbert would
have had her; my Lord Hinchingbroke was indifferent to have her;

     [They had quarrelled (see August 26th).  She, perhaps, was piqued at
     Lord Hinchingbroke's refusal "to compass the thing without consent
     of friends" (see February 25th), whence her expression,
     "indifferent" to have her.  It is worthy of remark that their
     children intermarried; Lord Hinchingbroke's son married Lady
     Rochester's daughter.--B.]

my Lord John Butler might not have her; my Lord of Rochester would have
forced her;

     [Of the lady thus sought after, whom Pepys calls "a beauty" as well
     as a fortune, and who shortly afterwards, about the 4th February,
     1667, became the wife of the Earl of Rochester, then not twenty
     years old, no authentic portrait is known to exist.  When Mr.
     Miller, of Albemarle Street, in 1811, proposed to publish an edition
     of the "Memoires de Grammont," he sent an artist to Windsor to copy
     there the portraits which he could find of those who figure in that
     work.  In the list given to him for this purpose was the name of
     Lady Rochester.  Not finding amongst the "Beauties," or elsewhere,
     any genuine portrait of her, but seeing that by Hamilton she is
     absurdly styled "une triste heritiere," the, artist made a drawing
     from some unknown portrait at Windsor of a lady of a sorrowful
     countenance, and palmed it off upon the bookseller.  In the edition
     of "Grammont" it is not actually called Lady Rochester, but "La
     Triste Heritiere."  A similar falsification had been practised in
     Edwards's edition of 1793, but a different portrait had been copied.
     It is needless, almost, to remark how ill applied is Hamilton's
     epithet.--B.]

and Sir------Popham, who nevertheless is likely to have her, would kiss
her breach to have her.

26th.  Up, and to my chamber to do some business.  Then to speak with
several people, among others with Mrs. Burroughs, whom I appointed to meet
me at the New Exchange in the afternoon.  I by water to Westminster, and
there to enquire after my tallies, which I shall get this week. Thence to
the Swan, having sent for some burnt claret, and there by and by comes
Doll Lane, and she and I sat and drank and talked a great while, among
other things about her sister's being brought to bed, and I to be
godfather to the girle.  I did tumble Doll, and do almost what I would
with her, and so parted, and I took coach, and to the New Exchange, buying
a neat's tongue by the way, thinking to eat it out of town, but there I
find Burroughs in company of an old woman, an aunt of hers, whom she could
not leave for half an hour.  So after buying a few baubles to while away
time, I down to Westminster, and there into the House of Parliament,
where, at a great Committee, I did hear, as long as I would, the great
case against my Lord Mordaunt, for some arbitrary proceedings of his
against one Taylor, whom he imprisoned, and did all the violence to
imaginable, only to get him to give way to his abusing his daughter. Here
was Mr. Sawyer, my old chamber-fellow, a counsel against my Lord; and I am
glad to see him in so good play.  Here I met, before the committee sat,
with my cozen Roger Pepys, the first time I have spoke with him this
parliament.  He hath promised to come, and bring Madam Turner with him,
who is come to towne to see the City, but hath lost all her goods of all
kinds in Salisbury Court, Sir William Turner having not endeavoured, in
her absence, to save one penny, to dine with me on Friday next, of which I
am glad.  Roger bids me to help him to some good rich widow; for he is
resolved to go, and retire wholly, into the country; for, he says, he is
confident we shall be all ruined very speedily, by what he sees in the
State, and I am much in his mind.  Having staid as long as I thought fit
for meeting of Burroughs, I away and to the 'Change again, but there I do
not find her now, I having staid too long at the House, and therefore very
hungry, having eat nothing to-day.  Home, and there to eat presently, and
then to the office a little, and to Sir W. Batten, where Sir J. Minnes and
Captain Cocke was; but no newes from the North at all to-day; and the
newes-book makes the business nothing, but that they are all dispersed.  I
pray God it may prove so.  So home, and, after a little, to my chamber to
bed.

27th.  Up, and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and here I had
a letter from Mr. Brisband on another occasion, which, by the by,
intimates my Lord Hinchingbroke's intention to come and dine with me
to-morrow.  This put me into a great surprise, and therefore endeavoured
all I could to hasten over our business at the office, and so home at noon
and to dinner, and then away by coach, it being a very foul day, to White
Hall, and there at Sir G. Carteret's find my Lord Hinchingbroke, who
promises to dine with me to-morrow, and bring Mr. Carteret along with him.
Here I staid a little while talking with him and the ladies, and then away
to my Lord Crew's, and then did by the by make a visit to my Lord Crew,
and had some good discourse with him, he doubting that all will break in
pieces in the kingdom; and that the taxes now coming out, which will tax
the same man in three or four several capacities, as for lands, office,
profession, and money at interest, will be the hardest that ever come out;
and do think that we owe it, and the lateness of its being given, wholly
to the unpreparedness of the King's own party, to make their demand and
choice; for they have obstructed the giving it by land-tax, which had been
done long since.  Having ended my visit, I spoke to Sir Thomas Crew, to
invite him and his brother John to dinner tomorrow, at my house, to meet
Lord Hinchingbroke; and so homewards, calling at the cook's, who is to
dress it, to bespeak him, and then home, and there set things in order for
a very fine dinner, and then to the office, where late very busy and to
good purpose as to dispatch of business, and then home.  To bed, my people
sitting up to get things in order against to-morrow.  This evening was
brought me what Griffin had, as he says, taken this evening off of the
table in the office, a letter sealed and directed to the Principal
Officers and Commissioners of the Navy.  It is a serious and just libel
against our disorder in paying of our money, making ten times more people
wait than we have money for, and complaining by name of Sir W. Batten for
paying away great sums to particular people, which is true.  I was sorry
to see this way of reproach taken against us, but more sorry that there is
true ground for it.

28th.  Up, and with Sir W. Pen to White Hall (setting his lady and
daughter down by the way at a mercer's in the Strand, where they are going
to lay out some money), where, though it blows hard and rains hard, yet
the Duke of York is gone a-hunting.  We therefore lost our labour, and so
back again, and by hackney coach to secure places to get things ready
against dinner, and then home, and did the like there, and to my great
satisfaction: and at noon comes my Lord Hinchingbroke, Sir Thomas Crew,
Mr. John Crew, Mr. Carteret, and Brisband.  I had six noble dishes for
them, dressed by a man-cook, and commended, as indeed they deserved, for
exceeding well done.  We eat with great pleasure, and I enjoyed myself in
it with reflections upon the pleasures which I at best can expect, yet not
to exceed this; eating in silver plates, and all things mighty rich and
handsome about me.  A great deal of fine discourse, sitting almost till
dark at dinner, and then broke up with great pleasure, especially to
myself; and they away, only Mr. Carteret and I to Gresham College, where
they meet now weekly again, and here they had good discourse how this late
experiment of the dog, which is in perfect good health, may be improved
for good uses to men, and other pretty things, and then broke up.  Here
was Mr. Henry Howard, that will hereafter be Duke of Norfolke, who is
admitted this day into the Society, and being a very proud man, and one
that values himself upon his family, writes his name, as he do every
where, Henry Howard of Norfolke.  Thence home and there comes my Lady Pen,
Pegg, and Mrs. Turner, and played at cards and supped with us, and were
pretty merry, and Pegg with me in my closet a good while, and did suffer
me 'a la baiser mouche et toucher ses cosas' upon her breast, wherein I
had great pleasure, and so spent the evening and then broke up, and I to
bed, my mind mightily pleased with the day's entertainment.

29th.  Up, and to the office, where busy all the morning.  At noon home to
dinner, where I find Balty come out to see us, but looks like death, and I
do fear he is in a consumption; he has not been abroad many weeks before,
and hath now a well day, and a fit day of the headake in extraordinary
torture.  After dinner left him and his wife, they having their mother
hard by and my wife, and I a wet afternoon to White Hall to have seen my
Lady Carteret and Jemimah, but as God would have it they were abroad, and
I was well contented at it.  So my wife and I to Westminster Hall, where I
left her a little, and to the Exchequer, and then presently home again,
calling at our man-cooke's for his help to-morrow, but he could not come.
So I home to the office, my people all busy to get a good dinner to-morrow
again.  I late at the office, and all the newes I hear I put into a letter
this night to my Lord Bruncker at Chatham, thus:--

     "I doubt not of your lordship's hearing of Sir Thomas Clifford's
     succeeding Sir H. Pollard' in the Comptrollership of the King's
     house; but perhaps our ill, but confirmed, tidings from the
     Barbadoes may not [have reached you] yet, it coming but yesterday;
     viz., that about eleven ships, whereof two of the King's, the Hope
     and Coventry, going thence with men to attack St. Christopher's,
     were seized by a violent hurricane, and all sunk--two only of
     thirteen escaping, and those with loss of masts, &c.  My Lord
     Willoughby  himself is involved in the disaster, and I think two
     ships thrown upon an island of the French, and so all the men, to
     500, become their prisoners.  'Tis said, too, that eighteen Dutch
     men-of-war are passed the Channell, in order to meet with our Smyrna
     ships; and some, I hear, do fright us with the King of Sweden's
     seizing our mast-ships at Gottenburgh.  But we have too much ill
     newes true, to afflict ourselves with what is uncertain.  That which
     I hear from Scotland is, the Duke of York's saying, yesterday, that
     he is confident the Lieutenant-Generall there hath driven them into
     a pound, somewhere towards the mountains."

Having writ my letter, I home to supper and to bed, the world being
mightily troubled at the ill news from Barbadoes, and the consequence of
the Scotch business, as little as we do make of it.  And to shew how mad
we are at home, here, and unfit for any troubles: my Lord St. John did, a
day or two since, openly pull a gentleman in Westminster Hall by the nose,
one Sir Andrew Henly, while the judges were upon their benches, and the
other gentleman did give him a rap over the pate with his cane, of which
fray the judges, they say, will make a great matter: men are only sorry
the gentle man did proceed to return a blow; for, otherwise, my Lord would
have been soundly fined for the affront, and may be yet for his affront to
the judges.

30th.  Up, and with Sir W. Batten to White Hall, and there we did attend
the Duke of York, and had much business with him; and pretty to see, it
being St. Andrew's day, how some few did wear St. Andrew's crosse; but
most did make a mockery at it, and the House of Parliament, contrary to
practice, did sit also: people having no mind to observe the Scotch
saints' days till they hear better newes from Scotland.  Thence to
Westminster Hall and the Abbey, thinking as I had appointed to have met
Mrs. Burroughs there, but not meeting her I home, and just overtook my
cozen Roger Pepys, Mrs. Turner, Dicke, and Joyce Norton, coming by
invitation to dine with me.  These ladies I have not seen since before the
plague.  Mrs. Turner is come to towne to look after her things in her
house, but all is lost.  She is quite weary of the country, but cannot get
her husband to let her live here any more, which troubles her mightily.
She was mighty angry with me, that in all this time I never writ to her,
which I do think and take to myself as a fault, and which I have promised
to mend.  Here I had a noble and costly dinner for them, dressed by a
man-cooke, as that the other day was, and pretty merry we were, as I could
be with this company and so great a charge.  We sat long, and after much
talk of the plenty of her country in fish, but in nothing also that is
pleasing, we broke up with great kindness, and when it begun to be dark we
parted, they in one coach home, and I in another to Westminster Hall,
where by appointment Mrs. Burroughs and I were to meet, but did not after
I had spent the whole evening there.  Only I did go drink at the Swan, and
there did meet with Sarah, who is now newly married, and there I did lay
the beginnings of a future 'amour con elle'. .  .  .  .  Thence it being
late away called at Mrs. Burroughs' mother's door, and she come out to me,
and I did hazer whatever I would .  .  .  . and then parted, and home, and
after some playing at cards with my wife, we to supper and to bed.




     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     Amending of bad blood by borrowing from a better body
     And for his beef, says he, "Look how fat it is"
     First their apes, that they may be afterwards their slaves
     For a land-tax and against a general excise
     I had six noble dishes for them, dressed by a man-cook
     In opposition to France, had made us throw off their fashion
     Magnifying the graces of the nobility and prelates
     Origin in the use of a plane against the grain of the wood
     Play on the harpsicon, till she tired everybody
     Reading to my wife and brother something in Chaucer
     Said that there hath been a design to poison the King
     Tax the same man in three or four several capacities
     There I did lay the beginnings of a future 'amour con elle'
     Too much ill newes true, to afflict ourselves with uncertain
     What I had writ foule in short hand





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Diary of Samuel Pepys, November 1666
by Samuel Pepys

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***

***** This file should be named 4169.txt or 4169.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/4/1/6/4169/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
