Project Gutenberg's Diary of Samuel Pepys, December 1666, by Samuel Pepys

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Diary of Samuel Pepys, December 1666

Author: Samuel Pepys

Release Date: December 1, 2004 [EBook #4170]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***




Produced by David Widger





                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A. F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                DECEMBER
                                  1666

December 1st.  Up, and to the office, where we sat all the morning.  At
home to dinner, and then abroad walking to the Old Swan, and in my way I
did see a cellar in Tower Streete in a very fresh fire, the late great
winds having blown it up.

     [The fire continued burning in some cellars of the ruins of the city
     for four months, though it rained in the month of October ten days
     without ceasing (Rugge's "Diurnal").--B.]

It seemed to be only of log-wood, that Hath kept the fire all this while
in it.  Going further, I met my late Lord Mayor Bludworth, under whom the
City was burned, and went with him by water to White Hall.  But, Lord! the
silly talk that this fellow had, only how ready he would be to part with
all his estate in these difficult times to advance the King's service, and
complaining that now, as every body did lately in the fire, every body
endeavours to save himself, and let the whole perish: but a very weak man
he seems to be.  I left him at White Hall, he giving 6d. towards the boat,
and I to Westminster Hall, where I was again defeated in my expectation of
Burroughs.  However, I was not much sorry for it, but by coach home, in
the evening, calling at Faythorne's, buying three of my Lady Castlemayne's
heads, printed this day, which indeed is, as to the head, I think, a very
fine picture, and like her.  I did this afternoon get Mrs. Michell to let
me only have a sight of a pamphlet lately printed, but suppressed and much
called after, called "The Catholique's Apology;" lamenting the severity of
the Parliament against them, and comparing it with the lenity of other
princes to Protestants; giving old and late instances of their loyalty to
their princes, whatever is objected against them; and excusing their
disquiets in Queen Elizabeth's time, for that it was impossible for them
to think her a lawfull Queen, if Queen Mary, who had been owned as such,
were so; one being the daughter of the true, and the other of a false
wife: and that of the Gunpowder Treason, by saying that it was only the
practice of some of us, if not the King, to trepan some of their religion
into it, it never being defended by the generality of their Church, nor
indeed known by them; and ends with a large Catalogue, in red letters, of
the Catholiques which have lost their lives in the quarrel of the late
King and this.  The thing is very well writ indeed.  So home to my
letters, and then to my supper and to bed.

2nd (Lord's day).  Up, and to church, and after church home to dinner,
where I met Betty Michell and her husband, very merry at dinner, and after
dinner, having borrowed Sir W. Pen's coach, we to Westminster, they two
and my wife and I to Mr. Martin's, where find the company almost all come
to the christening of Mrs. Martin's child, a girl.  A great deal of good
plain company.  After sitting long, till the church was done, the Parson
comes, and then we to christen the child.  I was Godfather, and Mrs.
Holder (her husband, a good man, I know well), and a pretty lady, that
waits, it seems, on my Lady Bath, at White Hall, her name, Mrs. Noble,
were Godmothers.  After the christening comes in the wine and the
sweetmeats, and then to prate and tattle, and then very good company they
were, and I among them.  Here was old Mrs. Michell and Howlett, and
several married women of the Hall, whom I knew mayds.  Here was also Mrs.
Burroughs and Mrs. Bales, the young widow, whom I led home, and having
staid till the moon was up, I took my pretty gossip to White Hall with us,
and I saw her in her lodging, and then my owne company again took coach,
and no sooner in the coach but something broke, that we were fain there to
stay till a smith could be fetched, which was above an hour, and then it
costing me 6s. to mend.  Away round by the wall and Cow Lane,

     [Cow Lane, West Smithfield (now named King Street), was famous for
     its coachmakers.]

for fear it should break again; and in pain about the coach all the way.
But to ease myself therein Betty Michell did sit at the same end with me .
.  .  .  Being very much pleased with this, we at last come home, and so
to supper, and then sent them by boat home, and we to bed.  When I come
home I went to Sir W. Batten's, and there I hear more ill newes still:
that all our New England fleete, which went out lately, are put back a
third time by foul weather, and dispersed, some to one port and some to
another; and their convoys also to Plymouth; and whether any of them be
lost or not, we do not know.  This, added to all the rest, do lay us flat
in our hopes and courages, every body prophesying destruction to the
nation.

3rd.  Up, and, among a great many people that come to speak with me, one
was my Lord Peterborough's gentleman, who comes to me to dun me to get
some money advanced for my Lord; and I demanding what newes, he tells me
that at Court they begin to fear the business of Scotland more and more;
and that the Duke of York intends to go to the North to raise an army, and
that the King would have some of the Nobility and others to go and assist;
but they were so served the last year, among others his Lord, in raising
forces at their own charge, for fear of the French invading us, that they
will not be got out now, without money advanced to them by the King, and
this is like to be the King's case for certain, if ever he comes to have
need of any army.  He and others gone, I by water to Westminster, and
there to the Exchequer, and put my tallys in a way of doing for the last
quarter.  But my not following it the last week has occasioned the clerks
some trouble, which I am sorry for, and they are mad at.  Thence at noon
home, and there find Kate Joyce, who dined with me: Her husband and she
are weary of their new life of being an Innkeeper, and will leave it, and
would fain get some office; but I know none the foole is fit for, but
would be glad to help them, if I could, though they have enough to live
on, God be thanked! though their loss hath been to the value of L3000 W.
Joyce now has all the trade, she says, the trade being come to that end of
the towne.  She dined with me, my wife being ill of her months in bed.  I
left her with my wife, and away myself to Westminster Hall by appointment
and there found out Burroughs, and I took her by coach as far as the Lord
Treasurer's and called at the cake house by Hales's, and there in the
coach eat and drank and then carried her home  .  .  .  .  So having set
her down in the palace I to the Swan, and there did the first time
'baiser' the little sister of Sarah that is come into her place, and so
away by coach home, where to my vyall and supper and then to bed, being
weary of the following of my pleasure and sorry for my omitting (though
with a true salvo to my vowes) the stating my last month's accounts in
time, as I should, but resolve to settle, and clear all my business before
me this month, that I may begin afresh the next yeare, and enjoy some
little pleasure freely at Christmasse.  So to bed, and with more
cheerfulness than I have done a good while, to hear that for certain the
Scott rebells are all routed; they having been so bold as to come within
three miles of Edinburgh, and there given two or three repulses to the
King's forces, but at last were mastered.  Three or four hundred killed or
taken, among which their leader, one Wallis, and seven ministers, they
having all taken the Covenant a few days before, and sworn to live and die
in it, as they did; and so all is likely to be there quiet again.  There
is also the very good newes come of four New-England ships come home safe
to Falmouth with masts for the King; which is a blessing mighty
unexpected, and without which, if for nothing else, we must have failed
the next year.  But God be praised for thus much good fortune, and send us
the continuance of his favour in other things!  So to bed.

4th.  Up, and to the office, where we sat all the morning.  At noon dined
at home.  After dinner presently to my office, and there late and then
home to even my Journall and accounts, and then to supper much eased in
mind, and last night's good news, which is more and more confirmed with
particulars to very good purpose, and so to bed.

5th.  Up, and by water to White Hall, where we did much business before
the Duke of York, which being done, I away home by water again, and there
to my office till noon busy.  At noon home, and Goodgroome dined with us,
who teaches my wife to sing.  After dinner I did give him my song, "Beauty
retire," which he has often desired of me, and without flattery I think is
a very good song.  He gone, I to the office, and there late, very busy
doing much business, and then home to supper and talk, and then scold with
my wife for not reckoning well the times that her musique master hath been
with her, but setting down more than I am sure, and did convince her, they
had been with her, and in an ill humour of anger with her to bed.

6th.  Up, but very good friends with her before I rose, and so to the
office, where we sat all the forenoon, and then home to dinner, where
Harman dined with us, and great sport to hear him tell how Will Joyce
grows rich by the custom of the City coming to his end of the towne, and
how he rants over his brother and sister for their keeping an Inne, and
goes thither and tears like a prince, calling him hosteller and his sister
hostess.  Then after dinner, my wife and brother, in another habit; go out
to see a play; but I am not to take notice that I know of my brother's
going.  So I to the office, where very busy till late at night, and then
home.  My wife not pleased with the play, but thinks that it is because
she is grown more critical than she used to be, but my brother she says is
mighty taken with it.  So to supper and to bed.  This day, in the Gazette,
is the whole story of defeating the Scotch rebells, and of the creation of
the Duke of Cambridge, Knight of the Garter.

7th.  Up, and by water to the Exchequer, where I got my tallys finished
for the last quarter for Tangier, and having paid all my fees I to the
Swan, whither I sent for some oysters, and thither comes Mr. Falconbridge
and Spicer and many more clerks; and there we eat and drank, and a great
deal of their sorry discourse, and so parted, and I by coach home, meeting
Balty in the streete about Charing Crosse walking, which I am glad to see
and spoke to him about his mustering business, I being now to give an
account how the several muster-masters have behaved themselves, and so
home to dinner, where finding the cloth laid and much crumpled but clean,
I grew angry and flung the trenchers about the room, and in a mighty heat
I was: so a clean cloth was laid, and my poor wife very patient, and so to
dinner, and in comes Mrs. Barbara Sheldon, now Mrs. Wood, and dined with
us, she mighty fine, and lives, I perceive, mighty happily, which I am
glad [of] for her sake, but hate her husband for a block-head in his
choice.  So away after dinner, leaving my wife and her, and by water to
the Strand, and so to the King's playhouse, where two acts were almost
done when I come in; and there I sat with my cloak about my face, and saw
the remainder of "The Mayd's Tragedy;" a good play, and well acted,
especially by the younger Marshall, who is become a pretty good actor, and
is the first play I have seen in either of the houses since before the
great plague, they having acted now about fourteen days publickly.  But I
was in mighty pain lest I should be seen by any body to be at a play.
Soon as done I home, and then to my office awhile, and then home and spent
the night evening my Tangier accounts, much to my satisfaction, and then
to supper, and mighty good friends with my poor wife, and so to bed.

8th.  Up, and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and at noon
home to dinner, and there find Mr. Pierce and his wife and Betty, a pretty
girle, who in discourse at table told me the great Proviso passed the
House of Parliament yesterday; which makes the King and Court mad, the
King having given order to my Lord Chamberlain to send to the playhouses
and bawdy houses, to bid all the Parliament-men that were there to go to
the Parliament presently.  This is true, it seems; but it was carried
against the Court by thirty or forty voices.  It is a Proviso to the Poll
Bill, that there shall be a Committee of nine persons that shall have the
inspection upon oath, and power of giving others, of all the accounts of
the money given and spent for this warr.  This hath a most sad face, and
will breed very ill blood.  He tells me, brought in by Sir Robert Howard,
who is one of the King's servants, at least hath a great office, and hath
got, they say, L20,000 since the King come in. Mr. Pierce did also tell me
as a great truth, as being told it by Mr. Cowly, who was by, and heard it,
that Tom Killigrew should publiquely tell the King that his matters were
coming into a very ill state; but that yet there was a way to help all,
which is, says he, "There is a good, honest, able man, that I could name,
that if your Majesty would employ, and command to see all things well
executed, all things would soon be mended; and this is one Charles Stuart,
who now spends his time in employing his lips .  .  .  .  about the Court,
and hath no other employment; but if you would give him this employment,
he were the fittest man in the world to perform it."  This, he says, is
most true; but the King do not profit by any of this, but lays all aside,
and remembers nothing, but to his pleasures again; which is a sorrowful
consideration.  Very good company we were at dinner, and merry, and after
dinner, he being gone about business, my wife and I and Mrs. Pierce and
Betty and Balty, who come to see us to-day very sick, and went home not
well, together out, and our coach broke the wheel off upon Ludgate Hill.
So we were fain to part ourselves and get room in other people's coaches,
and Mrs. Pierce and I in one, and I carried her home and set her down, and
myself to the King's playhouse, which troubles me since, and hath cost me
a forfeit of 10s., which I have paid, and there did see a good part of
"The English Monsieur," which is a mighty pretty play, very witty and
pleasant.  And the women do very well; but, above all, little Nelly; that
I am mightily pleased with the play, and much with the House, more than
ever I expected, the women doing better than ever I expected, and very
fine women.  Here I was in pain to be seen, and hid myself; but, as God
would have it, Sir John Chichly come, and sat just by me.  Thence to Mrs.
Pierce's, and there took up my wife and away home, and to the office and
Sir W. Batten's, of whom I hear that this Proviso in Parliament is
mightily ill taken by all the Court party as a mortal blow, and that, that
strikes deep into the King's prerogative, which troubles me mightily.
Home, and set some papers right in my chamber, and then to supper and to
bed, we being in much fear of ill news of our colliers.  A fleete of two
hundred sail, and fourteen Dutch men-of-war between them and us and they
coming home with small convoy; and the City in great want, coals being at
L3 3s.  per chaldron, as I am told.  I saw smoke in the ruines this very
day.

9th (Lord's day).  Up, not to church, but to my chamber, and there begun
to enter into this book my journall of September, which in the fire-time I
could not enter here, but in loose papers.  At noon dined, and then to my
chamber all the afternoon and night, looking over and tearing and burning
all the unnecessary letters, which I have had upon my file for four or
five years backward, which I intend to do quite through all my papers,
that I may have nothing by me but what is worth keeping, and fit to be
seen, if I should miscarry.  At this work till midnight, and then to
supper and to bed.

10th.  Up, and at my office all the morning, and several people with me,
Sir W. Warren, who I do every day more and more admire for a miracle of
cunning and forecast in his business, and then Captain Cocke, with whom I
walked in the garden, and he tells me how angry the Court is at the late
Proviso brought in by the House.  How still my Lord Chancellor is, not
daring to do or say any thing to displease the Parliament; that the
Parliament is in a very ill humour, and grows every day more and more so;
and that the unskilfulness of the Court, and their difference among one
another, is the occasion of all not agreeing in what they would have, and
so they give leisure and occasion to the other part to run away with what
the Court would not have.  Then comes Mr. Gawden, and he and I in my
chamber discoursing about his business, and to pay him some Tangier orders
which he delayed to receive till I had money instead of tallies, but do
promise me consideration for my victualling business for this year, and
also as Treasurer for Tangier, which I am glad of, but would have been
gladder to have just now received it.  He gone, I alone to dinner at home,
my wife and her people being gone down the river to-day for pleasure,
though a cold day and dark night to come up.  In the afternoon I to the
Excise Office to enter my tallies, which I did, and come presently back
again, and then to the office and did much business, and then home to
supper, my wife and people being come well and hungry home from Erith.
Then I to begin the setting of a Base to "It is Decreed," and so to bed.

11th.  Up, and to the office, where we sat, and at noon home to dinner, a
small dinner because of a good supper.  After dinner my wife and I by
coach to St. Clement's Church, to Mrs. Turner's lodgings, hard by, to take
our leaves of her.  She is returning into the North to her children,
where, I perceive, her husband hath clearly got the mastery of her, and
she is likely to spend her days there, which for her sake I am a little
sorry for, though for his it is but fit she should live where he hath a
mind.  Here were several people come to see and take leave of her, she
going to-morrow: among others, my Lady Mordant, which was Betty Turner, a
most homely widow, but young, and pretty rich, and good natured.  Thence,
having promised to write every month to her, we home, and I to my office,
while my wife to get things together for supper.  Dispatching my business
at the office.  Anon come our guests, old Mr. Batelier, and his son and
daughter, Mercer, which was all our company.  We had a good venison pasty
and other good cheer, and as merry as in so good, innocent, and
understanding company I could be.  He is much troubled that wines, laden
by him in France before the late proclamation was out, cannot now be
brought into England, which is so much to his and other merchants' loss.
We sat long at supper and then to talk, and so late parted and so to bed.
This day the Poll Bill was to be passed, and great endeavours used to take
away the Proviso.

12th.  Up, and to the office, where some accounts of Mr. Gawden's were
examined, but I home most of the morning to even some accounts with Sir H.
Cholmly, Mr. Moone, and others one after another.  Sir H. Cholmly did with
grief tell me how the Parliament hath been told plainly that the King hath
been heard to say, that he would dissolve them rather than pass this Bill
with the Proviso; but tells me, that the Proviso is removed, and now
carried that it shall be done by a Bill by itself.  He tells me how the
King hath lately paid about L30,000

     [Two thousand pounds of this sum went to Alderman Edward Bakewell
     for two diamond rings, severally charged L1000 and L900, bought
     March 14th, 1665-66 (Second addenda to Steinman's "Memoir of the
     Duchess of Cleveland," privately printed, 1878, p. 4.).]

to clear debts of my Lady Castlemayne's; and that she and her husband are
parted for ever, upon good terms, never to trouble one another more.  He
says that he hears L400,000 hath gone into the Privypurse since this warr;
and that that hath consumed so much of our money, and makes the King and
Court so mad to be brought to discover it.  He gone, and after him the
rest, I to the office, and at noon to the 'Change, where the very good
newes is just come of our four ships from Smyrna, come safe without convoy
even into the Downes, without seeing any enemy; which is the best, and
indeed only considerable good newes to our Exchange, since the burning of
the City; and it is strange to see how it do cheer up men's hearts.  Here
I saw shops now come to be in this Exchange, and met little Batelier, who
sits here but at L3 per annum, whereas he sat at the other at L100, which
he says he believes will prove of as good account to him now as the other
did at that rent.  From the 'Change to Captain Cocke's, and there, by
agreement, dined, and there was Charles Porter, Temple, Fern, Debasty,
whose bad English and pleasant discourses was exceeding good
entertainment, Matt. Wren, Major Cooper, and myself, mighty merry and
pretty discourse.  They talked for certain, that now the King do follow
Mrs. Stewart wholly, and my Lady Castlemayne not above once a week; that
the Duke of York do not haunt my Lady Denham so much; that she troubles
him with matters of State, being of my Lord Bristoll's faction, and that
he avoids; that she is ill still.  After dinner I away to the office,
where we sat late upon Mr. Gawden's accounts, Sir J. Minnes being gone
home sick.  I late at the office, and then home to supper and to bed,
being mightily troubled with a pain in the small of my back, through cold,
or (which I think most true) my straining last night to get open my plate
chest, in such pain all night I could not turn myself in my bed.  Newes
this day from Brampton, of Mr. Ensum, my sister's sweetheart, being dead:
a clowne.

13th.  Up, and to the office, where we sat.  At noon to the 'Change and
there met Captain Cocke, and had a second time his direction to bespeak
L100 of plate, which I did at Sir R. Viner's, being twelve plates more,
and something else I have to choose.  Thence home to dinner, and there W.
Hewer dined with me, and showed me a Gazette, in April last, which I
wonder should never be remembered by any body, which tells how several
persons were then tried for their lives, and were found guilty of a design
of killing the King and destroying the Government; and as a means to it,
to burn the City; and that the day intended for the plot was the 3rd of
last September.

     [The "Gazette" of April 23rd-26th, 1666, which contains the
     following remarkable passage: "At the Sessions in the Old Bailey,
     John Rathbone, an old army colonel, William Saunders, Henry Tucker,
     Thomas Flint, Thomas Evans, John Myles, Will. Westcot, and John
     Cole, officers or soldiers in the late Rebellion, were indicted for
     conspiring the death of his Majesty and the overthrow of the
     Government.  Having laid their plot and contrivance for the
     surprisal of the Tower, the killing his Grace the Lord General, Sir
     John Robinson, Lieutenant of the Tower, and Sir Richard Brown; and
     then to have declared for an equal division of lands, &c.  The
     better to effect this hellish design, the City was to have been
     fired, and the portcullis let down to keep out all assistance; and
     the Horse Guards to have been surprised in the inns where they were
     quartered, several ostlers having been gained for that purpose.  The
     Tower was accordingly viewed, and its surprise ordered by boats over
     the moat, and from thence to scale the wall.  One Alexander, not yet
     taken, had likewise distributed money to these conspirators; and,
     for the carrying on the design more effectually, they were told of a
     Council of the great ones that sat frequently in London, from whom
     issued all orders; which Council received their directions from
     another in Holland, who sat with the States; and that the third of
     September was pitched on for the attempt, as being found by Lilly's
     Almanack, and a scheme erected for that purpose, to be a lucky day,
     a planet then ruling which prognosticated the downfall of Monarchy.
     The evidence against these persons was very full and clear, and they
     were accordingly found guilty of High Treason." See November 10th,
     1666--B.]

And the fire did indeed break out on the 2nd of September, which is very
strange, methinks, and I shall remember it.  At the office all the
afternoon late, and then home to even my accounts in my Tangier book,
which I did to great content in all respects, and joy to my heart, and so
to bed.  This afternoon Sir W. Warren and Mr. Moore, one after another,
walked with me in the garden, and they both tell me that my Lord Sandwich
is called home, and that he do grow more and more in esteem everywhere,
and is better spoken of, which I am mighty glad of, though I know well
enough his deserving the same before, and did foresee that it will come to
it.  In mighty great pain in my back still, but I perceive it changes its
place, and do not trouble me at all in making of water, and that is my
joy, so that I believe it is nothing but a strain, and for these three or
four days I perceive my overworking of my eyes by candlelight do hurt them
as it did the last winter, that by day I am well and do get them right,
but then after candlelight they begin to be sore and run, so that I intend
to get some green spectacles.

14th.  Up, and very well again of my pain in my back, it having been
nothing but cold.  By coach to White Hall, seeing many smokes of the fire
by the way yet, and took up into the coach with me a country gentleman,
who asked me room to go with me, it being dirty--one come out of the North
to see his son, after the burning his house: a merchant.  Here endeavoured
to wait on the Duke of York, but he would not stay from the Parliament.
So I to Westminster Hall, and there met my good friend Mr. Evelyn, and
walked with him a good while, lamenting our condition for want of good
council, and the King's minding of his business and servants.  I out to
the Bell Taverne, and thither comes Doll to me .  . .  ., and after an
hour's stay, away and staid in Westminster Hall till the rising of the
house, having told Mr. Evelyn, and he several others, of my Gazette which
I had about me that mentioned in April last a plot for which several were
condemned of treason at the Old Bayly for many things, and among others
for a design of burning the city on the 3rd of September.  The house sat
till three o'clock, and then up: and I home with Sir Stephen Fox to his
house to dinner, and the Cofferer with us. There I find Sir S. Fox's lady,
a fine woman, and seven the prettiest children of theirs that ever I knew
almost.  A very genteel dinner, and in great state and fashion, and
excellent discourse; and nothing like an old experienced man and a
courtier, and such is the Cofferer Ashburnham. The House have been mighty
hot to-day against the Paper Bill, showing all manner of averseness to
give the King money; which these courtiers do take mighty notice of, and
look upon the others as bad rebells as ever the last were.  But the
courtiers did carry it against those men upon a division of the House, a
great many, that it should be committed; and so it was: which they reckon
good news.  After dinner we three to the Excise Office, and there had long
discourse about our monies, but nothing to satisfaction, that is, to shew
any way of shortening the time which our tallies take up before they
become payable, which is now full two years, which is 20 per, cent. for
all the King's money for interest, and the great disservice of his Majesty
otherwise.  Thence in the evening round by coach home, where I find
Foundes his present, of a fair pair of candlesticks, and half a dozen of
plates come, which cost him full L50, and is a very good present; and here
I met with, sealed up, from Sir H. Cholmly, the lampoone, or the
Mocke-Advice to a Paynter,

     [In a broadside (1680), quoted by Mr. G. T. Drury in his edition of
     Waller's Poems, 1893, satirical reference is made to the fashionable
     form of advice to the painters

               "Each puny brother of the rhyming trade
               At every turn implores the Painter's aid,
               And fondly enamoured of own foul brat
               Cries in an ecstacy, Paint this, draw that."

     The series was continued, for we find "Advice to a Painter upon the
     Defeat of the Rebels in the West and the Execution of the late Duke
     of Monmouth" ("Poems on Affairs of State," vol. ii., p. 148);
     "Advice to a Painter, being a Satire on the French King," &c., 1692,
     and "Advice to a Painter," 1697 ("Poems on Affairs of State," vol.
     ii., p. 428).]

abusing the Duke of York and my Lord Sandwich, Pen, and every body, and
the King himself, in all the matters of the navy and warr.  I am sorry for
my Lord Sandwich's having so great a part in it.  Then to supper and
musique, and to bed.

15th.  Up and to the office, where my Lord Bruncker newly come to town,
from his being at Chatham and Harwich to spy enormities: and at noon I
with him and his lady Williams, to Captain Cocke's, where a good dinner,
and very merry.  Good news to-day upon the Exchange, that our Hamburgh
fleete is got in; and good hopes that we may soon have the like of our
Gottenburgh, and then we shall be well for this winter.  Very merry at
dinner.  And by and by comes in Matt. Wren from the Parliament-house; and
tells us that he and all his party of the House, which is the Court party,
are fools, and have been made so this day by the wise men of the other
side; for, after the Court party had carried it yesterday so powerfully
for the Paper-Bill,

     [It was called "A Bill for raising part of the supply for his
     Majesty by an imposition on Sealed Paper and Parchment"--B.]

yet now it is laid aside wholly, and to be supplied by a land-tax; which
it is true will do well, and will be the sooner finished, which was the
great argument for the doing of it.  But then it shews them fools, that
they would not permit this to have been done six weeks ago, which they
might have had.  And next, they have parted with the Paper Bill, which,
when once begun, might have proved a very good flower in the Crowne, as
any there.  So do really say that they are truly outwitted by the other
side.  Thence away to Sir R. Viner's, and there chose some plate besides
twelve plates which I purpose to have with Captain Cocke's gift of L100,
and so home and there busy late, and then home and to bed.

16th (Lord's day).  Lay long talking with my wife in bed, then up with
great content and to my chamber to set right a picture or two, Lovett
having sent me yesterday Sancta Clara's head varnished, which is very
fine, and now my closet is so full stored, and so fine, as I would never
desire to have it better.  Dined without any strangers with me, which I do
not like on Sundays.  Then after dinner by water to Westminster to see
Mrs. Martin, whom I found up in her chamber and ready to go abroad.  I sat
there with her and her husband and others a pretty while, and then away to
White Hall, and there walked up and down to the Queen's side, and there
saw my dear Lady Castlemayne, who continues admirable, methinks, and I do
not hear but that the King is the same to her still as ever. Anon to
chapel, by the King's closet, and heard a very good anthemne. Then with
Lord Bruncker to Sir W. Coventry's chamber; and there we sat with him and
talked.  He is weary of anything to do, he says, in the Navy.  He tells us
this Committee of Accounts will enquire sharply into our office.  And,
speaking of Sir J. Minnes, he says he will not bear any body's faults but
his own.  He discoursed as bad of Sir W. Batten almost, and cries out upon
the discipline of the fleete, which is lost, and that there is not in any
of the fourth rates and under scarce left one Sea Commander, but all young
gentlemen; and what troubles him, he hears that the gentlemen give out
that in two or three years a Tarpaulin shall not dare to look after being
better than a Boatswain.  Which he is troubled at, and with good reason,
and at this day Sir Robert Holmes is mighty troubled that his brother do
not command in chief, but is commanded by Captain Hannum, who, Sir W.
Coventry says, he believes to be at least of as good blood, is a longer
bred seaman, an elder officer, and an elder commander, but such is Sir R.
Holmes's pride as never to be stopt, he being greatly troubled at my Lord
Bruncker's late discharging all his men and officers but the standing
officers at Chatham, and so are all other Commanders, and a very great cry
hath been to the King from them all in my Lord's absence.  But Sir W.
Coventry do undertake to defend it, and my Lord Bruncker got ground I
believe by it, who is angry at Sir W. Batten's and Sir W. Pen's bad words
concerning it, and I have made it worse by telling him that they refuse to
sign to a paper which he and I signed on Saturday to declare the reason of
his actions, which Sir W. Coventry likes and would have it sent him and he
will sign it, which pleases me well.  So we parted, and I with Lord
Bruncker to Sir P. Neale's chamber, and there sat and talked awhile, Sir
Edward Walker being there, and telling us how he hath lost many fine
rowles of antiquity in heraldry by the late fire, but hath saved the most
of his papers.  Here was also Dr. Wallis, the famous scholar and
mathematician; but he promises little. Left them, and in the dark and cold
home by water, and so to supper and to read and so to bed, my eyes being
better to-day, and I cannot impute it to anything but by my being much in
the dark to-night, for I plainly find that it is only excess of light that
makes my eyes sore.  This after noon I walked with Lord Bruncker into the
Park and there talked of the times, and he do think that the King sees
that he cannot never have much more money or good from this Parliament,
and that therefore he may hereafter dissolve them, that as soon as he has
the money settled he believes a peace will be clapped up, and that there
are overtures of a peace, which if such as the Lord Chancellor can excuse
he will take. For it is the Chancellor's interest, he says, to bring peace
again, for in peace he can do all and command all, but in war he cannot,
because he understands not the nature of the war as to the management
thereof. He tells me he do not believe the Duke of York will go to sea
again, though there are a great many about the King that would be glad of
any occasion to take him out of the world, he standing in their ways; and
seemed to mean the Duke of Monmouth, who spends his time the most
viciously and idly of any man, nor will be fit for any thing; yet bespeaks
as if it were not impossible but the King would own him for his son, and
that there was a marriage between his mother and him; which God forbid
should be if it be not true, nor will the Duke of York easily be gulled in
it.  But this put to our other distractions makes things appear very sad,
and likely to be the occasion of much confusion in a little time, and my
Lord Bruncker seems to say that nothing can help us but the King's making
a peace soon as he hath this money; and thereby putting himself out of
debt, and so becoming a good husband, and then he will neither need this
nor any other Parliament, till he can have one to his mind: for no
Parliament can, as he says, be kept long good, but they will spoil one
another, and that therefore it hath been the practice of kings to tell
Parliaments what he hath for them to do, and give them so long time to do
it in, and no longer.  Harry Kembe, one of our messengers, is lately dead.

17th.  Up, and several people to speak with me, and then comes Mr. Caesar,
and then Goodgroome, and, what with one and the other, nothing but musique
with me this morning, to my great content; and the more, to see that God
Aimighty hath put me into condition to bear the charge of all this.  So
out to the 'Change, and did a little business, and then home, where they
two musicians and Mr. Cooke come to see me, and Mercer to go along with my
wife this afternoon to a play.  To dinner, and then our company all broke
up, and to my chamber to do several things.  Among other things, to write
a letter to my Lord Sandwich, it being one of the burdens upon my mind
that I have not writ to him since he went into Spain, but now I do intend
to give him a brief account of our whole year's actions since he went,
which will make amends.  My wife well home in the evening from the play;
which I was glad of, it being cold and dark, and she having her necklace
of pearl on, and none but Mercer with her.  Spent the evening in fitting
my books, to have the number set upon each, in order to my having an
alphabet of my whole, which will be of great ease to me.  This day Captain
Batters come from sea in his fireship and come to see me, poor man, as his
patron, and a poor painful wretch he is as can be.  After supper to bed.

18th.  Up, and to the office, where I hear the ill news that poor Batters,
that had been born and bred a seaman, and brought up his ship from sea but
yesterday, was, going down from me to his ship, drowned in the Thames,
which is a sad fortune, and do make me afeard, and will do, more than ever
I was.  At noon dined at home, and then by coach to my Lord Bellasses, but
not at home.  So to Westminster Hall, where the Lords are sitting still, I
to see Mrs. Martin, who is very well, and intends to go abroad to-morrow
after her childbed.  She do tell me that this child did come is 'meme jour
that it ought to hazer after my avoir ete con elle before her marid did
venir home  .  .  .  .  Thence to the Swan, and there I sent for Sarah,
and mighty merry we were .  .  .  .  So to Sir Robert Viner's about my
plate, and carried home another dozen of plates, which makes my stock of
plates up 2 1/2 dozen, and at home find Mr. Thomas Andrews, with whom I
staid and talked a little and invited him to dine with me at Christmas,
and then I to the office, and there late doing business, and so home and
to bed.  Sorry for poor Batters.

19th.  Up, and by water down to White Hall, and there with the .Duke of
York did our usual business, but nothing but complaints of want of money
[without] success, and Sir W. Coventry's complaint of the defects of our
office (indeed Sir J. Minnes's) without any amendment, and he tells us so
plainly of the Committee of Parliament's resolution to enquire home into
all our managements that it makes me resolve to be wary, and to do all
things betimes to be ready for them.  Thence going away met Mr. Hingston
the organist (my old acquaintance) in the Court, and I took him to the Dog
Taverne and got him to set me a bass to my "It is decreed," which I think
will go well, but he commends the song not knowing the words, but says the
ayre is good, and believes the words are plainly expressed.  He is of my
mind against having of 8ths unnecessarily in composition.  This did all
please me mightily.  Then to talk of the King's family.  He says many of
the musique are ready to starve, they being five years behindhand for
their wages; nay, Evens, the famous man upon the Harp having not his equal
in the world, did the other day die for mere want, and was fain to be
buried at the almes of the parish, and carried to his grave in the dark at
night without one linke, but that Mr. Hingston met it by chance, and did
give 12d. to buy two or three links.  He says all must come to ruin at
this rate, and I believe him.  Thence I up to the Lords' House to enquire
for Lord Bellasses; and there hear how at a conference this morning
between the two Houses about the business of the Canary Company, my Lord
Buckingham leaning rudely over my Lord Marquis Dorchester, my Lord
Dorchester removed his elbow.  Duke of Buckingham asked him whether he was
uneasy; Dorchester replied, yes, and that he durst not do this were he any
where else: Buckingham replied, yes he would, and that he was a better man
than himself; Dorchester answered that he lyed.  With this Buckingham
struck off his hat, and took him by his periwigg, and pulled it aside, and
held him.  My Lord Chamberlain and others interposed, and, upon coming
into the House, the Lords did order them both to the Tower, whither they
are to go this afternoon.  I down into the Hall, and there the Lieutenant
of the Tower took me with him, and would have me to the Tower to dinner;
where I dined at the head of his table, next his lady,' who is comely and
seeming sober and stately, but very proud and very cunning, or I am
mistaken, and wanton, too.  This day's work will bring the Lieutenant of
the Tower L350.  But a strange, conceited, vain man he is that ever I met
withal, in his own praise, as I have heretofore observed of him.  Thence
home, and upon Tower Hill saw about 3 or 400 seamen get together; and one,
standing upon a pile of bricks, made his sign, with his handkercher, upon
his stick, and called all the rest to him, and several shouts they gave.
This made me afeard; so I got home as fast as I could.  And hearing of no
present hurt did go to Sir Robert Viner's about my plate again, and coming
home do hear of 1000 seamen said in the streets to be in armes.  So in
great fear home, expecting to find a tumult about my house, and was
doubtful of my riches there.  But I thank God I found all well.  But by
and by Sir W. Batten and Sir R. Ford do tell me, that the seamen have been
at some prisons, to release some seamen, and the Duke of Albemarle is in
armes, and all the Guards at the other end of the town; and the Duke of
Albemarle is gone with some forces to Wapping, to quell the seamen; which
is a thing of infinite disgrace to us.  I sat long talking with them; and,
among other things, Sir R. Ford did make me understand how the House of
Commons is a beast not to be understood, it being impossible to know
beforehand the success almost of any small plain thing, there being so
many to think and speak to any business, and they of so uncertain minds
and interests and passions.  He did tell me, and so did Sir W. Batten, how
Sir Allen Brodericke  and Sir Allen Apsly did come drunk the other day
into the House, and did both speak for half an hour together, and could
not be either laughed, or pulled, or bid to sit down and hold their peace,
to the great contempt of the King's servants and cause; which I am grieved
at with all my heart. We were full in discourse of the sad state of our
times, and the horrid shame brought on the King's service by the just
clamours of the poor seamen, and that we must be undone in a little time.
Home full of trouble on these considerations, and, among other things, I
to my chamber, and there to ticket a good part of my books, in order to
the numbering of them for my easy finding them to read as I have occasion.
So to supper and to bed, with my heart full of trouble.

20th.  Up, and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and here among
other things come Captain Cocke, and I did get him to sign me a note for
the L100 to pay for the plate he do present me with, which I am very glad
of.  At noon home to dinner, where was Balty come, who is well again, and
the most recovered in his countenance that ever I did see. Here dined with
me also Mrs. Batters, poor woman! now left a sad widow by the drowning of
her husband the other day.  I pity her, and will do her what kindness I
can; yet I observe something of ill-nature in myself more than should be,
that I am colder towards her in my charity than I should be to one so
painful as he and she have been and full of kindness to their power to my
wife and I.  After dinner out with Balty, setting him down at the Maypole
in the Strand, and then I to my Lord Bellasses, and there spoke with Mr.
Moone about some business, and so away home to my business at the office,
and then home to supper and to bed, after having finished the putting of
little papers upon my books to be numbered hereafter.

21st.  Lay long, and when up find Mrs. Clerk of Greenwich and her daughter
Daniel, their business among other things was a request her daughter was
to make, so I took her into my chamber, and there it was to help her
husband to the command of a little new pleasure boat building, which I
promised to assist in.  And here I had opportunity 'para baiser elle, and
toucher ses mamailles' .  .  .  .  Then to the office, and there did a
little business, and then to the 'Change and did the like. So home to
dinner, and spent all the afternoon in putting some things, pictures
especially, in order, and pasting my Lady Castlemayne's print on a frame,
which I have made handsome, and is a fine piece.  So to the office in the
evening to marshall my papers of accounts presented to the Parliament,
against any future occasion to recur to them, which I did do to my great
content.  So home and did some Tangier work, and so to bed.

22nd.  At the office all the morning, and there come news from Hogg that
our shipp hath brought in a Lubecker to Portsmouth, likely to prove prize,
of deals, which joys us.  At noon home to dinner, and then Sir W. Pen, Sir
R. Ford, and I met at Sir W. Batten's to examine our papers, and have
great hopes to prove her prize, and Sir R. Ford I find a mighty
yare--[Quick or ready, a naval term frequently used by Shakespeare.]--man
in this business, making exceeding good observations from the papers on
our behalf.  Hereupon concluded what to write to Hogg and Middleton, which
I did, and also with Mr. Oviatt (Sir R. Ford's son, who is to be our
solicitor), to fee some counsel in the Admiralty, but none in town.  So
home again, and after writing letters by the post, I with all my clerks
and Carcasse and Whitfield to the ticket-office, there to be informed in
the method and disorder of the office, which I find infinite great, of
infinite concernment to be mended, and did spend till 12 at night to my
great satisfaction, it being a point of our office I was wholly
unacquainted in.  So with great content home and to bed.

23rd (Lord's day).  Up and alone to church, and meeting Nan Wright at the
gate had opportunity to take two or three 'baisers', and so to church,
where a vain fellow with a periwigg preached, Chaplain, as by his prayer
appeared, to the Earl of Carlisle?  Home, and there dined with us Betty
Michell and her husband.  After dinner to White Hall by coach, and took
them with me.  And in the way I would have taken 'su main' as I did the
last time, but she did in a manner withhold it.  So set them down at White
Hall, and I to the Chapel to find Dr. Gibbons, and from him to the Harp
and Ball to transcribe the treble which I would have him to set a bass to.
But this took me so much time, and it growing night, I was fearful of
missing a coach, and therefore took a coach and to rights to call Michell
and his wife at their father Howlett's, and so home, it being cold, and
the ground all snow .  .  .  .  They gone I to my chamber, and with my
brother and wife did number all my books in my closet, and took a list of
their names, which pleases me mightily, and is a jobb I wanted much to
have done.  Then to supper and to bed.

24th.  Up, and to the office, where Lord Bruncker, [Sir] J. Mimics, [Sir]
W. Yen, and myself met, and there I did use my notes I took on Saturday
night about tickets, and did come to a good settlement in the business of
that office, if it be kept to, this morning being a meeting on purpose. At
noon to prevent my Lord Bruncker's dining here I walked as if upon
business with him, it being frost and dry, as far as Paul's, and so back
again through the City by Guildhall, observing the ruines thereabouts,
till I did truly lose myself, and so home to dinner.  I do truly find that
I have overwrought my eyes, so that now they are become weak and apt to be
tired, and all excess of light makes them sore, so that now to the
candlelight I am forced to sit by, adding, the snow upon the ground all
day, my eyes are very bad, and will be worse if not helped, so my Lord
Bruncker do advise as a certain cure to use greene spectacles, which I
will do.  So to dinner, where Mercer with us, and very merry.  After
dinner she goes and fetches a little son of Mr. Backeworth's, the wittiest
child and of the most spirit that ever I saw in my life for discourse of
all kind, and so ready and to the purpose, not above four years old.
Thence to Sir Robert Viner's, and there paid for the plate I have bought
to the value of L94, with the L100 Captain Cocke did give me to that
purpose, and received the rest in money.  I this evening did buy me a pair
of green spectacles, to see whether they will help my eyes or no.  So to
the 'Change, and went to the Upper 'Change, which is almost as good as the
old one; only shops are but on one side.  Then home to the office, and did
business till my eyes began to be bad, and so home to supper.  My people
busy making mince pies, and so to bed.  No newes yet of our Gottenburgh
fleete; which makes [us] have some fears, it being of mighty concernment
to have our supply of masts safe.  I met with Mr. Cade to-night, my
stationer; and he tells me that he hears for certain that the
Queene-Mother is about and hath near finished a peace with France, which,
as a Presbyterian, he do not like, but seems to fear it will be a means to
introduce Popery.

25th (Christmas day).  Lay pretty long in bed, and then rose, leaving my
wife desirous to sleep, having sat up till four this morning seeing her
mayds make mince-pies.  I to church, where our parson Mills made a good
sermon.  Then home, and dined well on some good ribbs of beef roasted and
mince pies; only my wife, brother, and Barker, and plenty of good wine of
my owne, and my heart full of true joy; and thanks to God Almighty for the
goodness of my condition at this day.  After dinner, I begun to teach my
wife and Barker my song, "It is decreed," which pleases me mightily as now
I have Mr. Hinxton's base.  Then out and walked alone on foot to the
Temple, it being a fine frost, thinking to have seen a play all alone; but
there, missing of any bills, concluded there was none, and so back home;
and there with my brother reducing the names of all my books to an
alphabet, which kept us till 7 or 8 at night, and then to supper, W. Hewer
with us, and pretty merry, and then to my chamber to enter this day's
journal only, and then to bed.  My head a little thoughtfull how to behave
myself in the business of the victualling, which I think will be prudence
to offer my service in doing something in passing the pursers' accounts,
thereby to serve the King, get honour to myself, and confirm me in my
place in the victualling, which at present yields not work enough to
deserve my wages.

26th.  Up, and walked all the way (it being a most fine frost), to White
Hall, to Sir W. Coventry's chamber, and thence with him up to the Duke of
York, where among other things at our meeting I did offer my assistance to
Sir J. Minnes to do the business of his office, relating to the Pursers'
accounts, which was well accepted by the Duke of York, and I think I have
and shall do myself good in it, if it be taken, for it will confirm me in
the business of the victualling office, which I do now very little for.
Thence home, carrying a barrel of oysters with me.  Anon comes Mr. John
Andrews and his wife by invitation from Bow to dine with me, and young
Batelier and his wife with her great belly, which has spoiled her looks
mightily already.  Here was also Mercer and Creed, whom I met coming home,
who tells me of a most bitter lampoone now out against the Court and the
management of State from head to foot, mighty witty and mighty severe.  By
and by to dinner, a very good one, and merry.  After dinner I put the
women into a coach, and they to the Duke's house, to a play which was
acted, "The--------."  It was indifferently done, but was not pleased with
the song, Gosnell not singing, but a new wench, that sings naughtily.
Thence home, all by coach, and there Mr. Andrews to the vyall, who plays
most excellently on it, which I did not know before. Then to dance, here
being Pembleton come, by my wife's direction, and a fiddler; and we got,
also, the elder Batelier to-night, and Nan Wright, and mighty merry we
were, and I danced; and so till twelve at night, and to supper, and then
to cross purposes, mighty merry, and then to bed, my eyes being sore.
Creed lay here in Barker's bed.

27th.  Up; and called up by the King's trumpets, which cost me 10s.  So to
the office, where we sat all the morning.  At noon, by invitation, my
wife, who had not been there these to months, I think, and I, to meet all
our families at Sir W. Batten's at dinner, whither neither a great dinner
for so much company nor anything good or handsome.  In the middle of
dinner I rose, and my wife, and by coach to the King's playhouse, and
meeting Creed took him up, and there saw "The Scornfull Lady" well acted;
Doll Common doing Abigail most excellently, and Knipp the widow very well,
and will be an excellent actor, I think.  In other parts the play not so
well done as used to be, by the old actors.  Anon to White Hall by coach,
thinking to have seen a play there to-night, but found it a mistake, so
back again, and missed our coach[man], who was gone, thinking to come time
enough three hours hence, and we could not blame him.  So forced to get
another coach, and all three home to my house, and there to Sir W.
Batten's, and eat a bit of cold chine of beef, and then staid and talked,
and then home and sat and talked a little by the fireside with my wife and
Creed, and so to bed, my left eye being very sore.  No business publick or
private minded all these two days.  This day a house or two was blown up
with powder in the Minorys, and several people spoiled, and many dug out
from under the rubbish.

28th.  Up, and Creed and I walked (a very fine walk in the frost) to my
Lord Bellasses, but missing him did find him at White Hall, and there
spoke with him about some Tangier business.  That done, we to Creed's
lodgings, which are very pretty, but he is going from them.  So we to
Lincoln's Inne Fields, he to Ned Pickering's, who it seems lives there,
keeping a good house, and I to my Lord Crew's, where I dined, and hear the
newes how my Lord's brother, Mr. Nathaniel Crew, hath an estate of 6 or
L700 per annum, left him by the death of an old acquaintance of his, but
not akin to him at all.  And this man is dead without will, but had, above
ten years since, made over his estate to this Mr. Crew, to him and his
heirs for ever, and given Mr. Crew the keeping of the deeds in his own
hand all this time; by which, if he would, he might have taken present
possession of the estate, for he knew what they were.  This is as great an
act of confident friendship as this latter age, I believe, can shew.  From
hence to the Duke's house, and there saw "Macbeth" most excellently acted,
and a most excellent play for variety.  I had sent for my wife to meet me
there, who did come, and after the play was done, I out so soon to meet
her at the other door that I left my cloake in the playhouse, and while I
returned to get it, she was gone out and missed me, and with W. Hewer away
home.  I not sorry for it much did go to White Hall, and got my Lord
Bellasses to get me into the playhouse; and there, after all staying above
an hour for the players, the King and all waiting, which was absurd, saw
"Henry the Fifth" well done by the Duke's people, and in most excellent
habits, all new vests, being put on but this night.  But I sat so high and
far off, that I missed most of the words, and sat with a wind coming into
my back and neck, which did much trouble me.  The play continued till
twelve at night; and then up, and a most horrid cold night it was, and
frosty, and moonshine.  But the worst was, I had left my cloak at Sir G.
Carteret's, and they being abed I was forced to go home without it.  So by
chance got a coach and to the Golden Lion Taverne in the Strand, and there
drank some mulled sack, and so home, where find my poor wife staying for
me, and then to bed mighty cold.

29th.  Up, called up with newes from Sir W. Batten that Hogg hath brought
in two prizes more: and so I thither, and hear the particulars, which are
good; one of them, if prize, being worth L4,000: for which God be thanked!
Then to the office, and have the newes brought us of Captain Robinson's
coming with his fleete from Gottenburgh: dispersed, though, by foul
weather.  But he hath light of five Dutch men-of-war, and taken three,
whereof one is sunk; which is very good newes to close up the year with,
and most of our merchantmen already heard of to be safely come home,
though after long lookings-for, and now to several ports, as they could
make them.  At noon home to dinner, where Balty is and now well recovered.
Then to the office to do business, and at night, it being very cold, home
to my chamber, and there late writing, but my left eye still very sore.  I
write by spectacles all this night, then to supper and to bed.  This day's
good news making me very lively, only the arrears of much business on my
hands and my accounts to be settled for the whole year past do lie as a
weight on my mind.

30th (Lord's day).  Lay long, however up and to church, where Mills made a
good sermon.  Here was a collection for the sexton; but it come into my
head why we should be more bold in making the collection while the psalm
is singing, than in the sermon or prayer.  Home, and, without any
strangers, to dinner, and then all the afternoon and evening in my chamber
preparing all my accounts in good condition against to-morrow, to state
them for the whole year past, to which God give me a good issue when I
come to close them!  So to supper and to bed.

31st.  Rising this day with a full design to mind nothing else but to make
up my accounts for the year past, I did take money, and walk forth to
several places in the towne as far as the New Exchange, to pay all my
debts, it being still a very great frost and good walking.  I staid at the
Fleece Tavern in Covent Garden while my boy Tom went to W. Joyce's to pay
what I owed for candles there.  Thence to the New Exchange to clear my
wife's score, and so going back again I met Doll Lane (Mrs. Martin's
sister), with another young woman of the Hall, one Scott, and took them to
the Half Moon Taverne and there drank some burnt wine with them, without
more pleasure, and so away home by coach, and there to dinner, and then to
my accounts, wherein, at last, I find them clear and right; but, to my
great discontent, do find that my gettings this year have been L573 less
than my last: it being this year in all but L2,986; whereas, the last, I
got L3,560.  And then again my spendings this year have exceeded my
spendings the last by L644: my whole spendings last year being but L509;
whereas this year, it appears, I have spent L1154, which is a sum not fit
to be said that ever I should spend in one year, before I am master of a
better estate than I am.  Yet, blessed be God!  and I pray God make me
thankful for it, I do find myself worth in money, all good, above L6,200;
which is above L1800 more than I was the last year. This, I trust in God,
will make me thankfull for what I have, and carefull to make up by care
next year what by my negligence and prodigality I have lost and spent this
year.  The doing of this, and entering of it fair, with the sorting of all
my expenses, to see how and in what points I have exceeded, did make it
late work, till my eyes become very sore and ill, and then did give over,
and supper, and to bed. Thus ends this year of publick wonder and mischief
to this nation, and, therefore, generally wished by all people to have an
end.  Myself and family well, having four mayds and one clerk, Tom, in my
house, and my brother, now with me, to spend time in order to his
preferment.  Our healths all well, only my eyes with overworking them are
sore as candlelight comes to them, and not else; publick matters in a most
sad condition; seamen discouraged for want of pay, and are become not to
be governed: nor, as matters are now, can any fleete go out next year.
Our enemies, French and Dutch, great, and grow more by our poverty.  The
Parliament backward in raising, because jealous of the spending of the
money; the City less and less likely to be built again, every body
settling elsewhere, and nobody encouraged to trade.  A sad, vicious,
negligent Court, and all sober men there fearful of the ruin of the whole
kingdom this next year; from which, good God deliver us!  One thing I
reckon remarkable in my owne condition is, that I am come to abound in
good plate, so as at all entertainments to be served wholly with silver
plates, having two dozen and a half.




     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     Being five years behindhand for their wages (court musicians)
     But fit she should live where he hath a mind
     Gladder to have just now received it (than a promise)
     Most homely widow, but young, and pretty rich, and good natured
     No Parliament can, as he says, be kept long good
     Peace with France, which, as a Presbyterian, he do not like
     That I may have nothing by me but what is worth keeping
     Weary of the following of my pleasure





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Diary of Samuel Pepys, December 1666
by Samuel Pepys

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***

***** This file should be named 4170.txt or 4170.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/4/1/7/4170/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
