The Project Gutenberg EBook of Diary of Samuel Pepys, 1666, by Samuel Pepys

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Diary of Samuel Pepys, 1666
       Transcribed From The Shorthand Manuscript In The Pepysian
       Library Magdalene College Cambridge By The Rev. Mynors
       Bright

Author: Samuel Pepys

Commentator: Lord Braybrooke

Editor: Henry B. Wheatley

Release Date: October 12, 2006 [EBook #4171]
Posting Date: March 22, 2009 

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, 1666 ***




Produced by David Widger







THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A. F.R.S.

CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

(Unabridged)

WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

1966

By Samuel Pepys

Edited With Additions By

Henry B. Wheatley F.S.A.




    LONDON
    GEORGE BELL & SONS YORK ST.  COVENT GARDEN
    CAMBRIDGE DEIGHTON BELL & CO.


    1893




JANUARY 1665-1666

January 1st (New-Yeare's Day). Called up by five o'clock, by my order,
by Mr. Tooker, who wrote, while I dictated to him, my business of
the Pursers; and so, without eating or drinking, till three in the
afternoon, and then, to my great content, finished it. So to dinner,
Gibson and he and I, and then to copying it over, Mr. Gibson reading and
I writing, and went a good way in it till interrupted by Sir W. Warren's
coming, of whom I always learne something or other, his discourse being
very good and his brains also. He being gone we to our business again,
and wrote more of it fair, and then late to bed.

     [This document is in the British Museum (Harleian MS. 6287), and is
     entitled, "A Letter from Mr. Pepys, dated at Greenwich, 1 Jan.
     1665-6, which he calls his New Year's Gift to his hon. friend, Sir
     Wm. Coventry, wherein he lays down a method for securing his Majesty
     in husbandly execution of the Victualling Part of the Naval
     Expence."  It consists of nineteen closely written folio pages, and
     is a remarkable specimen of Pepys's business habits.--B. There are
     copies of several letters on the victualling of the navy, written by
     Pepys in 1666, among the Rawlinson MSS. in the Bodleian.]

2nd. Up by candlelight again, and wrote the greatest part of my business
fair, and then to the office, and so home to dinner, and after dinner
up and made an end of my fair writing it, and that being done, set two
entering while to my Lord Bruncker's, and there find Sir J. Minnes and
all his company, and Mr. Boreman and Mrs. Turner, but, above all, my
dear Mrs. Knipp, with whom I sang, and in perfect pleasure I was to hear
her sing, and especially her little Scotch song of "Barbary Allen;"

     [The Scottish ballad is entitled, "Sir John Grehme and Barbara
     Allan," and the English version, "Barbara Allen's Cruelty."  Both
     are printed in Percy's "Reliques," Series III.]

and to make our mirthe the completer, Sir J. Minnes was in the highest
pitch of mirthe, and his mimicall tricks, that ever I saw, and most
excellent pleasant company he is, and the best mimique that ever I saw,
and certainly would have made an excellent actor, and now would be an
excellent teacher of actors. Thence, it being post night, against my
will took leave, but before I come to my office, longing for more of her
company, I returned and met them coming home in coaches, so I got into
the coach where Mrs. Knipp was and got her upon my knee (the coach being
full) and played with her breasts and sung, and at last set her at her
house and so good night. So home to my lodgings and there endeavoured to
have finished the examining my papers of Pursers' business to have sent
away to-night, but I was so sleepy with my late early risings and late
goings to bed that I could not do it, but was forced to go to bed and
leave it to send away to-morrow by an Expresse.

3rd. Up, and all the morning till three in the afternoon examining and
fitting up my Pursers' paper and sent it away by an Expresse. Then comes
my wife, and I set her to get supper ready against I go to the Duke of
Albemarle and back again; and at the Duke's with great joy I received
the good news of the decrease of the plague this week to 70, and but 253
in all; which is the least Bill hath been known these twenty years in
the City. Through the want of people in London is it, that must make
it so low below the ordinary number for Bills. So home, and find all my
good company I had bespoke, as Coleman and his wife, and Laneare, Knipp
and her surly husband; and good musique we had, and, among other things,
Mrs. Coleman sang my words I set of "Beauty retire," and I think it is a
good song, and they praise it mightily. Then to dancing and supper, and
mighty merry till Mr. Rolt come in, whose pain of the tooth-ake made him
no company, and spoilt ours; so he away, and then my wife's teeth fell
of akeing, and she to bed. So forced to break up all with a good song,
and so to bed.

4th. Up, and to the office, where my Lord Bruncker and I, against Sir W.
Batten and Sir J. Minnes and the whole table, for Sir W. Warren in the
business of his mast contract, and overcome them and got them to do what
I had a mind to, for indeed my Lord being unconcerned in what I aimed
at. So home to dinner, where Mr. Sheldon come by invitation from
Woolwich, and as merry as I could be with all my thoughts about me and
my wife still in pain of her tooth. He anon took leave and took Mrs.
Barbary his niece home with him, and seems very thankful to me for the
L10 I did give him for my wife's rent of his house, and I am sure I am
beholding to him, for it was a great convenience to me, and then my wife
home to London by water and I to the office till 8 at night, and so
to my Lord Bruncker's, thinking to have been merry, having appointed
a meeting for Sir J. Minnes and his company and Mrs. Knipp again,
but whatever hindered I know not, but no company come, which vexed me
because it disappointed me of the glut of mirthe I hoped for. However,
good discourse with my Lord and merry, with Mrs. Williams's descants
upon Sir J. Minnes's and Mrs. Turner's not coming. So home and to bed.

5th. I with my Lord Bruncker and Mrs. Williams by coach with four horses
to London, to my Lord's house in Covent-Guarden. But, Lord! what staring
to see a nobleman's coach come to town. And porters every where bow to
us; and such begging of beggars! And a delightfull thing it is to see
the towne full of people again as now it is; and shops begin to open,
though in many places seven or eight together, and more, all shut; but
yet the towne is full, compared with what it used to be. I mean the City
end; for Covent-Guarden and Westminster are yet very empty of people, no
Court nor gentry being there. Set Mrs. Williams down at my Lord's house
and he and I to Sir G. Carteret, at his chamber at White Hall, he being
come to town last night to stay one day. So my Lord and he and I much
talke about the Act, what credit we find upon it, but no private talke
between him and I. So I to the 'Change, and there met Mr. Povy, newly
come to town, and he and I to Sir George Smith's and there dined nobly.
He tells me how my Lord Bellases complains for want of money and of
him and me therein, but I value it not, for I know I do all that can
be done. We had no time to talk of particulars, but leave it to another
day, and I away to Cornhill to expect my Lord Bruncker's coming back
again, and I staid at my stationer's house, and by and by comes my Lord,
and did take me up and so to Greenwich, and after sitting with them a
while at their house, home, thinking to get Mrs. Knipp, but could not,
she being busy with company, but sent me a pleasant letter, writing
herself "Barbary Allen." I went therefore to Mr. Boreman's for pastime,
and there staid an houre or two talking with him, and reading a
discourse about the River of Thames, the reason of its being choked up
in several places with shelfes; which is plain is, by the encroachments
made upon the River, and running out of causeways into the River at
every wood-wharfe; which was not heretofore when Westminster Hall and
White Hall were built, and Redriffe Church, which now are sometimes
overflown with water. I had great satisfaction herein. So home and to my
papers for lacke of company, but by and by comes little Mrs. Tooker and
sat and supped with me, and I kept her very late talking and making her
comb my head, and did what I will with her. So late to bed.

6th. Up betimes and by water to the Cockepitt, there met Sir G. Carteret
and, after discourse with the Duke, all together, and there saw a letter
wherein Sir W. Coventry did take notice to the Duke with a commendation
of my paper about Pursers, I to walke in the Parke with the
Vice-Chamberlain, and received his advice about my deportment about the
advancing the credit of the Act; giving me caution to see that we do not
misguide the King by making them believe greater matters from it than
will be found. But I see that this arises from his great trouble to see
the Act succeede, and to hear my name so much used and my letters shown
at Court about goods served us in upon the credit of it. But I do make
him believe that I do it with all respect to him and on his behalfe too,
as indeed I do, as well as my owne, that it may not be said that he or
I do not assist therein. He tells me that my Lord Sandwich do proceed
on his journey with the greatest kindnesse that can be imagined from
the King and Chancellor, which was joyfull newes to me. Thence with Lord
Bruncker to Greenwich by water to a great dinner and much company; Mr.
Cottle and his lady and others and I went, hoping to get Mrs. Knipp to
us, having wrote a letter to her in the morning, calling myself "Dapper
Dicky," in answer to hers of "Barbary Allen," but could not, and am told
by the boy that carried my letter, that he found her crying; but I fear
she lives a sad life with that ill-natured fellow her husband: so we had
a great, but I a melancholy dinner, having not her there, as I hoped.
After dinner to cards, and then comes notice that my wife is come
unexpectedly to me to towne. So I to her. It is only to see what I do,
and why I come not home; and she is in the right that I would have a
little more of Mrs. Knipp's company before I go away. My wife to fetch
away my things from Woolwich, and I back to cards and after cards to
choose King and Queene, and a good cake there was, but no marks found;
but I privately found the clove, the mark of the knave, and privately
put it into Captain Cocke's piece, which made some mirthe, because of
his lately being knowne by his buying of clove and mace of the East
India prizes. At night home to my lodging, where I find my wife returned
with my things, and there also Captain Ferrers is come upon business of
my Lord's to this town about getting some goods of his put on board in
order to his going to Spain, and Ferrers presumes upon my finding a bed
for him, which I did not like to have done without my invitation because
I had done [it] several times before, during the plague, that he could
not provide himself safely elsewhere. But it being Twelfth Night, they
had got the fiddler and mighty merry they were; and I above come not
to them, but when I had done my business among my papers went to bed,
leaving them dancing, and choosing King and Queene.

7th (Lord's day). Up, and being trimmed I was invited by Captain Cocke,
so I left my wife, having a mind to some discourse with him, and dined
with him. He tells me of new difficulties about his goods which troubles
me and I fear they will be great. He tells me too what I hear everywhere
how the towne talks of my Lord Craven being to come into Sir G.
Carteret's place; but sure it cannot be true. But I do fear those two
families, his and my Lord Sandwich's, are quite broken. And I must now
stand upon my own legs. Thence to my lodging, and considering how I am
hindered by company there to do any thing among my papers, I did resolve
to go away to-day rather than stay to no purpose till to-morrow and so
got all my things packed up and spent half an hour with W. Howe about
his papers of accounts for contingencies and my Lord's accounts, so took
leave of my landlady and daughters, having paid dear for what time I
have spent there, but yet having been quiett and my health, I am very
well contented therewith. So with my wife and Mercer took boat and
away home; but in the evening, before I went, comes Mrs. Knipp, just
to speake with me privately, to excuse her not coming to me yesterday,
complaining how like a devil her husband treats her, but will be with us
in towne a weeke hence, and so I kissed her and parted. Being come home,
my wife and I to look over our house and consider of laying out a little
money to hang our bedchamber better than it is, and so resolved to go
and buy something to-morrow, and so after supper, with great joy in my
heart for my coming once again hither, to bed.

8th. Up, and my wife and I by coach to Bennett's, in Paternoster Row,
few shops there being yet open, and there bought velvett for a coate,
and camelott for a cloake for myself; and thence to a place to look over
some fine counterfeit damasks to hang my wife's closett, and pitched
upon one, and so by coach home again, I calling at the 'Change, and so
home to dinner and all the afternoon look after my papers at home and
my office against to-morrow, and so after supper and considering the
uselessness of laying out so much money upon my wife's closett, but only
the chamber, to bed.

9th. Up, and then to the office, where we met first since the plague,
which God preserve us in! At noon home to dinner, where uncle Thomas
with me, and in comes Pierce lately come from Oxford, and Ferrers. After
dinner Pierce and I up to my chamber, where he tells me how a great
difference hath been between the Duke and Duchesse, he suspecting her to
be naught with Mr. Sidney.

     ["This Duchess was Chancellor Hyde's daughter, and she was a very
     handsome woman, and had a great deal of wit; therefore it was not
     without reason that Mr. Sydney, the handsomest youth of his time, of
     the Duke's bedchamber, was so much in love with her, as appeared to
     us all, and the Duchess not unkind to him, but very innocently.  He
     was afterwards banished the Court for another reason, as was
     reported" (Sir John Reresby's "Memoirs," August 5th, 1664, ed.
     Cartwright, pp. 64,65). "'How could the Duke of York make my mother
     a Papist?' said the Princess Mary to Dr. Bumet.  'The Duke caught a
     man in bed with her,' said the Doctor, 'and then had power to make
     her do anything.'  The Prince, who sat by the fire, said, 'Pray,
     madam, ask the Doctor a few more questions'" (Spence's "Anecdotes,"
     ed.  Singer, 329).]

But some way or other the matter is made up; but he was banished the
Court, and the Duke for many days did not speak to the Duchesse at all.
He tells me that my Lord Sandwich is lost there at Court, though
the King is particularly his friend. But people do speak every where
slightly of him; which is a sad story to me, but I hope it may be better
again. And that Sir G. Carteret is neglected, and hath great enemies at
work against him. That matters must needs go bad, while all the town,
and every boy in the streete, openly cries, "The King cannot go away
till my Lady Castlemaine be ready to come along with him;" she being
lately put to bed And that he visits her and Mrs. Stewart every morning
before he eats his breakfast. All this put together makes me very sad,
but yet I hope I shall do pretty well among them for all this, by my not
meddling with either of their matters. He and Ferrers gone I paid uncle
Thomas his last quarter's money, and then comes Mr. Gawden and he and I
talked above stairs together a good while about his business, and to my
great joy got him to declare that of the L500 he did give me the other
day, none of it was for my Treasurershipp for Tangier (I first telling
him how matters stand between Povy and I, that he was to have half of
whatever was coming to me by that office), and that he will gratify me
at 2 per cent. for that when he next receives any money. So there is
L80 due to me more than I thought of. He gone I with a glad heart to
the office to write, my letters and so home to supper and bed, my wife
mighty full of her worke she hath to do in furnishing her bedchamber.

10th. Up, and by coach to Sir G. Downing, where Mr. Gawden met me by
agreement to talke upon the Act. I do find Sir G. Downing to be a mighty
talker, more than is true, which I now know to be so, and suspected it
before, but for all that I have good grounds to think it will succeed
for goods and in time for money too, but not presently. Having done with
him, I to my Lord Bruncker's house in Covent-Garden, and, among other
things, it was to acquaint him with my paper of Pursers, and read it to
him, and had his good liking of it. Shewed him Mr. Coventry's sense of
it, which he sent me last post much to my satisfaction. Thence to the
'Change, and there hear to our grief how the plague is encreased
this week from seventy to eighty-nine. We have also great fear of our
Hambrough fleete, of their meeting the Dutch; as also have certain
newes, that by storms Sir Jer. Smith's fleet is scattered, and three
of them come without masts back to Plymouth, which is another very
exceeding great disappointment, and if the victualling ships are
miscarried will tend to the losse of the garrison of Tangier. Thence
home, in my way had the opportunity I longed for, of seeing and saluting
Mrs. Stokes, my little goldsmith's wife in Paternoster Row, and there
bespoke some thing, a silver chafing-dish for warming plates, and so
home to dinner, found my wife busy about making her hangings for her
chamber with the upholster. So I to the office and anon to the Duke of
Albemarle, by coach at night, taking, for saving time, Sir W. Warren
with me, talking of our businesses all the way going and coming, and
there got his reference of my pursers' paper to the Board to consider of
it before he reads it, for he will never understand it I am sure. Here I
saw Sir W. Coventry's kind letter to him concerning my paper, and among
others of his letters, which I saw all, and that is a strange thing,
that whatever is writ to this Duke of Albemarle, all the world may see;
for this very night he did give me Mr. Coventry's letter to read, soon
as it come to his hand, before he had read it himself, and bid me take
out of it what concerned the Navy, and many things there was in it,
which I should not have thought fit for him to have let any body so
suddenly see; but, among other things, find him profess himself to the
Duke a friend into the inquiring further into the business of Prizes,
and advises that it may be publique, for the righting the King, and
satisfying the people and getting the blame to be rightly laid where it
should be, which strikes very hard upon my Lord Sandwich, and troubles
me to read it. Besides, which vexes me more, I heard the damned Duchesse
again say to twenty gentlemen publiquely in the room, that she would
have Montagu sent once more to sea, before he goes his Embassy, that we
may see whether he will make amends for his cowardice, and repeated
the answer she did give the other day in my hearing to Sir G. Downing,
wishing her Lord had been a coward, for then perhaps he might have been
made an Embassador, and not been sent now to sea. But one good thing she
said, she cried mightily out against the having of gentlemen Captains
with feathers and ribbands, and wished the King would send her husband
to sea with the old plain sea Captains, that he served with formerly,
that would make their ships swim with blood, though they could not make
legs

     [Make bows, play the courtier.  The reading, "make leagues,"
     appeared in former editions till Mr. Mynors Bright corrected it.]

as Captains nowadays can. It grieved me to see how slightly the Duke
do every thing in the world, and how the King and every body suffers
whatever he will to be done in the Navy, though never so much against
reason, as in the business of recalling tickets, which will be done
notwithstanding all the arguments against it. So back again to my
office, and there to business and so to bed.

11th. Up and to the office. By and by to the Custome House to the
Farmers, there with a letter of Sir G. Carteret's for L3000, which they
ordered to be paid me. So away back again to the office, and at noon to
dinner all of us by invitation to Sir W. Pen's, and much other company.
Among others, Lieutenant of the Tower, and Broome, his poet, and Dr.
Whistler, and his (Sir W. Pen's) son-in-law Lowder, servant--[lover]--to
Mrs. Margaret Pen, and Sir Edward Spragg, a merry man, that sang a
pleasant song pleasantly. Rose from table before half dined, and with
Mr. Mountney of the Custome House to the East India House, and there
delivered to him tallys for L3000 and received a note for the money on
Sir R. Viner. So ended the matter, and back to my company, where staid a
little, and thence away with my Lord Bruncker for discourse sake, and
he and I to Gresham College to have seen Mr. Hooke and a new invented
chariott of Dr. Wilkins, but met with nobody at home! So to Dr.
Wilkins's, where I never was before, and very kindly received and met
with Dr. Merritt, and fine discourse among them to my great joy, so
sober and so ingenious. He is now upon finishing his discourse of a
universal character. So away and I home to my office about my letters,
and so home to supper and to bed.

12th. By coach to the Duke of Albemarle, where Sir W. Batten and I only
met. Troubled at my heart to see how things are ordered there without
consideration or understanding. Thence back by coach and called at
Wotton's, my shoemaker, lately come to towne, and bespoke shoes, as also
got him to find me a taylor to make me some clothes, my owne being not
yet in towne, nor Pym, my Lord Sandwich's taylor. So he helped me to a
pretty man, one Mr. Penny, against St. Dunstan's Church. Thence to the
'Change and there met Mr. Moore, newly come to towne, and took him home
to dinner with me and after dinner to talke, and he and I do conclude my
Lord's case to be very bad and may be worse, if he do not get a pardon
for his doings about the prizes and his business at Bergen, and other
things done by him at sea, before he goes for Spayne. I do use all the
art I can to get him to get my Lord to pay my cozen Pepys, for it is
a great burden to my mind my being bound for my Lord in L1000 to him.
Having done discourse with him and directed him to go with my advice to
my Lord expresse to-morrow to get his pardon perfected before his going,
because of what I read the other night in Sir W. Coventry's letter, I to
the office, and there had an extraordinary meeting of Sir J. Minnes, Sir
W. Batten, and Sir W. Pen, and my Lord Bruncker and I to hear my paper
read about pursers, which they did all of them with great good will and
great approbation of my method and pains in all, only Sir W. Pen, who
must except against every thing and remedy nothing, did except against
my proposal for some reasons, which I could not understand, I confess,
nor my Lord Bruncker neither, but he did detect indeed a failure or two
of mine in my report about the ill condition of the present pursers,
which I did magnify in one or two little things, to which, I think, he
did with reason except, but at last with all respect did declare the
best thing he ever heard of this kind, but when Sir W. Batten did say,
"Let us that do know the practical part of the Victualling meet Sir J.
Minnes, Sir W. Pen and I and see what we can do to mend all," he was
so far from offering or furthering it, that he declined it and said, he
must be out of towne. So as I ever knew him never did in his life ever
attempt to mend any thing, but suffer all things to go on in the way
they are, though never so bad, rather than improve his experience to
the King's advantage. So we broke up, however, they promising to meet to
offer some thing in it of their opinions, and so we rose, and I and my
Lord Bruncker by coach a little way for discourse sake, till our coach
broke, and tumbled me over him quite down the side of the coach, falling
on the ground about the Stockes, but up again, and thinking it fit to
have for my honour some thing reported in writing to the Duke in
favour of my pains in this, lest it should be thought to be rejected as
frivolous, I did move it to my Lord, and he will see it done to-morrow.
So we parted, and I to the office and thence home to my poor wife, who
works all day at home like a horse, at the making of her hangings for
our chamber and the bed. So to supper and to bed.

13th. At the office all the morning, where my Lord Bruncker moved to
have something wrote in my matter as I desired him last night, and it
was ordered and will be done next sitting. Home with his Lordship to
Mrs. Williams's, in Covent-Garden, to dinner (the first time I ever
was there), and there met Captain Cocke; and pretty merry, though not
perfectly so, because of the fear that there is of a great encrease
again of the plague this week. And again my Lord Bruncker do tell us,
that he hath it from Sir John Baber; who is related to my Lord Craven,
that my Lord Craven do look after Sir G. Carteret's place, and do reckon
himself sure of it. After dinner Cocke and I together by coach to the
Exchange, in our way talking of our matters, and do conclude that every
thing must breake in pieces, while no better counsels govern matters
than there seem to do, and that it will become him and I and all men
to get their reckonings even, as soon as they can, and expect all to
breake. Besides, if the plague continues among us another yeare, the
Lord knows what will become of us. I set him down at the 'Change, and
I home to my office, where late writing letters and doing business, and
thence home to supper and to bed. My head full of cares, but pleased
with my wife's minding her worke so well, and busying herself about
her house, and I trust in God if I can but clear myself of my Lord
Sandwich's bond, wherein I am bound with him for L1000 to T. Pepys, I
shall do pretty well, come what will come.

14th (Lord's day). Long in bed, till raised by my new taylor, Mr. Penny,
[who comes and brings me my new velvet coat, very handsome, but plain,
and a day hence will bring me my camelott cloak.] He gone I close to
my papers and to set all in order and to perform my vow to finish my
journall and other things before I kiss any woman more or drink any
wine, which I must be forced to do to-morrow if I go to Greenwich as I
am invited by Mr. Boreman to hear Mrs. Knipp sing, and I would be glad
to go, so as we may be merry. At noon eat the second of the two cygnets
Mr. Shepley sent us for a new-year's gift, and presently to my chamber
again and so to work hard all day about my Tangier accounts, which I am
going again to make up, as also upon writing a letter to my father about
Pall, whom it is time now I find to think of disposing of while God
Almighty hath given me something to give with her, and in my letter to
my father I do offer to give her L450 to make her own L50 given her by
my uncle up L500. I do also therein propose Mr. Harman the upholster for
a husband for her, to whom I have a great love and did heretofore love
his former wife, and a civil man he is and careful in his way, beside, I
like his trade and place he lives in, being Cornhill. Thus late at work,
and so to supper and to bed. This afternoon, after sermon, comes my dear
fair beauty of the Exchange, Mrs. Batelier, brought by her sister, an
acquaintance of Mercer's, to see my wife. I saluted her with as much
pleasure as I had done any a great while. We sat and talked together an
houre, with infinite pleasure to me, and so the fair creature went away,
and proves one of the modestest women, and pretty, that ever I saw in my
life, and my [wife] judges her so too.

15th. Busy all the morning in my chamber in my old cloth suit, while my
usuall one is to my taylor's to mend, which I had at noon again, and an
answer to a letter I had sent this morning to Mrs. Pierce to go along
with my wife and I down to Greenwich to-night upon an invitation to Mr.
Boreman's to be merry to dance and sing with Mrs. Knipp. Being dressed,
and having dined, I took coach and to Mrs. Pierce, to her new house in
Covent-Garden, a very fine place and fine house. Took her thence home
to my house, and so by water to Boreman's by night, where the greatest
disappointment that ever I saw in my life, much company, a good supper
provided, and all come with expectation of excesse of mirthe, but
all blank through the waywardnesse of Mrs. Knipp, who, though she
had appointed the night, could not be got to come. Not so much as her
husband could get her to come; but, which was a pleasant thing in all my
anger, I asking him, while we were in expectation what answer one of our
many messengers would bring, what he thought, whether she would come or
no, he answered that, for his part, he could not so much as thinke. By
and by we all to supper, which the silly master of the feast commended,
but, what with my being out of humour, and the badnesse of the meate
dressed, I did never eat a worse supper in my life. At last, very late,
and supper done, she came undressed, but it brought me no mirthe at
all; only, after all being done, without singing, or very little, and no
dancing, Pierce and I to bed together, and he and I very merry to find
how little and thin clothes they give us to cover us, so that we were
fain to lie in our stockings and drawers, and lay all our coates and
clothes upon the bed. So to sleep.

16th. Up, and leaving the women in bed together (a pretty black and
white) I to London to the office, and there forgot, through business, to
bespeake any dinner for my wife and Mrs. Pierce. However, by noon they
come, and a dinner we had, and Kate Joyce comes to see us, with whom
very merry. After dinner she and I up to my chamber, who told me her
business was chiefly for my advice about her husband's leaving off his
trade, which though I wish enough, yet I did advise against, for he is
a man will not know how to live idle, and employment he is fit for none.
Thence anon carried her and Mrs. Pierce home, and so to the Duke of
Albemarle, and mighty kind he to me still. So home late at my letters,
and so to bed, being mightily troubled at the newes of the plague's
being encreased, and was much the saddest news that the plague hath
brought me from the beginning of it; because of the lateness of the
year, and the fear, we may with reason have, of its continuing with us
the next summer. The total being now 375, and the plague 158.

17th. Busy all the morning, settling things against my going out
of towne this night. After dinner, late took horse, having sent for
Lashmore to go with me, and so he and I rode to Dagenhams in the dark.
There find the whole family well. It was my Lord Crew's desire that
I should come, and chiefly to discourse with me of Lord Sandwich's
matters; and therein to persuade, what I had done already, that my Lord
should sue out a pardon for his business of the prizes, as also for
Bergen, and all he hath done this year past, before he begins his
Embassy to Spayne. For it is to be feared that the Parliament will fly
out against him and particular men, the next Session. He is glad also
that my Lord is clear of his sea-imployment, though sorry as I am, only
in the manner of its bringing about. By and by to supper, my Lady Wright
very kind. After supper up to wait on my Lady Crew, who is the same
weake silly lady as ever, asking such saintly questions. Down to my Lord
again and sat talking an houre or two, and anon to prayers the whole
family, and then all to bed, I handsomely used, lying in the chamber
Mr. Carteret formerly did, but sat up an houre talking sillily with Mr.
Carteret and Mr. Marre, and so to bed.

18th. Up before day and thence rode to London before office time, where
I met a note at the doore to invite me to supper to Mrs. Pierces because
of Mrs. Knipp, who is in towne and at her house: To the office, where,
among other things, vexed with Major Norwood's coming, who takes it ill
my not paying a bill of Exchange of his, but I have good reason for it,
and so the less troubled, but yet troubled, so as at noon being carried
by my Lord Bruncker to Captain Cocke's to dinner, where Mrs. Williams
was, and Mrs. Knipp, I was not heartily merry, though a glasse of wine
did a little cheer me. After dinner to the office. Anon comes to me
thither my Lord Bruncker, Mrs. Williams, and Knipp. I brought down my
wife in her night-gowne, she not being indeed very well, to the office
to them and there by and by they parted all and my wife and I anon and
Mercer, by coach, to Pierces; where mighty merry, and sing and dance
with great pleasure; and I danced, who never did in company in my life,
and Captain Cocke come for a little while and danced, but went away, but
we staid and had a pretty supper, and spent till two in the morning, but
got home well by coach, though as dark as pitch, and so to bed.

19th. Up and ready, called on by Mr. Moone, my Lord Bellases' secretary,
who and I good friends though I have failed him in some payments. Thence
with Sir J. Minnes to the Duke of Albemarle's, and carried all well, and
met Norwood but prevented him in desiring a meeting of the Commissioners
for Tangier. Thence to look for Sir H. [Cholmly], but he not within, he
coming to town last night. It is a remarkable thing how infinitely naked
all that end of the towne, Covent-Garden, is at this day of people;
while the City is almost as full again of people as ever it was. To the
'Change and so home to dinner and the office, whither anon comes Sir H.
Cholmley to me, and he and I to my house, there to settle his accounts
with me, and so with great pleasure we agreed and great friends become,
I think, and he presented me upon the foot of our accounts for this
year's service for him L100, whereof Povy must have half. Thence to the
office and wrote a letter to Norwood to satisfy him about my nonpayment
of his bill, for that do still stick in my mind. So at night home to
supper and to bed.

20th. To the office, where upon Mr. Kinaston's coming to me about some
business of Colonell Norwood's, I sent my boy home for some papers,
where, he staying longer than I would have him, and being vexed at the
business and to be kept from my fellows in the office longer than was
fit, I become angry, and boxed my boy when he came, that I do hurt my
thumb so much, that I was not able to stir all the day after, and in
great pain. At noon to dinner, and then to the office again, late, and
so to supper and to bed.

21st (Lord's day). Lay almost till noon merrily and with pleasure
talking with my wife in bed. Then up looking about my house, and the
roome which my wife is dressing up, having new hung our bedchamber
with blue, very handsome. After dinner to my Tangier accounts and there
stated them against to-morrow very distinctly for the Lords to see who
meet tomorrow, and so to supper and to bed.

22nd. Up, and set my people to work in copying Tangier accounts, and I
down the river to Greenwich to the office to fetch away some papers and
thence to Deptford, where by agreement my Lord Bruncker was to come, but
staid almost till noon, after I had spent an houre with W. Howe talking
of my Lord Sandwich's matters and his folly in minding his pleasures too
much now-a-days, and permitting himself to be governed by Cuttance to
the displeasing of all the Commanders almost of the fleete, and thence
we may conceive indeed the rise of all my Lord's misfortunes of late.
At noon my Lord Bruncker did come, but left the keys of the chests
we should open, at Sir G. Carteret's lodgings, of my Lord Sandwich's,
wherein Howe's supposed jewells are; so we could not, according to my
Lord Arlington's order, see them today; but we parted, resolving to meet
here at night: my Lord Bruncker being going with Dr. Wilkins, Mr. Hooke,
and others, to Colonell Blunts, to consider again of the business of
charriots, and to try their new invention. Which I saw here my Lord
Bruncker ride in; where the coachman sits astride upon a pole over the
horse, but do not touch the horse, which is a pretty odde thing; but it
seems it is most easy for the horse, and, as they say, for the man also.
Thence I with speede by water home and eat a bit, and took my accounts
and to the Duke of Albemarle, where for all I feared of Norwood he was
very civill, and Sir Thomas Ingram beyond expectation, I giving them all
content and I thereby settled mightily in my mind, for I was weary of
the employment, and had had thoughts of giving it over. I did also give
a good step in a business of Mr. Hubland's, about getting a ship of his
to go to Tangier, which during this strict embargo is a great matter,
and I shall have a good reward for it, I hope. Thence by water in the
darke down to Deptford, and there find my Lord Bruncker come and gone,
having staid long for me. I back presently to the Crowne taverne behind
the Exchange by appointment, and there met the first meeting of Gresham
College since the plague. Dr. Goddard did fill us with talke, in defence
of his and his fellow physicians going out of towne in the plague-time;
saying that their particular patients were most gone out of towne, and
they left at liberty; and a great deal more, &c. But what, among other
fine discourse pleased me most, was Sir G. Ent about Respiration; that
it is not to this day known, or concluded on among physicians, nor to be
done either, how the action is managed by nature, or for what use it
is. Here late till poor Dr. Merriot was drunk, and so all home, and I to
bed.

23rd. Up and to the office and then to dinner. After dinner to the
office again all the afternoon, and much business with me. Good newes
beyond all expectation of the decrease of the plague, being now but
79, and the whole but 272. So home with comfort to bed. A most furious
storme all night and morning.

24th. By agreement my Lord Bruncker called me up, and though it was a
very foule, windy, and rainy morning, yet down to the waterside we went,
but no boat could go, the storme continued so. So my Lord to stay till
fairer weather carried me into the Tower to Mr. Hore's and there we
staid talking an houre, but at last we found no boats yet could go,
so we to the office, where we met upon an occasion extraordinary
of examining abuses of our clerkes in taking money for examining of
tickets, but nothing done in it. Thence my Lord and I, the weather being
a little fairer, by water to Deptford to Sir G. Carteret's house, where
W. Howe met us, and there we opened the chests, and saw the poor sorry
rubys which have caused all this ado to the undoing of W. Howe; though I
am not much sorry for it, because of his pride and ill nature. About 200
of these very small stones, and a cod of muske (which it is strange I
was not able to smell) is all we could find; so locked them up again,
and my Lord and I, the wind being again very furious, so as we durst not
go by water, walked to London quite round the bridge, no boat being able
to stirre; and, Lord! what a dirty walk we had, and so strong the wind,
that in the fields we many times could not carry our bodies against it,
but were driven backwards. We went through Horsydowne, where I never was
since a little boy, that I went to enquire after my father, whom we did
give over for lost coming from Holland. It was dangerous to walk the
streets, the bricks and tiles falling from the houses that the whole
streets were covered with them; and whole chimneys, nay, whole houses
in two or three places, blowed down. But, above all, the pales on
London-bridge on both sides were blown away, so that we were fain to
stoop very low for fear of blowing off of the bridge. We could see
no boats in the Thames afloat, but what were broke loose, and carried
through the bridge, it being ebbing water. And the greatest sight of
all was, among other parcels of ships driven here and there in clusters
together, one was quite overset and lay with her masts all along in the
water, and keel above water. So walked home, my Lord away to his house
and I to dinner, Mr. Creed being come to towne and to dine with me,
though now it was three o'clock. After dinner he and I to our accounts
and very troublesome he is and with tricks which I found plainly and
was vexed at; while we were together comes Sir G. Downing with Colonell
Norwood, Rumball, and Warrupp to visit me. I made them drink good wine
and discoursed above alone a good while with Sir G. Downing, who is very
troublesome, and then with Colonell Norwood, who hath a great mind to
have me concerned with him in everything; which I like, but am shy of
adventuring too much, but will thinke of it. They gone, Creed and I
to finish the settling his accounts. Thence to the office, where the
Houblans and we discoursed upon a rubb which we have for one of the
ships I hoped to have got to go out to Tangier for them. They being
gone, I to my office-business late, and then home to supper and even
sacke for lacke of a little wine, which I was forced to drink against my
oathe, but without pleasure.

25th. Up and to the office, at noon home to dinner. So abroad to the
Duke of Albemarle and Kate Joyce's and her husband, with whom I talked
a great deale about Pall's business, and told them what portion I would
give her, and they do mightily like of it and will proceed further in
speaking with Harman, who hath already been spoke to about it, as from
them only, and he is mighty glad of it, but doubts it may be an offence
to me, if I should know of it, so thinks that it do come only from
Joyce, which I like the better. So I do believe the business will go
on, and I desire it were over. I to the office then, where I did much
business, and set my people to work against furnishing me to go to
Hampton Court, where the King and Duke will be on Sunday next. It is now
certain that the King of France hath publickly declared war against
us, and God knows how little fit we are for it. At night comes Sir
W. Warren, and he and I into the garden, and talked over all our
businesses. He gives me good advice not to embarke into trade (as I have
had it in my thoughts about Colonell Norwood) so as to be seen to mind
it, for it will do me hurte, and draw my mind off from my business and
embroile my estate too soon. So to the office business, and I find him
as cunning a man in all points as ever I met with in my life and mighty
merry we were in the discourse of our owne trickes. So about to o'clock
at night I home and staid with him there settling my Tangier-Boates
business and talking and laughing at the folly of some of our neighbours
of this office till two in the morning and so to bed.

26th. Up, and pleased mightily with what my poor wife hath been doing
these eight or ten days with her owne hands, like a drudge in fitting
the new hangings of our bed-chamber of blue, and putting the old red
ones into my dressing-room, and so by coach to White Hall, where I had
just now notice that Sir G. Carteret is come to towne. He seems pleased,
but I perceive he is heartily troubled at this Act, and the report of
his losing his place, and more at my not writing to him to the prejudice
of the Act. But I carry all fair to him and he to me. He bemoans the
Kingdom as in a sad state, and with too much reason I doubt, having so
many enemys about us and no friends abroad, nor money nor love at
home. Thence to the Duke of Albemarle, and there a meeting with all
the officers of the Navy, where, Lord! to see how the Duke of Albemarle
flatters himself with false hopes of money and victuals and all without
reason. Then comes the Committee of Tangier to sit, and I there carry
all before me very well. Thence with Sir J. Bankes and Mr. Gawden to
the 'Change, they both very wise men. After 'Change and agreeing with
Houblon about our ships, D. Gawden and I to the Pope's Head and there
dined and little Chaplin (who a rich man grown). He gone after dinner,
D. Gawden and I to talke of the Victualling business of the Navy in what
posture it is, which is very sad also for want of money. Thence home to
my chamber by oathe to finish my Journall. Here W. Hewer came to me with
L320 from Sir W. Warren, whereof L220 is got clearly by a late business
of insurance of the Gottenburg ships, and the other L100 which was due
and he had promised me before to give me to my very extraordinary joy,
for which I ought and do bless God and so to my office, where late
providing a letter to send to Mr. Gawden in a manner we concluded on
to-day, and so to bed.

27th. Up very betimes to finish my letter and writ it fair to Mr.
Gawden, it being to demand several arrears in the present state of the
victualling, partly to the King's and partly to give him occasion to say
something relating to the want of money on his own behalf. This done I
to the office, where all the morning. At noon after a bit of dinner back
to the office and there fitting myself in all points to give an account
to the Duke and Mr. Coventry in all things, and in my Tangier business,
till three o'clock in the morning, and so to bed,

28th. And up again about six (Lord's day), and being dressed in my
velvett coate and plain cravatte took a hackney coach provided ready for
me by eight o'clock, and so to my Lord Bruncker's with all my papers,
and there took his coach with four horses and away toward Hampton Court,
having a great deale of good discourse with him, particularly about his
coming to lie at the office, when I went further in inviting him to than
I intended, having not yet considered whether it will be convenient for
me or no to have him here so near us, and then of getting Mr. Evelyn
or Sir Robert Murray into the Navy in the room of Sir Thomas Harvey.
At Brainford I 'light, having need to shit, and went into an Inne doore
that stood open, found the house of office and used it, but saw no
people, only after I was in the house, heard a great dogg barke, and so
was afeard how I should get safe back again, and therefore drew my sword
and scabbard out of my belt to have ready in my hand, but did not need
to use it, but got safe into the coach again, but lost my belt by the
shift, not missing it till I come to Hampton Court. At the Wicke found
Sir J. Minnes and Sir W. Batten at a lodging provided for us by our
messenger, and there a good dinner ready. After dinner took coach and to
Court, where we find the King, and Duke, and Lords, all in council; so
we walked up and down: there being none of the ladies come, and so much
the more business I hope will be done. The Council being up, out comes
the King, and I kissed his hand, and he grasped me very kindly by
the hand. The Duke also, I kissed his, and he mighty kind, and Sir
W. Coventry. I found my Lord Sandwich there, poor man! I see with a
melancholy face, and suffers his beard to grow on his upper lip more
than usual. I took him a little aside to know when I should wait on
him, and where: he told me, and that it would be best to meet at his
lodgings, without being seen to walk together. Which I liked very well;
and, Lord! to see in what difficulty I stand, that I dare not walk with
Sir W. Coventry, for fear my Lord or Sir G. Carteret should see me; nor
with either of them, for fear Sir W. Coventry should. After changing a
few words with Sir W. Coventry, who assures me of his respect and love
to me, and his concernment for my health in all this sickness, I went
down into one of the Courts, and there met the King and Duke; and the
Duke called me to him. And the King come to me of himself, and told me,
"Mr. Pepys," says he, "I do give you thanks for your good service all
this year, and I assure you I am very sensible of it." And the Duke
of Yorke did tell me with pleasure, that he had read over my discourse
about pursers, and would have it ordered in my way, and so fell from one
discourse to another. I walked with them quite out of the Court into the
fields, and then back to my Lord Sandwich's chamber, where I find him
very melancholy and not well satisfied, I perceive, with my carriage to
Sir G. Carteret, but I did satisfy him and made him confess to me, that
I have a very hard game to play; and told me he was sorry to see it, and
the inconveniences which likely may fall upon me with him; but, for all
that, I am not much afeard, if I can but keepe out of harm's way in
not being found too much concerned in my Lord's or Sir G. Carteret's
matters, and that I will not be if I can helpe it. He hath got over his
business of the prizes, so far as to have a privy seale passed for all
that was in his distribution to the officers, which I am heartily glad
of; and, for the rest, he must be answerable for what he is proved to
have. But for his pardon for anything else, he thinks it not seasonable
to aske it, and not usefull to him; because that will not stop a
Parliament's mouth, and for the King, he is sure enough of him. I did
aske him whether he was sure of the interest and friendship of any great
Ministers of State and he told me, yes. As we were going further, in
comes my Lord Mandeville, so we were forced to breake off and I away,
and to Sir W. Coventry's chamber, where he not come in but I find Sir W.
Pen, and he and I to discourse. I find him very much out of humour, so
that I do not think matters go very well with him, and I am glad of it.
He and I staying till late, and Sir W. Coventry not coming in (being
shut up close all the afternoon with the Duke of Albemarle), we took
boat, and by water to Kingston, and so to our lodgings, where a good
supper and merry, only I sleepy, and therefore after supper I slunk away
from the rest to bed, and lay very well and slept soundly, my mind being
in a great delirium between joy for what the King and Duke have said to
me and Sir W. Coventry, and trouble for my Lord Sandwich's concernments,
and how hard it will be for me to preserve myself from feeling thereof.

29th. Up, and to Court by coach, where to Council before the Duke of
Yorke, the Duke of Albemarle with us, and after Sir W. Coventry had gone
over his notes that he had provided with the Duke of Albemarle, I went
over all mine with good successe, only I fear I did once offend the Duke
of Albemarle, but I was much joyed to find the Duke of Yorke so much
contending for my discourse about the pursers against Sir W. Pen, who
opposes it like a foole; my Lord Sandwich come in in the middle of the
business, and, poor man, very melancholy, methought, and said little at
all, or to the business, and sat at the lower end, just as he come, no
roome being made for him, only I did give him my stoole, and another was
reached me. After council done, I walked to and again up and down the
house, discoursing with this and that man. Among others tooke occasion
to thanke the Duke of Yorke for his good opinion in general of my
service, and particularly his favour in conferring on me the Victualling
business. He told me that he knew nobody so fit as I for it, and next,
he was very glad to find that to give me for my encouragement, speaking
very kindly of me. So to Sir W. Coventry's to dinner with him, whom I
took occasion to thanke for his favour and good thoughts of what little
service I did, desiring he would do the last act of friendship in
telling me of my faults also. He told me he would be sure he would do
that also, if there were any occasion for it. So that as much as it is
possible under so great a fall of my Lord Sandwich's, and difference
between them, I may conclude that I am thoroughly right with Sir W.
Coventry. I dined with him with a great deale of company, and much merry
discourse. I was called away before dinner ended to go to my company who
dined at our lodgings. Thither I went with Mr. Evelyn (whom I met)
in his coach going that way, but finding my company gone, but my Lord
Bruncker left his coach for me; so Mr. Evelyn and I into my Lord's
coach, and rode together with excellent discourse till we come to
Clapham, talking of the vanity and vices of the Court, which makes it
a most contemptible thing; and indeed in all his discourse I find him a
most worthy person. Particularly he entertained me with discourse of
an Infirmary, which he hath projected for the sick and wounded seamen
against the next year, which I mightily approve of; and will endeavour
to promote it, being a worthy thing, and of use, and will save money. He
set me down at Mr. Gawden's, where nobody yet come home, I having left
him and his sons and Creed at Court, so I took a book and into the
gardens, and there walked and read till darke with great pleasure, and
then in and in comes Osborne, and he and I to talk of Mr. Jaggard, who
comes from London, and great hopes there is of a decrease this week also
of the plague. Anon comes in Creed, and after that Mr. Gawden and his
sons, and then they bringing in three ladies, who were in the house,
but I do not know them, his daughter and two nieces, daughters of Dr.
Whistler's, with whom and Creed mighty sport at supper, the ladies very
pretty and mirthfull. I perceive they know Creed's gut and stomach as
well as I, and made as much mirthe as I with it at supper. After supper
I made the ladies sing, and they have been taught, but, Lord! though I
was forced to commend them, yet it was the saddest stuff I ever heard.
However, we sat up late, and then I, in the best chamber like a prince,
to bed, and Creed with me, and being sleepy talked but little.

30th. Lay long till Mr. Gawden was gone out being to take a little
journey. Up, and Creed and I some good discourse, but with some trouble
for the state of my Lord's matters. After walking a turne or two in the
garden, and bid good morrow to Mr. Gawden's sons, and sent my service to
the ladies, I took coach after Mr. Gawden's, and home, finding the towne
keeping the day solemnly, it being the day of the King's murther, and
they being at church, I presently into the church, thinking to see
Mrs. Lethulier or Batelier, but did not, and a dull sermon of our young
Lecturer, too bad. This is the first time I have been in this church
since I left London for the plague, and it frighted me indeed to go
through the church more than I thought it could have done, to see so
[many] graves lie so high upon the churchyards where people have been
buried of the plague. I was much troubled at it, and do not think to go
through it again a good while. So home to my wife, whom I find not well,
in bed, and it seems hath not been well these two days. She rose and we
to dinner, after dinner up to my chamber, where she entertained me with
what she hath lately bought of clothes for herself, and Damask linnen,
and other things for the house. I did give her a serious account how
matters stand with me, of favour with the King and Duke, and of
danger in reference to my Lord's and Sir G. Carteret's falls, and the
dissatisfaction I have heard the Duke of Albemarle hath acknowledged
to somebody, among other things, against my Lord Sandwich, that he did
bring me into the Navy against his desire and endeavour for another,
which was our doting foole Turner. Thence from one discourse to another,
and looking over my house, and other things I spent the day at home, and
at night betimes to bed. After dinner this day I went down by water to
Deptford, and fetched up what money there was of W. Howe's contingencies
in the chest there, being L516 13s. 3d. and brought it home to dispose
of.

31st. Lay pretty long in bed, and then up and to the office, where we
met on extraordinary occasion about the business of tickets. By and by
to the 'Change, and there did several businesses, among others brought
home my cozen Pepys, whom I appointed to be here to-day, and Mr. Moore
met us upon the business of my Lord's bond. Seeing my neighbour Mr.
Knightly walk alone from the 'Change, his family being not yet come to
town, I did invite him home with me, and he dined with me, a very sober,
pretty man he is. He is mighty solicitous, as I find many about the City
that live near the churchyards, to have the churchyards covered with
lime, and I think it is needfull, and ours I hope will be done. Good
pleasant discourse at dinner of the practices of merchants to cheate the
"Customers," occasioned by Mr. Moore's being with much trouble freed of
his prize goods, which he bought, which fell into the Customers' hands,
and with much ado hath cleared them. Mr. Knightly being gone, my cozen
Pepys and Moore and I to our business, being the clearing of my Lord
Sandwich's bond wherein I am bound with him to my cozen for L1000 I have
at last by my dexterity got my Lord's consent to have it paid out of
the money raised by his prizes. So the bond is cancelled, and he paid
by having a note upon Sir Robert Viner, in whose hands I had lodged
my Lord's money, by which I am to my extraordinary comfort eased of a
liablenesse to pay the sum in case of my Lord's death, or troubles in
estate, or my Lord's greater fall, which God defend! Having settled this
matter at Sir R. Viner's, I took up Mr. Moore (my cozen going home) and
to my Lord Chancellor's new house which he is building, only to view
it, hearing so much from Mr. Evelyn of it; and, indeed, it is the finest
pile I ever did see in my life, and will be a glorious house. Thence
to the Duke of Albemarle, who tells me Mr. Coventry is come to town
and directs me to go to him about some business in hand, whether out of
displeasure or desire of ease I know not; but I asked him not the reason
of it but went to White Hall, but could not find him there, though to my
great joy people begin to bustle up and down there, the King holding
his resolution to be in towne to-morrow, and hath good encouragement,
blessed be God! to do so, the plague being decreased this week to 56,
and the total to 227. So after going to the Swan in the Palace, and sent
for Spicer to discourse about my last Tangier tallys that have some of
the words washed out with the rain, to have them new writ, I home, and
there did some business and at the office, and so home to supper, and to
bed.




FEBRUARY 1665-1666

February 1st. Up and to the office, where all the morning till late,
and Mr. Coventry with us, the first time since before the plague, then
hearing my wife was gone abroad to buy things and see her mother and
father, whom she hath not seen since before the plague, and no dinner
provided for me ready, I walked to Captain Cocke's, knowing my Lord
Bruncker dined there, and there very merry, and a good dinner. Thence my
Lord and his mistresse, Madam Williams, set me down at the Exchange, and
I to Alderman Backewell's to set all my reckonings straight there, which
I did, and took up all my notes. So evened to this day, and thence to
Sir Robert Viner's, where I did the like, leaving clear in his hands
just L2000 of my owne money, to be called for when I pleased. Having
done all this I home, and there to the office, did my business there by
the post and so home, and spent till one in the morning in my chamber to
set right all my money matters, and so to bed.

2nd. Up betimes, and knowing that my Lord Sandwich is come to towne with
the King and Duke, I to wait upon him, which I did, and find him in very
good humour, which I am glad to see with all my heart. Having received
his commands, and discoursed with some of his people about my Lord's
going, and with Sir Roger Cuttance, who was there, and finds himself
slighted by Sir W. Coventry, I advised him however to look after
employment lest it should be said that my Lord's friends do forsake the
service after he hath made them rich with the prizes. I to London, and
there among other things did look over some pictures at Cade's for my
house, and did carry home a silver drudger

     [The dredger was probably the drageoir of France; in low Latin,
     dragerium, or drageria, in which comfits (dragdes) were kept.
     Roquefort says, "The ladies wore a little spice-box, in shape like a
     watch, to carry dragles, and it was called a drageoir."  The custom
     continued certainly till the middle of the last century.  Old
     Palsgrave, in his "Eclaircissement de la Langue Francaise," gives
     "dradge" as spice, rendering it by the French word dragde.  Chaucer
     says, of his Doctor of Physic, "Full ready hadde he his Apothecaries
     To send him dragges, and his lattuaries."  The word sometimes may
     have signified the pounded condiments in which our forefathers
     delighted.  It is worth notice, that "dragge" was applied to a grain
     in the eastern counties, though not exclusively there, appearing to
     denote mixed grain.  Bishop Kennett tells us that "dredge mault is
     mault made up of oats, mixed with barley, of which they make an
     excellent, freshe, quiete sort of drinke, in Staffordshire."  The
     dredger is still commonly used in our kitchen.--B.]

for my cupboard of plate, and did call for my silver chafing dishes, but
they are sent home, and the man would not be paid for them, saying that
he was paid for them already, and with much ado got him to tell me by
Mr. Wayth, but I would not accept of that, but will send him his money,
not knowing any courtesy I have yet done him to deserve it. So home, and
with my wife looked over our plate, and picked out L40 worth, I believe,
to change for more usefull plate, to our great content, and then we
shall have a very handsome cupboard of plate. So to dinner, and then to
the office, where we had a meeting extraordinary, about stating to the
Duke the present debts of the Navy, for which ready money must be had,
and that being done, I to my business, where late, and then home to
supper, and to bed.

3rd. Up, and to the office very busy till 3 o'clock, and then home, all
of us, for half an hour to dinner, and to it again till eight at night,
stating our wants of money for the Duke, but could not finish it. So
broke up, and I to my office, then about letters and other businesses
very late, and so home to supper, weary with business, and to bed.

4th. Lord's day; and my wife and I the first time together at church
since the plague, and now only because of Mr. Mills his coming home to
preach his first sermon; expecting a great excuse for his leaving the
parish before any body went, and now staying till all are come home;
but he made but a very poor and short excuse, and a bad sermon. It was
a frost, and had snowed last night, which covered the graves in the
churchyard, so as I was the less afeard for going through. Here I had
the content to see my noble Mrs. Lethulier, and so home to dinner, and
all the afternoon at my Journall till supper, it being a long while
behindhand. At supper my wife tells me that W. Joyce has been with her
this evening, the first time since the plague, and tells her my aunt
James is lately dead of the stone, and what she had hath given to his
and his brother's wife and my cozen Sarah. So after supper to work
again, and late to bed.

5th. Up, and with Sir W. Batten (at whose lodgings calling for him, I
saw his Lady the first time since her coming to towne since the plague,
having absented myself designedly to shew some discontent, and that I am
not at all the more suppliant because of my Lord Sandwich's fall), to
my Lord Bruncker's, to see whether he goes to the Duke's this morning
or no. But it is put off, and so we parted. My Lord invited me to dinner
to-day to dine with Sir W. Batten and his Lady there, who were invited
before, but lest he should thinke so little an invitation would serve
my turne I refused and parted, and to Westminster about business, and
so back to the 'Change, and there met Mr. Hill, newly come to town,
and with him the Houblands, preparing for their ship's and his going to
Tangier, and agreed that I must sup with them to-night. So home and eat
a bit, and then to White Hall to a Committee for Tangier, but it did
not meet but was put off to to-morrow, so I did some little business and
visited my Lord Sandwich, and so, it raining, went directly to the Sun,
behind the Exchange, about seven o'clock, where I find all the five
brothers Houblons, and mighty fine gentlemen they are all, and used me
mighty respectfully. We were mighty civilly merry, and their discourses,
having been all abroad, very fine. Here late and at last accompanied
home with Mr. J. Houblon and Hill, whom I invited to sup with me on
Friday, and so parted and I home to bed.

6th. Up, and to the office, where very busy all the morning. We met
upon a report to the Duke of Yorke of the debts of the Navy, which we
finished by three o'clock, and having eat one little bit of meate, I by
water before the rest to White Hall (and they to come after me) because
of a Committee for Tangier, where I did my business of stating my
accounts perfectly well, and to good liking, and do not discern, but
the Duke of Albemarle is my friend in his intentions notwithstanding my
general fears. After that to our Navy business, where my fellow officers
were called in, and did that also very well, and then broke up, and I
home by coach, Tooker with me, and staid in Lumbard Streete at Viner's,
and sent home for the plate which my wife and I had a mind to change,
and there changed it, about L50 worth, into things more usefull, whereby
we shall now have a very handsome cupboard of plate. So home to the
office, wrote my letters by the post, and to bed.

7th. It being fast day I staid at home all day long to set things to
rights in my chamber by taking out all my books, and putting my chamber
in the same condition it was before the plague. But in the morning doing
of it, and knocking up a nail I did bruise my left thumb so as broke
a great deal of my flesh off, that it hung by a little. It was a sight
frighted my wife, but I put some balsam of Mrs. Turner's to it, and
though in great pain, yet went on with my business, and did it to my
full content, setting every thing in order, in hopes now that the worst
of our fears are over as to the plague for the next year. Interrupted I
was by two or three occasions this day to my great vexation, having this
the only day I have been able to set apart for this work since my
coming to town. At night to supper, weary, and to bed, having had the
plasterers and joiners also to do some jobbs.

8th. Up, and all the morning at the office. At noon to the 'Change,
expecting to have received from Mr. Houbland, as he promised me, an
assignment upon Viner, for my reward for my getting them the going of
their two ships to Tangier, but I find myself much disappointed therein,
for I spoke with him and he said nothing of it, but looked coldly,
through some disturbance he meets with in our business through Colonell
Norwood's pressing them to carry more goods than will leave room for
some of their own. But I shall ease them. Thence to Captain Cocke's,
where Mr. Williamson, Wren, Boldell and Madam Williams, and by and by
Lord Bruncker, he having been with the King and Duke upon the water
to-day, to see Greenwich house, and the yacht Castle is building of, and
much good discourse. So to White Hall to see my Lord Sandwich, and then
home to my business till night, and then to bed.

9th. Up, and betimes to Sir Philip Warwicke, who was glad to see me, and
very kind. Thence to Colonell Norwood's lodgings, and there set about
Houblons' business about their ships. Thence to Westminster, to the
Exchequer, about my Tangier business to get orders for tallys, and so
to the Hall, where the first day of the Terme, and the Hall very full
of people, and much more than was expected, considering the plague that
hath been. Thence to the 'Change, and to the Sun behind it to dinner
with the Lieutenant of the Tower, Colonell Norwood and others, where
strange pleasure they seem to take in their wine and meate, and
discourse of it with the curiosity and joy that methinks was below men
of worthe. Thence home, and there very much angry with my people till
I had put all things in good forwardnesse about my supper for the
Houblons, but that being done I was in good humour again, and all things
in good order. Anon the five brothers Houblons come and Mr. Hill, and
a very good supper we had, and good company and discourse, with great
pleasure. My new plate sets off my cupboard very nobly. Here they were
till about eleven at night with great pleasure, and a fine sight it
is to see these five brothers thus loving one to another, and all
industrious merchants. Our subject was principally Mr. Hill's going for
them to Portugall, which was the occasion of this entertainment. They
gone, we to bed.

10th. Up, and to the office. At noon, full of business, to dinner. This
day comes first Sir Thomas Harvy after the plague, having been out of
towne all this while. He was coldly received by us, and he went away
before we rose also, to make himself appear yet a man less necessary.
After dinner, being full of care and multitude of business, I took coach
and my wife with me. I set her down at her mother's (having first called
at my Lord Treasurer's and there spoke with Sir Ph. Warwicke), and I to
the Exchequer about Tangier orders, and so to the Swan and there staid a
little, and so by coach took up my wife, and at the old Exchange bought
a muffe, and so home and late at my letters, and so to supper and to
bed, being now-a-days, for these four or five months, mightily troubled
with my snoring in my sleep, and know not how to remedy it.

11th (Lord's day). Up, and put on a new black cloth suit to an old coate
that I make to be in mourning at Court, where they are all, for the King
of Spayne.--[Philip IV., who died September 17th, 1665.]--To church
I, and at noon dined well, and then by water to White Hall, carrying a
captain of the Tower (who desired his freight thither); there I to the
Parke, and walked two or three turns of the Pell Mell with the company
about the King and Duke; the Duke speaking to me a good deal. There met
Lord Bruncker and Mr. Coventry, and discoursed about the Navy business;
and all of us much at a loss that we yet can hear nothing of Sir Jeremy
Smith's fleete, that went away to the Streights the middle of December,
through all the storms that we have had since, that have driven back
three or four of them with their masts by the board. Yesterday come out
the King's Declaration of War against the French, but with such mild
invitations of both them and the Dutch to come over hither with promise
of their protection, that every body wonders at it. Thence home with my
Lord Bruncker for discourse sake, and thence by hackney coach home, and
so my wife and I mighty pleasant discourse, supped and to bed. The great
wound I had Wednesday last in my thumb having with once dressing by Mrs.
Turner's balsam been perfectly cured, whereas I did not hope to save
my nail, whatever else ill it did give me. My wife and I are much
thoughtfull now-a-days about Pall's coming up in order to a husband.

12th. Up, and very busy to perform an oathe in finishing my Journall
this morning for 7 or 8 days past. Then to several people attending upon
business, among others Mr. Grant and the executors of Barlow for the
L25 due for the quarter before he died, which I scrupled to pay, being
obliged but to pay every half year. Then comes Mr. Caesar, my boy's
lute-master, whom I have not seen since the plague before, but he hath
been in Westminster all this while very well; and tells me in the height
of it, how bold people there were, to go in sport to one another's
burials; and in spite too, ill people would breathe in the faces (out
of their windows) of well people going by. Then to dinner before the
'Change, and so to the 'Change, and then to the taverne to talk with Sir
William Warren, and so by coach to several places, among others to my
Lord Treasurer's, there to meet my Lord Sandwich, but missed, and met
him at [my] Lord Chancellor's, and there talked with him about his
accounts, and then about Sir G. Carteret, and I find by him that Sir G.
Carteret has a worse game to play than my Lord Sandwich, for people are
jeering at him, and he cries out of the business of Sir W. Coventry, who
strikes at all and do all. Then to my bookseller's, and then received
some books I have new bought, and here late choosing some more to new
bind, having resolved to give myself L10 in books, and so home to the
office and then home to supper, where Mr. Hill was and supped with us,
and good discourse; an excellent person he still appears to me. After
supper, and he gone, we to bed.

13th. Up, and all the morning at the office. At noon to the 'Change, and
thence after business dined at the Sheriffe's [Hooker], being carried by
Mr. Lethulier, where to my heart's content I met with his wife, a most
beautifull fat woman. But all the house melancholy upon the sickness of
a daughter of the house in childbed, Mr. Vaughan's lady. So all of them
undressed, but however this lady a very fine woman. I had a salute of
her, and after dinner some discourse the Sheriffe and I about a parcel
of tallow I am buying for the office of him. I away home, and there at
the office all the afternoon till late at night, and then away home to
supper and to bed. Ill newes this night that the plague is encreased
this week, and in many places else about the towne, and at Chatham and
elsewhere. This day my wife wanting a chambermaid with much ado got our
old little Jane to be found out, who come to see her and hath lived
all this while in one place, but is so well that we will not desire her
removal, but are mighty glad to see the poor wench, who is very well and
do well.

14th (St. Valentine's day). This morning called up by Mr. Hill, who, my
wife thought, had been come to be her Valentine; she, it seems, having
drawne him last night, but it proved not. However, calling him up to our
bed-side, my wife challenged him. I up, and made myself ready, and so
with him by coach to my Lord Sandwich's by appointment to deliver Mr.
Howe's accounts to my Lord. Which done, my Lord did give me hearty and
large studied thanks for all my kindnesse to him and care of him and his
business. I after profession of all duty to his Lordship took occasion
to bemoane myself that I should fall into such a difficulty about Sir G.
Carteret, as not to be for him, but I must be against Sir W. Coventry,
and therefore desired to be neutrall, which my Lord approved and
confessed reasonable, but desired me to befriend him privately. Having
done in private with my Lord I brought Mr. Hill to kisse his hands, to
whom my Lord professed great respect upon my score. My Lord being gone,
I took Mr. Hill to my Lord Chancellor's new house that is building, and
went with trouble up to the top of it, and there is there the noblest
prospect that ever I saw in my life, Greenwich being nothing to it; and
in every thing is a beautiful house, and most strongly built in every
respect; and as if, as it hath, it had the Chancellor for its master.
Thence with him to his paynter, Mr. Hales, who is drawing his picture,
which will be mighty like him, and pleased me so, that I am resolved
presently to have my wife's and mine done by him, he having a very
masterly hand. So with mighty satisfaction to the 'Change and thence
home, and after dinner abroad, taking Mrs. Mary Batelier with us,
who was just come to see my wife, and they set me down at my Lord
Treasurer's, and themselves went with the coach into the fields to take
the ayre. I staid a meeting of the Duke of Yorke's, and the officers of
the Navy and Ordnance. My Lord Treasurer lying in bed of the gowte. Our
business was discourse of the straits of the Navy for want of money, but
after long discourse as much out of order as ordinary people's, we come
to no issue, nor any money promised, or like to be had, and yet the
worke must be done. Here I perceive Sir G. Carteret had prepared himself
to answer a choque of Sir W. Coventry, by offering of himself to shew
all he had paid, and what is unpaid, and what moneys and assignments he
hath in his hands, which, if he makes good, was the best thing he ever
did say in his life, and the best timed, for else it must have fallen
very foule on him. The meeting done I away, my wife and they being come
back and staying for me at the gate. But, Lord! to see how afeard I was
that Sir W. Coventry should have spyed me once whispering with Sir G.
Carteret, though not intended by me, but only Sir G. Carteret come to me
and I could not avoyde it. So home, they set me down at the 'Change,
and I to the Crowne, where my Lord Bruncker was come and several of the
Virtuosi, and after a small supper and but little good discourse I with
Sir W. Batten (who was brought thither with my Lord Bruncker) home,
where I find my wife gone to Mrs. Mercer's to be merry, but presently
come in with Mrs. Knipp, who, it seems, is in towne, and was gone
thither with my wife and Mercer to dance, and after eating a little
supper went thither again to spend the whole night there, being W. Howe
there, at whose chamber they are, and Lawd Crisp by chance. I to bed.

15th. Up, and my wife not come home all night. To the office, where sat
all the morning. At noon to Starky's, a great cooke in Austin Friars,
invited by Colonell Atkins, and a good dinner for Colonell Norwood
and his friends, among others Sir Edward Spragg and others, but ill
attendance. Before dined, called on by my wife in a coach, and so I took
leave, and then with her and Knipp and Mercer (Mr. Hunt newly come
out of the country being there also come to see us) to Mr. Hales, the
paynter's, having set down Mr. Hunt by the way. Here Mr. Hales' begun my
wife in the posture we saw one of my Lady Peters, like a St. Katharine.

     [It was the fashion at this time to be painted as St. Catherine, in
     compliment to the queen.]

While he painted, Knipp, and Mercer, and I, sang; and by and by comes
Mrs. Pierce, with my name in her bosom for her Valentine, which will
cost me money. But strange how like his very first dead colouring is,
that it did me good to see it, and pleases me mightily, and I believe
will be a noble picture. Thence with them all as far as Fleete Streete,
and there set Mercer and Knipp down, and we home. I to the office,
whither the Houblons come telling me of a little new trouble from
Norwood about their ship, which troubles me, though without reason. So
late home to supper and to bed. We hear this night of Sir Jeremy Smith,
that he and his fleete have been seen at Malaga; which is good newes.

16th. Up betimes, and by appointment to the Exchange, where I met
Messrs. Houblons, and took them up in my coach and carried them to
Charing Crosse, where they to Colonell Norwood to see how they can
settle matters with him, I having informed them by the way with advice
to be easy with him, for he may hereafter do us service, and they and
I are like to understand one another to very good purpose. I to my
Lord Sandwich, and there alone with him to talke of his affairs, and
particularly of his prize goods, wherein I find he is wearied with being
troubled, and gives over the care of it to let it come to what it will,
having the King's release for the dividend made, and for the rest he
thinks himself safe from being proved to have anything more. Thence to
the Exchequer, and so by coach to the 'Change, Mr. Moore with me,
who tells me very odde passages of the indiscretion of my Lord in the
management of his family, of his carelessnesse, &c., which troubles me,
but makes me rejoice with all my heart of my being rid of the bond of
L1000, for that would have been a cruel blow to me. With Moore to the
Coffee-House, the first time I have been there, where very full, and
company it seems hath been there all the plague time. So to the 'Change,
and then home to dinner, and after dinner to settle accounts with him
for my Lord, and so evened with him to this day. Then to the office, and
out with Sir W. Warren for discourse by coach to White Hall, thinking to
have spoke with Sir W. Coventry, but did not, and to see the Queene,
but she comes but to Hampton Court to-night. Back to my office and there
late, and so home to supper and bed. I walked a good while to-night
with Mr. Hater in the garden, talking about a husband for my sister, and
reckoning up all our clerks about us, none of which he thinks fit for
her and her portion. At last I thought of young Gawden, and will thinke
of it again.

17th. Up, and to the office, where busy all the morning. Late to dinner,
and then to the office again, and there busy till past twelve at night,
and so home to supper and to bed. We have newes of Sir Jeremy Smith's
being very well with his fleete at Cales.--[Cadiz]

18th (Lord's day). Lay long in bed discoursing with pleasure with my
wife, among other things about Pall's coming up, for she must be here
a little to be fashioned, and my wife hath a mind to go down for her,
which I am not much against, and so I rose and to my chamber to settle
several things. At noon comes my uncle Wight to dinner, and brings with
him Mrs. Wight, sad company to me, nor was I much pleased with it, only
I must shew respect to my uncle. After dinner they gone, and it being a
brave day, I walked to White Hall, where the Queene and ladies are all
come: I saw some few of them, but not the Queene, nor any of the great
beauties. I endeavoured to have seen my Lord Hinchingbrooke, who come
to town yesterday, but I could not. Met with Creed and walked with him a
turne or two in the Parke, but without much content, having now designs
of getting money in my head, which allow me not the leisure I used to
have with him, besides an odde story lately told of him for a great
truth, of his endeavouring to lie with a woman at Oxford, and her crying
out saved her; and this being publickly known, do a little make me hate
him. Thence took coach, and calling by the way at my bookseller's for a
booke I writ about twenty years ago in prophecy of this year coming on,
1666, explaining it to be the marke of the beast, I home, and there fell
to reading, and then to supper, and to bed.

19th. Up, and by coach to my Lord Sandwich's, but he was gone out. So
I to White Hall, and there waited on the Duke of Yorke with some of the
rest of our brethren, and thence back again to my Lord's, to see my Lord
Hinchingbroke, which I did, and I am mightily out of countenance in my
great expectation of him by others' report, though he is indeed a pretty
gentleman, yet nothing what I took him for, methinks, either as to
person or discourse discovered to me, but I must try him more before I
go too far in censuring. Hence to the Exchequer from office to office,
to set my business of my tallys in doing, and there all the morning.
So at noon by coach to St. Paul's Church-yarde to my Bookseller's, and
there bespoke a few more books to bring all I have lately bought to L10.
Here I am told for certain, what I have heard once or twice already, of
a Jew in town, that in the name of the rest do offer to give any man L10
to be paid L100, if a certain person now at Smyrna be within these two
years owned by all the Princes of the East, and particularly the grand
Signor as the King of the world, in the same manner we do the King of
England here, and that this man is the true Messiah. One named a friend
of his that had received ten pieces in gold upon this score, and says
that the Jew hath disposed of L1100 in this manner, which is very
strange; and certainly this year of 1666 will be a year of great action;
but what the consequences of it will be, God knows! Thence to the
'Change, and from my stationer's thereabouts carried home by coach two
books of Ogilby's, his AEsop and Coronation, which fell to my lot at his
lottery. Cost me L4 besides the binding. So home. I find my wife gone
out to Hales, her paynter's, and I after a little dinner do follow her,
and there do find him at worke, and with great content I do see it will
be a very brave picture. Left her there, and I to my Lord Treasurer's,
where Sir G. Carteret and Sir J. Minnes met me, and before my Lord
Treasurer and Duke of Albemarle the state of our Navy debts were laid
open, being very great, and their want of money to answer them openly
professed, there being but L1,500,000 to answer a certaine expense and
debt of L2,300,000. Thence walked with Fenn down to White Hall, and
there saw the Queene at cards with many ladies, but none of our
beauties were there. But glad I was to see the Queene so well, who looks
prettily; and methinks hath more life than before, since it is confessed
of all that she miscarryed lately; Dr. Clerke telling me yesterday at
White Hall that he had the membranes and other vessels in his hands
which she voided, and were perfect as ever woman's was that bore a
child. Thence hoping to find my Lord Sandwich, away by coach to my Lord
Chancellor's, but missed him, and so home and to office, and then to
supper and my Journall, and to bed.

20th. Up, and to the office; where, among other businesses, Mr. Evelyn's
proposition about publique Infirmarys was read and agreed on, he being
there: and at noon I took him home to dinner, being desirous of keeping
my acquaintance with him; and a most excellent humoured man I still find
him, and mighty knowing. After dinner I took him by coach to White Hall,
and there he and I parted, and I to my Lord Sandwich's, where coming
and bolting into the dining-room, I there found Captain Ferrers going
to christen a child of his born yesterday, and I come just pat to be
a godfather, along with my Lord Hinchingbrooke, and Madam Pierce, my
Valentine, which for that reason I was pretty well contented with,
though a little vexed to see myself so beset with people to spend me
money, as she of a Valentine and little Mrs. Tooker, who is come to my
house this day from Greenwich, and will cost me 20s., my wife going out
with her this afternoon, and now this christening. Well, by and by
the child is brought and christened Katharine, and I this day on this
occasion drank a glasse of wine, which I have not professedly done these
two years, I think, but a little in the time of the sicknesse. After
that done, and gone and kissed the mother in bed, I away to Westminster
Hall, and there hear that Mrs. Lane is come to town. So I staid
loitering up and down till anon she comes and agreed to meet at Swayn's,
and there I went anon, and she come, but staid but little, the place not
being private. I have not seen her since before the plague. So thence
parted and 'rencontrais a' her last 'logis', and in the place did what I
'tenais a mind pour ferais con her'. At last she desired to borrow money
of me, L5, and would pawn gold with me for it, which I accepted and
promised in a day or two to supply her. So away home to the office, and
thence home, where little Mrs. Tooker staid all night with us, and a
pretty child she is, and happens to be niece to my beauty that is dead,
that lived at the Jackanapes, in Cheapside. So to bed, a little troubled
that I have been at two houses this afternoon with Mrs. Lane that were
formerly shut up of the plague.

21st. Up, and with Sir J. Minnes to White Hall by his coach, by the way
talking of my brother John to get a spiritual promotion for him, which
I am now to looke after, for as much as he is shortly to be Master in
Arts, and writes me this weeke a Latin letter that he is to go into
orders this Lent. There to the Duke's chamber, and find our fellows
discoursing there on our business, so I was sorry to come late, but no
hurte was done thereby. Here the Duke, among other things, did bring out
a book of great antiquity of some of the customs of the Navy, about 100
years since, which he did lend us to read and deliver him back again.
Thence I to the Exchequer, and there did strike my tallys for a quarter
for Tangier and carried them home with me, and thence to Trinity-house,
being invited to an Elder Brother's feast; and there met and sat by Mr.
Prin, and had good discourse about the privileges of Parliament, which,
he says, are few to the Commons' House, and those not examinable by
them, but only by the House of Lords. Thence with my Lord Bruncker to
Gresham College, the first time after the sicknesse that I was there,
and the second time any met. And here a good lecture of Mr. Hooke's
about the trade of felt-making, very pretty. And anon alone with me
about the art of drawing pictures by Prince Rupert's rule and machine,
and another of Dr. Wren's;

     [Afterwards the famous Sir Christopher Wren.  He was one of the
     mainstays of the Royal Society.]

but he says nothing do like squares, or, which is the best in the world,
like a darke roome,--[The camera obscura.]--which pleased me mightily.
Thence with Povy home to my house, and there late settling accounts
with him, which was very troublesome to me, and he gone, found Mr. Hill
below, who sat with me till late talking, and so away, and we to bed.

22nd. Up, and to the office, where sat all the morning. At noon home to
dinner and thence by coach with my wife for ayre principally for her.
I alone stopped at Hales's and there mightily am pleased with my wife's
picture that is begun there, and with Mr. Hill's, though I must [owne]
I am not more pleased with it now the face is finished than I was when I
saw it the second time of sitting. Thence to my Lord Sandwich's, but he
not within, but goes to-morrow. My wife to Mrs. Hunt's, who is lately
come to towne and grown mighty fat. I called her there, and so home
and late at the office, and so home to supper and to bed. We are much
troubled that the sicknesse in general (the town being so full of
people) should be but three, and yet of the particular disease of the
plague there should be ten encrease.

23rd. Up betimes, and out of doors by 6 of the clock, and walked (W.
Howe with me) to my Lord Sandwich's, who did lie the last night at his
house in Lincoln's Inne Fields. It being fine walking in the morning,
and the streets full of people again. There I staid, and the house full
of people come to take leave of my Lord, who this day goes out of towne
upon his embassy towards Spayne. And I was glad to find Sir W. Coventry
to come, though I know it is only a piece of courtshipp. I had much
discourse with my Lord, he telling me how fully he leaves the King his
friend and the large discourse he had with him the other day, and how he
desired to have the business of the prizes examined before he went, and
that he yielded to it, and it is done as far as it concerns himself to
the full, and the Lords Commissioners for prizes did reprehend all the
informers in what related to his Lordship, which I am glad of in many
respects. But we could not make an end of discourse, so I promised to
waite upon [him] on Sunday at Cranborne, and took leave and away hence
to Mr. Hales's with Mr. Hill and two of the Houblons, who come thither
to speak with me, and saw my wife's picture, which pleases me well,
but Mr. Hill's picture never a whit so well as it did before it was
finished, which troubled me, and I begin to doubt the picture of my
Lady Peters my wife takes her posture from, and which is an excellent
picture, is not of his making, it is so master-like. I set them down at
the 'Change and I home to the office, and at noon dined at home and to
the office again. Anon comes Mrs. Knipp to see my wife, who is gone out,
so I fain to entertain her, and took her out by coach to look my wife at
Mrs. Pierce's and Unthanke's, but find her not. So back again, and then
my wife comes home, having been buying of things, and at home I spent
all the night talking with this baggage, and teaching her my song of
"Beauty retire," which she sings and makes go most rarely, and a very
fine song it seems to be. She also entertained me with repeating many
of her own and others' parts of the play-house, which she do most
excellently; and tells me the whole practices of the play-house and
players, and is in every respect most excellent company. So I supped,
and was merry at home all the evening, and the rather it being my
birthday, 33 years, for which God be praised that I am in so good a
condition of healthe and estate, and every thing else as I am, beyond
expectation, in all. So she to Mrs. Turner's to lie, and we to bed.
Mightily pleased to find myself in condition to have these people come
about me and to be able to entertain them, and have the pleasure of
their qualities, than which no man can have more in the world.

24th. All the morning at the office till past three o'clock. At that
houre home and eat a bit alone, my wife being gone out. So abroad by
coach with Mr. Hill, who staid for me to speake about business, and he
and I to Hales's, where I find my wife and her woman, and Pierce and
Knipp, and there sung and was mighty merry, and I joyed myself in it;
but vexed at first to find my wife's picture not so like as I expected;
but it was only his having finished one part, and not another, of
the face; but, before I went, I was satisfied it will be an excellent
picture. Here we had ale and cakes and mighty merry, and sung my song,
which she [Knipp] now sings bravely, and makes me proud of myself.
Thence left my wife to go home with Mrs. Pierce, while I home to the
office, and there pretty late, and to bed, after fitting myself for
to-morrow's journey.

25th (Lord's day). My wife up between three and four of the clock in the
morning to dress herself, and I about five, and were all ready to take
coach, she and I and Mercer, a little past five, but, to our trouble,
the coach did not come till six. Then with our coach of four horses
I hire on purpose, and Leshmore to ride by, we through the City to
Branford and so to Windsor, Captain Ferrers overtaking us at Kensington,
being to go with us, and here drank, and so through, making no stay, to
Cranborne, about eleven o'clock, and found my Lord and the ladies at a
sermon in the house; which being ended we to them, and all the company
glad to see us, and mighty merry to dinner. Here was my Lord, and Lord
Hinchingbroke, and Mr. Sidney, Sir Charles Herbert, and Mr. Carteret, my
Lady Carteret, my Lady Jemimah, and Lady Slaning. After dinner to talk
to and again, and then to walke in the Parke, my Lord and I alone,
talking upon these heads; first, he has left his business of the prizes
as well as is possible for him, having cleared himself before the
Commissioners by the King's commands, so that nothing or little is to
be feared from that point, he goes fully assured, he tells me, of the
King's favour. That upon occasion I may know, I desired to know, his
friends I may trust to, he tells me, but that he is not yet in England,
but continues this summer in Ireland, my Lord Orrery is his father
almost in affection. He tells me my Lord of Suffolke, Lord Arlington,
Archbishop of Canterbury, Lord Treasurer, Mr. Atturny Montagu, Sir
Thomas Clifford in the House of Commons, Sir G. Carteret, and some
others I cannot presently remember, are friends that I may rely on for
him. He tells me my Lord Chancellor seems his very good friend, but
doubts that he may not think him so much a servant of the Duke of
Yorke's as he would have him, and indeed my Lord tells me he hath lately
made it his business to be seen studious of the King's favour, and not
of the Duke's, and by the King will stand or fall, for factions there
are, as he tells me, and God knows how high they may come. The Duke of
Albemarle's post is so great, having had the name of bringing in the
King, that he is like to stand, or, if it were not for him, God knows in
what troubles we might be from some private faction, if an army could be
got into another hand, which God forbid! It is believed that though
Mr. Coventry be in appearance so great against the Chancellor, yet that
there is a good understanding between the Duke and him. He dreads the
issue of this year, and fears there will be some very great revolutions
before his coming back again. He doubts it is needful for him to have a
pardon for his last year's actions, all which he did without commission,
and at most but the King's private single word for that of Bergen; but
he dares not ask it at this time, lest it should make them think that
there is something more in it than yet they know; and if it should be
denied, it would be of very ill consequence. He says also, if it should
in Parliament be enquired into the selling of Dunkirke (though the
Chancellor was the man that would have it sold to France, saying the
King of Spayne had no money to give for it); yet he will be found to
have been the greatest adviser of it; which he is a little apprehensive
may be called upon this Parliament. He told me it would not be necessary
for him to tell me his debts, because he thinks I know them so well.
He tells me, that for the match propounded of Mrs. Mallett for my Lord
Hinchingbroke, it hath been lately off, and now her friends bring it on
again, and an overture hath been made to him by a servant of hers,
to compass the thing without consent of friends, she herself having a
respect to my Lord's family, but my Lord will not listen to it but in
a way of honour. The Duke hath for this weeke or two been very kind to
him, more than lately; and so others, which he thinks is a good sign
of faire weather again. He says the Archbishopp of Canterbury hath been
very kind to him, and hath plainly said to him that he and all the world
knows the difference between his judgment and brains and the Duke of
Albemarle's, and then calls my Lady Duchesse the veryest slut and drudge
and the foulest worde that can be spoke of a woman almost. My Lord
having walked an houre with me talking thus and going in, and my Lady
Carteret not suffering me to go back again to-night, my Lord to walke
again with me about some of this and other discourse, and then in
a-doors and to talke with all and with my Lady Carteret, and I with
the young ladies and gentle men, who played on the guittar, and mighty
merry, and anon to supper, and then my Lord going away to write, the
young gentlemen to flinging of cushions, and other mad sports; at this
late till towards twelve at night, and then being sleepy, I and my wife
in a passage-room to bed, and slept not very well because of noise.

26th. Called up about five in the morning, and my Lord up, and took
leave, a little after six, very kindly of me and the whole company. Then
I in, and my wife up and to visit my Lady Slaving in her bed, and there
sat three hours, with Lady Jemimah with us, talking and laughing, and by
and by my Lady Carteret comes, and she and I to talke, I glad to please
her in discourse of Sir G. Carteret, that all will do well with him, and
she is much pleased, he having had great annoyance and fears about his
well doing, and I fear hath doubted that I have not been a friend to
him, but cries out against my Lady Castlemaine, that makes the King
neglect his business and seems much to fear that all will go to wracke,
and I fear with great reason; exclaims against the Duke of Albemarle,
and more the Duchesse for a filthy woman, as indeed she is. Here
staid till 9 o'clock almost, and then took coach with so much love and
kindnesse from my Lady Carteret, Lady Jemimah, and Lady Slaving, that it
joys my heart, and when I consider the manner of my going hither, with
a coach and four horses and servants and a woman with us, and coming
hither being so much made of, and used with that state, and then going
to Windsor and being shewn all that we were there, and had wherewith to
give every body something for their pains, and then going home, and
all in fine weather and no fears nor cares upon me, I do thinke myself
obliged to thinke myself happy, and do look upon myself at this time
in the happiest occasion a man can be, and whereas we take pains in
expectation of future comfort and ease, I have taught myself to reflect
upon myself at present as happy, and enjoy myself in that consideration,
and not only please myself with thoughts of future wealth and forget
the pleasure we at present enjoy. So took coach and to Windsor, to the
Garter, and thither sent for Dr. Childe; who come to us, and carried us
to St. George's Chappell; and there placed us among the Knights' stalls
(and pretty the observation, that no man, but a woman may sit in
a Knight's place, where any brass-plates are set); and hither come
cushions to us, and a young singing-boy to bring us a copy of the anthem
to be sung. And here, for our sakes, had this anthem and the great
service sung extraordinary, only to entertain us. It is a noble place
indeed, and a good Quire of voices. Great bowing by all the people, the
poor Knights particularly, to the Alter. After prayers, we to see the
plate of the chappell, and the robes of Knights, and a man to shew us
the banners of the several Knights in being, which hang up over the
stalls. And so to other discourse very pretty, about the Order. Was
shewn where the late [King] is buried, and King Henry the Eighth, and
my Lady [Jane] Seymour. This being done, to the King's house, and to
observe the neatness and contrivance of the house and gates: it is the
most romantique castle that is in the world. But, Lord! the prospect
that is in the balcone in the Queene's lodgings, and the terrace and
walk, are strange things to consider, being the best in the world,
sure. Infinitely satisfied I and my wife with all this, she being in all
points mightily pleased too, which added to my pleasure; and so giving
a great deal of money to this and that man and woman, we to our taverne,
and there dined, the Doctor with us; and so took coach and away to Eton,
the Doctor with me. Before we went to Chappell this morning, Kate Joyce,
in a stage-coach going toward London, called to me. I went to her and
saluted her, but could not get her to stay with us, having company. At
Eton I left my wife in the coach, and he and I to the College, and there
find all mighty fine. The school good, and the custom pretty of
boys cutting their names in the struts of the window when they go to
Cambridge, by which many a one hath lived to see himself Provost and
Fellow, that had his name in the window standing. To the Hall, and there
find the boys' verses, "De Peste;" it being their custom to make verses
at Shrove-tide. I read several, and very good ones they were, and
better, I think, than ever I made when I was a boy, and in rolls as long
and longer than the whole Hall, by much. Here is a picture of Venice
hung up given, and a monument made of Sir H. Wotton's giving it to the
College. Thence to the porter's, in the absence of the butler, and did
drink of the College beer, which is very good; and went into the back
fields to see the scholars play. And so to the chappell, and there saw,
among other things, Sir H. Wotton's stone with this Epitaph

          Hic facet primus hujus sententiae Author:--
          Disputandi pruritus fit ecclesiae scabies.

But unfortunately the word "Author" was wrong writ, and now so basely
altered that it disgraces the stone. Thence took leave of the Doctor,
and so took coach, and finely, but sleepy, away home, and got thither
about eight at night, and after a little at my office, I to bed; and an
houre after, was waked with my wife's quarrelling with Mercer, at which
I was angry, and my wife and I fell out. But with much ado to sleep
again, I beginning to practise more temper, and to give her her way.

27th. Up, and after a harsh word or two my wife and I good friends, and
so up and to the office, where all the morning. At noon late to dinner,
my wife gone out to Hales's about her picture, and, after dinner, I
after her, and do mightily like her picture, and think it will be as
good as my Lady Peters's. So home mightily pleased, and there late at
business and set down my three last days' journalls, and so to bed,
overjoyed to thinke of the pleasure of the last Sunday and yesterday,
and my ability to bear the charge of these pleasures, and with profit
too, by obliging my Lord, and reconciling Sir George Carteret's family.

28th (Ash Wednesday). Up, and after doing a little business at my office
I walked, it being a most curious dry and cold morning, to White Hall,
and there I went into the Parke, and meeting Sir Ph. Warwicke took a
turne with him in the Pell Mall, talking of the melancholy posture of
affairs, where every body is snarling one at another, and all things put
together looke ominously. This new Act too putting us out of a power of
raising money. So that he fears as I do, but is fearfull of enlarging
in that discourse of an ill condition in every thing, and the State and
all. We appointed another time to meet to talke of the business of the
Navy alone seriously, and so parted, and I to White Hall, and there we
did our business with the Duke of Yorke, and so parted, and walked to
Westminster Hall, where I staid talking with Mrs. Michell and Howlett
long and her daughter, which is become a mighty pretty woman, and thence
going out of the Hall was called to by Mrs. Martin, so I went to her and
bought two bands, and so parted, and by and by met at her chamber, and
there did what I would, and so away home and there find Mrs. Knipp,
and we dined together, she the pleasantest company in the world. After
dinner I did give my wife money to lay out on Knipp, 20s., and I abroad
to White Hall to visit Colonell Norwood, and then Sir G. Carteret, with
whom I have brought myself right again, and he very open to me; is very
melancholy, and matters, I fear, go down with him, but he seems most
afeard of a general catastrophe to the whole kingdom, and thinks, as I
fear, that all things will come to nothing. Thence to the Palace Yard,
to the Swan, and there staid till it was dark, and then to Mrs. Lane's,
and there lent her L5 upon L4 01s. in gold. And then did what I would
with her, and I perceive she is come to be very bad, and offers any
thing, that it is dangerous to have to do with her, nor will I see [her]
any more a good while. Thence by coach home and to the office, where a
while, and then betimes to bed by ten o'clock, sooner than I have done
many a day. And thus ends this month, with my mind full of resolution
to apply myself better from this time forward to my business than I have
done these six or eight days, visibly to my prejudice both in quiett
of mind and setting backward of my business, that I cannot give a good
account of it as I ought to do.




MARCH 1665-1666

March 1st. Up, and to the office and there all the morning sitting and
at noon to dinner with my Lord Bruncker, Sir W. Batten and Sir W. Pen
at the White Horse in Lumbard Streete, where, God forgive us! good sport
with Captain Cocke's having his mayde sicke of the plague a day or two
ago and sent to the pest house, where she now is, but he will not say
anything but that she is well. But blessed be God! a good Bill this week
we have; being but 237 in all, and 42 of the plague, and of them but six
in the City: though my Lord Bruneker says, that these six are most of
them in new parishes where they were not the last week. Here was with
us also Mr. Williamson, who the more I know, the more I honour. Hence I
slipt after dinner without notice home and there close to my business at
my office till twelve at night, having with great comfort returned to my
business by some fresh vowes in addition to my former, and-more severe,
and a great joy it is to me to see myself in a good disposition to
business. So home to supper and to my Journall and to bed.

2nd. Up, as I have of late resolved before 7 in the morning and to the
office, where all the morning, among other things setting my wife and
Mercer with much pleasure to worke upon the ruling of some paper for the
making of books for pursers, which will require a great deale of worke
and they will earn a good deale of money by it, the hopes of which makes
them worke mighty hard. At noon dined and to the office again, and about
4 o'clock took coach and to my Lord Treasurer's and thence to Sir Philip
Warwicke's new house by appointment, there to spend an houre in talking
and we were together above an hour, and very good discourse about the
state of the King as to money, and particularly in the point of the
Navy. He endeavours hard to come to a good understanding of Sir G.
Carteret's accounts, and by his discourse I find Sir G. Carteret must be
brought to it, and what a madman he is that he do not do it of himself,
for the King expects the Parliament will call upon him for his promise
of giving an account of the money, and he will be ready for it, which
cannot be, I am sure, without Sir G. Carteret's accounts be better
understood than they are. He seems to have a great esteem of me and
my opinion and thoughts of things. After we had spent an houre thus
discoursing and vexed that we do but grope so in the darke as we do,
because the people, that should enlighten us, do not helpe us, we
resolved fitting some things for another meeting, and so broke up. He
shewed me his house, which is yet all unhung, but will be a very noble
house indeed. Thence by coach calling at my bookseller's and carried
home L10 worth of books, all, I hope, I shall buy a great while. There
by appointment find Mr. Hill come to sup and take his last leave of me,
and by and by in comes Mr. James Houbland to bear us company, a man I
love mightily, and will not lose his acquaintance. He told me in my eare
this night what he and his brothers have resolved to give me, which is
L200, for helping them out with two or three ships. A good sum and that
which I did believe they would give me, and I did expect little less.
Here we talked and very good company till late, and then took leave of
one another, and indeed I am heartily sorry for Mr. Hill's leaving us,
for he is a very worthy gentleman, as most I know. God give him a good
voyage and successe in his business. Thus we parted and my wife and I to
bed, heavy for the losse of our friend.

3rd. All the morning at the office, at noon to the Old James, being sent
for, and there dined with Sir William Rider, Cutler, and others, to make
an end with two Scots Maisters about the freight of two ships of my Lord
Rutherford's. After a small dinner and a little discourse I away to the
Crowne behind the Exchange to Sir W. Pen, Captain Cocke and Fen, about
getting a bill of Cocke's paid to Pen, in part for the East India goods
he sold us. Here Sir W. Pen did give me the reason in my eare of his
importunity for money, for that he is now to marry his daughter. God
send her better fortune than her father deserves I should wish him for a
false rogue. Thence by coach to Hales's, and there saw my wife sit; and
I do like her picture mightily, and very like it will be, and a brave
piece of work. But he do complain that her nose hath cost him as much
work as another's face, and he hath done it finely indeed. Thence home
and late at the office, and then to bed.

4th (Lord's day). And all day at my Tangier and private accounts, having
neglected them since Christmas, which I hope I shall never do again;
for I find the inconvenience of it, it being ten times the labour
to remember and settle things. But I thank God I did it at last, and
brought them all fine and right; and I am, I thinke, by all appears to
me (and I am sure I cannot be L10 wrong), worth above L4600, for which
the Lord be praised! being the biggest sum I ever was worth yet.

5th. I was at it till past two o'clock on Monday morning, and then read
my vowes, and to bed with great joy and content that I have brought my
things to so good a settlement, and now having my mind fixed to follow
my business again and sensible of Sir W. Coventry's jealousies, I doubt,
concerning me, partly my siding with Sir G. Carteret, and partly that
indeed I have been silent in my business of the office a great while,
and given but little account of myself and least of all to him, having
not made him one visitt since he came to towne from Oxford, I am
resolved to fall hard to it again, and fetch up the time and interest I
have lost or am in a fair way of doing it. Up about eight o'clock, being
called up by several people, among others by Mr. Moone, with whom I went
to Lumbard Streete to Colvill, and so back again and in my chamber he
and I did end all our businesses together of accounts for money upon
bills of Exchange, and am pleased to find myself reputed a man of
business and method, as he do give me out to be. To the 'Change at
noon and so home to dinner. Newes for certain of the King of Denmarke's
declaring for the Dutch, and resolution to assist them. To the office,
and there all the afternoon. In the evening come Mr. James and brother
Houblons to agree upon share parties for their ships, and did acquaint
me that they had paid my messenger, whom I sent this afternoon for it,
L200 for my friendship in the business, which pleases me mightily. They
being gone I forth late to Sir H. Viner's to take a receipt of them
for the L200 lodged for me there with them, and so back home, and after
supper to bed.

6th. Up betimes and did much business before office time. Then to the
office and there till noon and so home to dinner and to the office again
till night. In the evening being at Sir W. Batten's, stepped in (for I
have not used to go thither a good while), I find my Lord Bruncker and
Mrs. Williams, and they would of their own accord, though I had never
obliged them (nor my wife neither) with one visit for many of theirs, go
see my house and my wife; which I showed them and made them welcome with
wine and China oranges (now a great rarity since the war, none to be
had). There being also Captain Cocke and Mrs. Turner, who had never been
in my house since I come to the office before, and Mrs. Carcasse, wife
of Mr. Carcasses. My house happened to be mighty clean, and did me great
honour, and they mightily pleased with it. They gone I to the office and
did some business, and then home to supper and to bed. My mind
troubled through a doubtfulness of my having incurred Sir W. Coventry's
displeasure by not having waited on him since his coming to towne, which
is a mighty faulte and that I can bear the fear of the bad effects of
till I have been with him, which shall be to-morrow, God willing. So to
bed.

7th. Up betimes, and to St. James's, thinking Mr. Coventry had lain
there; but he do not, but at White Hall; so thither I went and had as
good a time as heart could wish, and after an houre in his chamber about
publique business he and I walked up, and the Duke being gone abroad we
walked an houre in the Matted Gallery: he of himself begun to discourse
of the unhappy differences between him and my Lord of Sandwich, and from
the beginning to the end did run through all passages wherein my Lord
hath, at any time, gathered any dissatisfaction, and cleared himself to
me most honourably; and in truth, I do believe he do as he says. I did
afterwards purge myself of all partiality in the business of Sir G.
Carteret, (whose story Sir W. Coventry did also run over,) that I do
mind the King's interest, notwithstanding my relation to him; all
which he declares he firmly believes, and assures me he hath the same
kindnesse and opinion of me as ever. And when I said I was jealous of
myself, that having now come to such an income as I am, by his favour,
I should not be found to do as much service as might deserve it; he did
assure me, he thinks it not too much for me, but thinks I deserve it as
much as any man in England. All this discourse did cheer my heart, and
sets me right again, after a good deal of melancholy, out of fears of
his disinclination to me, upon the differences with my Lord Sandwich and
Sir G. Carteret; but I am satisfied throughly, and so went away quite
another man, and by the grace of God will never lose it again by my
folly in not visiting and writing to him, as I used heretofore to do.
Thence by coach to the Temple, and it being a holyday, a fast-day, there
'light, and took water, being invited, and down to Greenwich, to Captain
Cocke's, where dined, he and Lord Bruncker, and Matt. Wren, Boltele, and
Major Cooper, who is also a very pretty companion; but they all drink
hard, and, after dinner, to gaming at cards. So I provoked my Lord to be
gone, and he and I to Mr. Cottle's and met Mrs. Williams (without whom
he cannot stir out of doors) and there took coach and away home. They
carry me to London and set me down at the Temple, where my mind changed
and I home, and to writing and heare my boy play on the lute, and a
turne with my wife pleasantly in the garden by moonshine, my heart being
in great peace, and so home to supper and to bed. The King and Duke are
to go to-morrow to Audly End, in order to the seeing and buying of it of
my Lord Suffolke.

8th. Up betimes and to the office, where all the morning sitting and
did discover three or four fresh instances of Sir W. Pen's old cheating
dissembling tricks, he being as false a fellow as ever was born. Thence
with Sir. W. Batten and Lord Bruncker to the White Horse in Lumbard
Streete to dine with Captain Cocke, upon particular business of canvas
to buy for the King, and here by chance I saw the mistresse of the house
I have heard much of, and a very pretty woman she is indeed and her
husband the simplest looked fellow and old that ever I saw. After dinner
I took coach and away to Hales's, where my wife is sitting; and, indeed,
her face and necke, which are now finished, do so please me that I am
not myself almost, nor was not all the night after in writing of my
letters, in consideration of the fine picture that I shall be master of.
Thence home and to the office, where very late, and so home to supper
and to bed.

9th. Up, and being ready, to the Cockpitt to make a visit to the Duke of
Albemarle, and to my great joy find him the same man to me that [he has
been] heretofore, which I was in great doubt of, through my negligence
in not visiting of him a great while; and having now set all to rights
there, I am in mighty ease in my mind and I think shall never suffer
matters to run so far backward again as I have done of late, with
reference to my neglecting him and Sir W. Coventry. Thence by water
down to Deptford, where I met my Lord Bruncker and Sir W. Batten by
agreement, and to measuring Mr. Castle's new third-rate ship, which is
to be called the Defyance.

     [William Castell wrote to the Navy Commissioners on February 17th,
     1665-66, to inform them that the "Defiance" had gone to Longreach,
     and again, on February 22nd, to say that Mr. Grey had no masts large
     enough for the new ship.  Sir William Batten on March 29th asked for
     the consent of the Board to bring the "Defiance" into dock ("
     Calendar of State Papers," Domestic, 1665-66, pp.  252, 262, 324).]

And here I had my end in saving the King some money and getting myself
some experience in knowing how they do measure ships. Thence I left them
and walked to Redriffe, and there taking water was overtaken by them in
their boat, and so they would have me in with them to Castle's house,
where my Lady Batten and Madam Williams were, and there dined and a
deale of doings. I had a good dinner and counterfeit mirthe and pleasure
with them, but had but little, thinking how I neglected my business.
Anon, all home to Sir W. Batten's and there Mrs. Knipp coming we did
spend the evening together very merry. She and I singing, and, God
forgive me! I do still see that my nature is not to be quite conquered,
but will esteem pleasure above all things, though yet in the middle
of it, it has reluctances after my business, which is neglected by my
following my pleasure. However musique and women I cannot but give way
to, whatever my business is. They being gone I to the office a while and
so home to supper and to bed.

10th. Up, and to the office, and there busy sitting till noon. I find at
home Mrs. Pierce and Knipp come to dine with me. We were mighty merry;
and, after dinner, I carried them and my wife out by coach to the New
Exchange, and there I did give my valentine, Mrs. Pierce, a dozen payre
of gloves, and a payre of silke stockings, and Knipp for company's sake,
though my wife had, by my consent, laid out 20s. upon her the other day,
six payre of gloves. Thence to Hales's to have seen our pictures, but
could not get in, he being abroad, and so to the Cakehouse hard by, and
there sat in the coach with great pleasure, and eat some fine cakes and
so carried them to Pierces and away home. It is a mighty fine witty
boy, Mrs. Pierces little boy. Thence home and to the office, where late
writing letters and leaving a great deale to do on Monday, I home to
supper and to bed. The truth is, I do indulge myself a little the more
in pleasure, knowing that this is the proper age of my life to do it;
and out of my observation that most men that do thrive in the world,
do forget to take pleasure during the time that they are getting their
estate, but reserve that till they have got one, and then it is too late
for them to enjoy it with any pleasure.

11th (Lord's day). Up, and by water to White Hall, there met Mr.
Coventry coming out, going along with the Commissioners of the Ordnance
to the water side to take barge, they being to go down to the Hope. I
returned with them as far as the Tower in their barge speaking with Sir
W. Coventry and so home and to church, and at noon dined and then to
my chamber, where with great pleasure about one business or other till
late, and so to supper and to bed.

12th. Up betimes, and called on by abundance of people about business,
and then away by water to Westminster, and there to the Exchequer about
some business, and thence by coach calling at several places, to the
Old Exchange, and there did much business, and so homeward and bought
a silver salt for my ordinary table to use, and so home to dinner, and
after dinner comes my uncle and aunt Wight, the latter I have not seen
since the plague; a silly, froward, ugly woman she is. We made mighty
much of them, and she talks mightily of her fear of the sicknesse, and
so a deale of tittle tattle and I left them and to my office where late,
and so home to supper and to bed. This day I hear my Uncle Talbot Pepys
died the last week, and was buried. All the news now is, that Sir
Jeremy Smith is at Cales--[Cadiz]--with his fleete, and Mings in the
Elve.--[Elbe]--The King is come this noon to towne from Audly End, with
the Duke of Yorke and a fine train of gentlemen.

13th. Up betimes, and to the office, where busy sitting all the morning,
and I begin to find a little convenience by holding up my head to Sir
W. Pen, for he is come to be more supple. At noon to dinner, and then
to the office again, where mighty business, doing a great deale till
midnight and then home to supper and to bed. The plague encreased this
week 29 from 28, though the total fallen from 238 to 207, which do never
a whit please me.

14th. Up, and met by 6 o'clock in my chamber Mr. Povy (from White Hall)
about evening reckonings between him and me, on our Tangier business,
and at it hard till toward eight o'clock, and he then carried me in his
chariot to White Hall, where by and by my fellow officers met me, and
we had a meeting before the Duke. Thence with my Lord Bruncker towards
London, and in our way called in Covent Garden, and took in Sir John
(formerly Dr.) Baber; who hath this humour that he will not enter into
discourse while any stranger is in company, till he be told who he is
that seems a stranger to him. This he did declare openly to me,
and asked my Lord who I was, giving this reason, that he has been
inconvenienced by being too free in discourse till he knew who all the
company were. Thence to Guildhall (in our way taking in Dr. Wilkins),
and there my Lord and I had full and large discourse with Sir Thomas
Player, the Chamberlain of the City (a man I have much heard of for his
credit and punctuality in the City, and on that score I had a desire to
be made known to him), about the credit of our tallys, which are lodged
there for security to such as should lend money thereon to the use of
the Navy. And I had great satisfaction therein: and the truth is, I find
all our matters of credit to be in an ill condition. Thence, I being in
a little haste walked before and to the 'Change a little and then home,
and presently to Trinity house to dinner, where Captain Cox made his
Elder Brother's dinner. But it seemed to me a very poor sorry dinner. I
having many things in my head rose, when my belly was full, though the
dinner not half done, and home and there to do some business, and by
and by out of doors and met Mr. Povy coming to me by appointment, but it
being a little too late, I took a little pride in the streete not to go
back with him, but prayed him to come another time, and I away to Kate
Joyce's, thinking to have spoke to her husband about Pall's business,
but a stranger, the Welsh Dr. Powell, being there I forebore and went
away and so to Hales's, to see my wife's picture, which I like mighty
well, and there had the pleasure to see how suddenly he draws the
Heavens, laying a darke ground and then lightening it when and where he
will. Thence to walk all alone in the fields behind Grayes Inne, making
an end of reading over my dear "Faber fortunae," of my Lord Bacon's, and
thence, it growing dark, took two or three wanton turns about the idle
places and lanes about Drury Lane, but to no satisfaction, but a great
fear of the plague among them, and so anon I walked by invitation to
Mrs. Pierces, where I find much good company, that is to say, Mrs.
Pierce, my wife, Mrs. Worshipp and her daughter, and Harris the player,
and Knipp, and Mercer, and Mrs. Barbary Sheldon, who is come this day
to spend a weeke with my wife; and here with musique we danced, and sung
and supped, and then to sing and dance till past one in the morning; and
much mirthe with Sir Anthony Apsley and one Colonell Sidney, who lodge
in the house; and above all, they are mightily taken with Mrs. Knipp.
Hence weary and sleepy we broke up, and I and my company homeward by
coach and to bed.

15th. Lay till it was full time to rise, it being eight o'clock, and
so to the office and there sat till almost three o'clock and then to
dinner, and after dinner (my wife and Mercer and Mrs. Barbary being gone
to Hales's before), I and my cozen Anthony Joyce, who come on purpose to
dinner with me, and he and I to discourse of our proposition of marriage
between Pall and Harman, and upon discourse he and I to Harman's house
and took him to a taverne hard by, and we to discourse of our business,
and I offered L500, and he declares most ingenuously that his trade is
not to be trusted on, that he however needs no money, but would have
her money bestowed on her, which I like well, he saying that he would
adventure 2 or L300 with her. I like him as a most good-natured, and
discreet man, and, I believe, very cunning. We come to this conclusion
for us to meete one another the next weeke, and then we hope to come to
some end, for I did declare myself well satisfied with the match. Thence
to Hales's, where I met my wife and people; and do find the picture,
above all things, a most pretty picture, and mighty like my wife; and
I asked him his price: he says L14, and the truth is, I think he do
deserve it. Thence toward London and home, and I to the office, where
I did much, and betimes to bed, having had of late so little sleep, and
there slept

16th. Till 7 this morning. Up and all the morning about the Victualler's
business, passing his account. At noon to the 'Change, and did several
businesses, and thence to the Crowne behind the 'Change and dined with
my Lord Bruncker and Captain Cocke and Fenn, and Madam Williams, who
without question must be my Lord's wife, and else she could not follow
him wherever he goes and kisse and use him publiquely as she do. Thence
to the office, where Sir W. Pen and I made an end of the Victualler's
business, and thence abroad about several businesses, and so in the
evening back again, and anon called on by Mr. Povy, and he and I staid
together in my chamber till 12 at night ending our reckonings and giving
him tallys for all I was to pay him and so parted, and I to make good
my Journall for two or three days, and begun it till I come to the other
side, where I have scratched so much, for, for want of sleep, I begun
to write idle and from the purpose. So forced to breake off, and to
bed.--[There are several erasures in the original MS.]

17th. Up, and to finish my Journall, which I had not sense enough the
last night to make an end of, and thence to the office, where very busy
all the morning. At noon home to dinner and presently with my wife out
to Hales's, where I am still infinitely pleased with my wife's picture.
I paid him L14 for it, and 25s. for the frame, and I think it is not a
whit too deare for so good a picture. It is not yet quite finished and
dry, so as to be fit to bring home yet. This day I begun to sit, and he
will make me, I think, a very fine picture. He promises it shall be as
good as my wife's, and I sit to have it full of shadows, and do almost
break my neck looking over my shoulder to make the posture for him to
work by. Thence home and to the office, and so home having a great cold,
and so my wife and Mrs. Barbary have very great ones, we are at a loss
how we all come by it together, so to bed, drinking butter-ale. This day
my W. Hewer comes from Portsmouth and gives me an instance of another
piece of knavery of Sir W. Pen, who wrote to Commissioner Middleton,
that it was my negligence the other day he was not acquainted, as the
board directed, with our clerks coming down to the pay. But I need no
new arguments to teach me that he is a false rogue to me and all the
world besides.

18th (Lord's day). Up and my cold better, so to church, and then home to
dinner, and so walked out to St. James's Church, thinking to have seen
faire Mrs. Butler, but could not, she not being there, nor, I believe,
lives thereabouts now. So walked to Westminster, very fine fair dry
weather, but all cry out for lack of rain. To Herbert's and drank, and
thence to Mrs. Martin's, and did what I would with her; her husband
going for some wine for us. The poor man I do think would take pains if
I can get him a purser's place, which I will endeavour. She tells me
as a secret that Betty Howlet of the Hall, my little sweetheart, that
I used to call my second wife, is married to a younger son of Mr.
Michell's (his elder brother, who should have had her, being dead this
plague), at which I am glad, and that they are to live nearer me in
Thames Streete, by the Old Swan. Thence by coach home and to my chamber
about some accounts, and so to bed. Sir Christopher Mings is come home
from Hambro without anything done, saving bringing home some pipestaves
for us.

19th. Up betimes and upon a meeting extraordinary at the office most of
the morning with Lord Bruncker, Sir W. Coventry, and Sir W. Pen, upon
the business of the accounts. Where now we have got almost as much as we
would have we begin to lay all on the Controller, and I fear he will
be run down with it, for he is every day less and less capable of doing
business. Thence with my Lord Bruncker, Sir W. Coventry to the ticket
office, to see in what little order things are there, and there it is
a shame to see how the King is served. Thence to the Chamberlain of
London, and satisfy ourselves more particularly how much credit we have
there, which proves very little. Thence to Sir Robert Long's, absent.
About much the same business, but have not the satisfaction we would
have there neither. So Sir W. Coventry parted, and my Lord and I to Mrs.
Williams's, and there I saw her closett, where indeed a great many fine
things there are, but the woman I hate. Here we dined, and Sir J. Minnes
come to us, and after dinner we walked to the King's play-house, all in
dirt, they being altering of the stage to make it wider. But God knows
when they will begin to act again; but my business here was to see the
inside of the stage and all the tiring-rooms and machines; and, indeed,
it was a sight worthy seeing. But to see their clothes, and the various
sorts, and what a mixture of things there was; here a wooden-leg, there
a ruff, here a hobbyhorse, there a crown, would make a man split himself
to see with laughing; and particularly Lacy's wardrobe, and
Shotrell's. But then again, to think how fine they show on the stage by
candle-light, and how poor things they are to look now too near hand,
is not pleasant at all. The machines are fine, and the paintings very
pretty. Thence mightily satisfied in my curiosity I away with my Lord to
see him at her house again, and so take leave and by coach home and
to the office, and thence sent for to Sir G. Carteret by and by to the
Broad Streete, where he and I walked two or three hours till it was
quite darke in his gallery talking of his affairs, wherein I assure
him all will do well, and did give him (with great liberty, which he
accepted kindly) my advice to deny the Board nothing they would aske
about his accounts, but rather call upon them to know whether there was
anything more they desired, or was wanting. But our great discourse and
serious reflections was upon the bad state of the kingdom in general,
through want of money and good conduct, which we fear will undo all.
Thence mightily satisfied with this good fortune of this discourse with
him I home, and there walked in the darke till 10 o'clock at night in
the garden with Sir W. Warren, talking of many things belonging to us
particularly, and I hope to get something considerably by him before
the year be over. He gives me good advice of circumspection in my place,
which I am now in great mind to improve; for I think our office stands
on very ticklish terms, the Parliament likely to sit shortly and likely
to be asked more money, and we able to give a very bad account of the
expence of what we have done with what they did give before. Besides,
the turning out the prize officers may be an example for the King giving
us up to the Parliament's pleasure as easily, for we deserve it as
much. Besides, Sir G. Carteret did tell me tonight how my Lord Bruncker
himself, whose good-will I could have depended as much on as any, did
himself to him take notice of the many places I have; and though I was
a painful man, yet the Navy was enough for any man to go through with
in his owne single place there, which much troubles me, and shall yet
provoke me to more and more care and diligence than ever. Thence home
to supper, where I find my wife and Mrs. Barbary with great colds, as I
also at this time have. This day by letter from my father he propounds
a match in the country for Pall, which pleased me well, of one that hath
seven score and odd pounds land per annum in possession, and expects
L1000 in money by the death of an old aunt. He hath neither father,
mother, sister, nor brother, but demands L600 down, and L100 on the
birth of first child, which I had some inclination to stretch to. He is
kinsman to, and lives with, Mr. Phillips, but my wife tells me he is a
drunken, ill-favoured, ill-bred country fellow, which sets me off of it
again, and I will go on with Harman. So after supper to bed.

20th. Up and to the office, where busy all the morning. At noon dined in
haste, and so my wife, Mrs. Barbary, Mercer, and I by coach to Hales's,
where I find my wife's picture now perfectly finished in all respects,
and a beautiful picture it is, as almost I ever saw. I sat again, and
had a great deale done, but, whatever the matter is, I do not fancy
that it has the ayre of my face, though it will be a very fine picture.
Thence home and to my business, being post night, and so home to supper
and to, bed.

21st. Up betimes, and first by coach to my Lord Generall to visitt
him, and then to the Duke of Yorke, where we all met and did our usual
business with him; but, Lord! how everything is yielded to presently,
even by Sir W. Coventry, that is propounded by the Duke, as now to have
Troutbecke, his old surgeon, and intended to go Surgeon-General of the
fleete, to go Physician-General of the fleete, of which there never
was any precedent in the world, and he for that to have L20 per month.
Thence with Lord Bruncker to Sir Robert Long, whom we found in his
closett, and after some discourse of business he fell to discourse at
large and pleasant, and among other things told us of the plenty of
partridges in France, where he says the King of France and his company
killed with their guns, in the plain de Versailles, 300 and odd
partridges at one bout. Thence I to the Excise Office behind the
'Change, and there find our business of our tallys in great disorder as
to payment, and thereupon do take a resolution of thinking how to remedy
it, as soon as I can. Thence home, and there met Sir W. Warren, and
after I had eat a bit of victuals (he staying in the office) he and I
to White Hall. He to look after the business of the prize ships which we
are endeavouring to buy, and hope to get money by them. So I to London
by coach and to Gresham College, where I staid half an houre, and so
away home to my office, and there walking late alone in the darke in
the garden with Sir W. Warren, who tells me that at the Committee of
the Lords for the prizes to-day, there passed very high words between my
Lord Ashly and Sir W. Coventry, about our business of the prize ships.
And that my Lord Ashly did snuff and talk as high to him, as he used
to do to any ordinary seaman. And that Sir W. Coventry did take it very
quietly, but yet for all did speak his mind soberly and with reason, and
went away, saying, he had done his duty therein, and so left it to them,
whether they would let so many ships go for masts or not: Here he and I
talked of 1,000 businesses, all profitable discourse, and late parted,
and I home to supper and to bed, troubled a little at a letter from my
father, telling me how [he] is like to be sued for a debt of Tom's, by
Smith, the mercer.

22nd. Up, and to the office all the morning. At noon my wife being gone
to her father's I dined with Sir W. Batten, he inviting me. After dinner
to my office close, and did very much business, and so late home to
supper and to bed. The plague increased four this week, which troubles
me, though but one in the whole.

23rd. Up, and going out of my dressing-room, when ready to go down
stairs, I spied little Mrs. Tooker, my pretty little girle, which, it
seems, did come yesterday to our house to stay a little while with us,
but I did not know of it till now. I was glad of her coming, she being a
very pretty child, and now grown almost a woman. I out by six o'clock by
appointment to Hales's, where we fell to my picture presently very hard,
and it comes on a very fine picture, and very merry, pleasant discourse
we had all the morning while he was painting. Anon comes my wife and
Mercer and little Tooker, and having done with me we all to a picture
drawer's hard by, Hales carrying me to see some landskipps of a man's
doing. But I do not [like] any of them, save only a piece of fruit,
which indeed was very fine. Thence I to Westminster, to the Chequer,
about a little business, and then to the Swan, and there sent for a bit
of meat and dined; and after dinner had opportunity of being pleased
with Sarah; and so away to Westminster Hall, and there Mrs. Michell
tells me with great joy how little Betty Howlett is married to her young
son Michell, which is a pretty odd thing, that he should so soon succeed
in the match to his elder brother that died of the plague, and to the
house and trade intended for him, and more they say that the girle has
heretofore said that she did love this little one more than the other
brother that was intended her all along. I am mighty glad of this match,
and more that they are likely to live near me in Thames Streete, where
I may see Betty now and then, whom I from a girle did use to call my
second wife, and mighty pretty she is. Thence by coach to Anthony Joyce
to receive Harman's answer, which did trouble me to receive, for he
now demands L800, whereas he never made exception at the portion, but
accepted of L500. This I do not like; but, however, I cannot much blame
the man, if he thinks he can get more of another than of me. So home and
hard to my business at the office, where much business, and so home to
supper and to bed.

24th. Up and to the office, where all the morning. At noon home to
dinner, where Anthony Joyce, and I did give my final answer, I would
give but L500 with my sister, and did show him the good offer made us
in the country, to which I did now more and more incline, and intend to
pursue that. After dinner I to White Hall to a Committee for Tangier,
where the Duke of Yorke was, and I acquitted myself well in what I had
to do. After the Committee up, I had occasion to follow the Duke into
his lodgings, into a chamber where the Duchesse was sitting to have her
picture drawn by Lilly, who was there at work. But I was well pleased to
see that there was nothing near so much resemblance of her face in his
work, which is now the second, if not the third time, as there was of
my wife's at the very first time. Nor do I think at last it can be like,
the lines not being in proportion to those of her face. So home, and to
the office, where late, and so to bed.

25th (Lady day and Sunday). Up, and to my chamber in my gowne all the
morning about settling my papers there. At noon to dinner, where my
wife's brother, whom I sent for to offer making him a Muster-Master and
send to sea, which the poore man likes well of and will go, and it will
be a good preferment to him, only hazardous. I hope he will prove a good
discreet man. After dinner to my papers and Tangier accounts again till
supper, and after supper again to them, but by my mixing them, I know
not how, my private and publique accounts, it makes me mad to see how
hard it is to bring them to be understood, and my head is confounded,
that though I did sweare to sit up till one o'clock upon them, yet, I
fear, it will be to no purpose, for I cannot understand what I do or
have been doing of them to-day.

26th. Up, and a meeting extraordinary there was of Sir W. Coventry, Lord
Bruncker, and myself, about the business of settling the ticket office,
where infinite room is left for abusing the King in the wages of seamen.
Our [meeting] being done, my Lord Bruncker and I to the Tower, to see
the famous engraver, to get him to grave a seale for the office. And did
see some of the finest pieces of work in embossed work, that ever I did
see in my life, for fineness and smallness of the images thereon, and I
will carry my wife thither to shew them her. Here I also did see bars of
gold melting, which was a fine sight. So with my Lord to the Pope's Head
Taverne in Lumbard Streete to dine by appointment with Captain Taylor,
whither Sir W. Coventry come to us, and were mighty merry, and I find
reason to honour him every day more and more. Thence alone to Broade
Street to Sir G. Carteret by his desire to confer with him, who is I
find in great pain about the business of the office, and not a little,
I believe, in fear of falling there, Sir W. Coventry having so great
a pique against him, and herein I first learn an eminent instance how
great a man this day, that nobody would think could be shaken, is the
next overthrown, dashed out of countenance, and every small thing of
irregularity in his business taken notice of, where nobody the other day
durst cast an eye upon them, and next I see that he that the other day
nobody durst come near is now as supple as a spaniel, and sends and
speaks to me with great submission, and readily hears to advice. Thence
home to the office, where busy late, and so home a little to my accounts
publique and private, but could not get myself rightly to know how to
dispose of them in order to passing.

27th. All the morning at the office busy. At noon dined at home, Mr.
Cooke, our old acquaintance at my Lord Sandwich's, come to see and dine
with me, but I quite out of humour, having many other and better things
to thinke of. Thence to the office to settle my people's worke and then
home to my publique accounts of Tangier, which it is strange by meddling
with evening reckonings with Mr. Povy lately how I myself am become
intangled therein, so that after all I could do, ready to breake my head
and brains, I thought of another way, though not so perfect, yet the
only one which this account is capable of. Upon this latter I sat up
till past two in the morning and then to bed.

28th. Up, and with Creed, who come hither betimes to speake with me
about his accounts, to White Hall by water, mighty merry in discourse,
though I had been very little troubled with him, or did countenance it,
having now, blessed be God! a great deale of good business to mind to
better purpose than chatting with him. Waited on the Duke, after that
walked with Sir W. Clerke into St. James's Parke, and by and by met
with Mr. Hayes, Prince Rupert's Secretary, who are mighty, both, briske
blades, but I fear they promise themselves more than they expect. Thence
to the Cockpitt, and dined with a great deal of company at the Duke of
Albemarle's, and a bad and dirty, nasty dinner. So by coach to Hales's,
and there sat again, and it is become mighty like. Hither come my wife
and Mercer brought by Mrs. Pierce and Knipp, we were mighty merry and
the picture goes on the better for it. Thence set them down at Pierces,
and we home, where busy and at my chamber till 12 at night, and so to
bed. This night, I am told, the Queene of Portugall, the mother to our
Queene, is lately dead, and newes brought of it hither this day.

     [Donna Luiza, the Queen Regent of Portugal.  She was daughter of the
     Duke de Medina Sidonia and widow of Juan IV. The Court wore the
     deepest mourning on this occasion.  The ladies were directed to wear
     their hair plain, and to appear without spots on their faces, the
     disfiguring fashion of patching having just been introduced.--
     Strickland s Queens of England, vol. viii., p. 362.]

29th. All the morning hard at the office. At noon dined and then out to
Lumbard Streete, to look after the getting of some money that is lodged
there of mine in Viner's hands, I having no mind to have it lie there
longer. So back again and to the office, where and at home about
publique and private business and accounts till past 12 at night, and so
to bed. This day, poor Jane, my old, little Jane, came to us again, to
my wife's and my great content, and we hope to take mighty pleasure in
her, she having all the marks and qualities of a good and loving and
honest servant, she coming by force away from the other place, where
she hath lived ever since she went from us, and at our desire, her late
mistresse having used all the stratagems she could to keepe her.

30th. My wife and I mighty pleased with Jane's coming to us again. Up,
and away goes Alce, our cooke-mayde, a good servant, whom we loved and
did well by her, and she an excellent servant, but would not bear being
told of any faulte in the fewest and kindest words and would go away of
her owne accord, after having given her mistresse warning fickly for
a quarter of a yeare together. So we shall take another girle and make
little Jane our cook, at least, make a trial of it. Up, and after much
business I out to Lumbard Streete, and there received L2200 and brought
it home; and, contrary to expectation, received L35 for the use of L2000
of it [for] a quarter of a year, where it hath produced me this profit,
and hath been a convenience to me as to care and security of my house,
and demandable at two days' warning, as this hath been. This morning
Sir W. Warren come to me a second time about having L2000 of me upon
his bills on the Act to enable him to pay for the ships he is buying,
wherein I shall have considerable profit. I am loth to do it, but yet
speaking with Colvill I do not see but I shall be able to do it and get
money by it too. Thence home and eat one mouthful, and so to Hales's,
and there sat till almost quite darke upon working my gowne, which I
hired to be drawn in; an Indian gowne, and I do see all the reason
to expect a most excellent picture of it. So home and to my private
accounts in my chamber till past one in the morning, and so to bed, with
my head full of thoughts for my evening of all my accounts tomorrow, the
latter end of the month, in which God give me good issue, for I never
was in such a confusion in my life and that in great sums.

31st All the morning at the office busy. At noon to dinner, and thence
to the office and did my business there as soon as I could, and then
home and to my accounts, where very late at them, but, Lord! what a
deale of do I have to understand any part of them, and in short do what
I could, I could not come to any understanding of them, but after I had
throughly wearied myself, I was forced to go to bed and leave them much
against my will and vowe too, but I hope God will forgive me, for I have
sat up these four nights till past twelve at night to master them, but
cannot. Thus ends this month, with my head and mind mighty full and
disquiett because of my accounts, which I have let go too long, and
confounded my publique with my private that I cannot come to any
liquidating of them. However, I do see that I must be grown richer
than I was by a good deale last month. Busy also I am in thoughts for
a husband for my sister, and to that end my wife and I have determined
that she shall presently go into the country to my father and mother,
and consider of a proffer made them for her in the country, which, if
she likes, shall go forward.




APRIL 1666

April 1st (Lord's day). Up and abroad, and by coach to Charing Cross,
to wait on Sir Philip Howard; whom I found in bed: and he do receive me
very civilly. My request was about suffering my wife's brother to go
to sea, and to save his pay in the Duke's guards; which after a little
difficulty he did with great respect agree to. I find him a very
fine-spoken gentleman, and one of great parts, and very courteous. Much
pleased with this visit I to White Hall, where I met Sir G. Downing,
and to discourse with him an houre about the Exchequer payments upon the
late Act, and informed myself of him thoroughly in my safety in lending
L2000 to Sir W. Warren, upon an order of his upon the Exchequer
for L2602 and I do purpose to do it. Thence meeting Dr. Allen, the
physician, he and I and another walked in the Parke, a most pleasant
warm day, and to the Queene's chappell; where I do not so dislike the
musique. Here I saw on a post an invitation to all good Catholiques to
pray for the soul of such a one departed this life. The Queene, I hear,
do not yet hear of the death of her mother, she being in a course of
physique, that they dare not tell it her. At noon by coach home, and
there by invitation met my uncle and aunt Wight and their cozen Mary,
and dined with me and very merry. After dinner my uncle and I abroad by
coach to White Hall, up and down the house, and I did some business and
thence with him and a gentleman he met with to my Lord Chancellor's new
house, and there viewed it again and again and up to the top and I like
it as well as ever and think it a most noble house. So all up and down
my Lord St. Albans his new building and market-house, and the taverne
under the market-house, looking to and again into every place of
building, and so away and took coach and home, where to my accounts, and
was at them till I could not hold open my eyes, and so to bed. I this
afternoon made a visit to my Lady Carteret, whom I understood newly come
to towne; and she took it mighty kindly, but I see her face and heart
are dejected from the condition her husband's matters stand in. But I
hope they will do all well enough. And I do comfort her as much as I
can, for she is a noble lady.

2nd. Up, and to the office and thence with Mr. Gawden to Guildhall to
see the bills and tallys there in the chamber (and by the way in the
streete his new coach broke and we fain to take an old hackney). Thence
to the Exchequer again to inform myself of some other points in the new
Act in order to my lending Sir W. Warren L2000 upon an order of his upon
the Act, which they all encourage me to. There walking with Mr. Gawden
in Westminster Hall, he and I to talke from one business to another and
at last to the marriage of his daughter. He told me the story of Creed's
pretences to his daughter, and how he would not believe but she loved
him, while his daughter was in great passion on the other hand against
him. Thence to talke of his son Benjamin; and I propounded a match
for him, and at last named my sister, which he embraces heartily, and
speaking of the lowness of her portion, that it would be less than
L1000, he tells me if every thing else agrees, he will out of what he
means to give me yearly, make a portion for her shall cost me nothing
more than I intend freely. This did mightily rejoice me and full of it
did go with him to London to the 'Change; and there did much business
and at the Coffee-house with Sir W. Warren, who very wisely did shew
me that my matching my sister with Mr. Gawden would undo me in all my
places, everybody suspecting me in all I do; and I shall neither be able
to serve him, nor free myself from imputation of being of his faction,
while I am placed for his severest check. I was convinced that it would
be for neither of our interests to make this alliance, and so am quite
off of it again, but with great satisfaction in the motion. Thence to
the Crowne tavern behind the Exchange to meet with Cocke and Fenn and
did so, and dined with them, and after dinner had the intent of our
meeting, which was some private discourse with Fenn, telling him what I
hear and think of his business, which he takes very kindly and says he
will look about him. It was about his giving of ill language and answers
to people that come to him about money and some other particulars. This
morning Mrs. Barbary and little Mrs. Tooker went away homeward. Thence
my wife by coach calling me at White Hall to visit my Lady Carteret, and
she was not within. So to Westminster Hall, where I purposely tooke my
wife well dressed into the Hall to see and be seen; and, among others,
[met] Howlet's daughter, who is newly married, and is she I call wife,
and one I love mightily. So to Broad Streete and there met my Lady and
Sir G. Carteret, and sat and talked with them a good while and so home,
and to my accounts which I cannot get through with. But at it till I
grew drowsy, and so to bed mightily vexed that I can come to no better
issue in my accounts.

3rd. Up, and Sir W. Warren with me betimes and signed a bond, and
assigned his order on the Exchequer to a blank for me to fill and I did
deliver him L1900. The truth is, it is a great venture to venture so
much on the Act, but thereby I hedge in L300 gift for my service about
some ships that he hath bought, prizes, and good interest besides, and
his bond to repay me the money at six weeks' warning. So to the office,
where busy all the morning. At noon home to dinner, and there my brother
Balty dined with me and my wife, who is become a good serious man, and
I hope to do him good being sending him a Muster-Master on one of the
squadrons of the fleete. After dinner and he gone I to my accounts hard
all the afternoon till it was quite darke, and I thank God I do come
to bring them very fairly to make me worth L5,000 stocke in the world,
which is a great mercy to me. Though I am a little troubled to find L50
difference between the particular account I make to myself of my
profits and loss in each month and the account which I raise from my
acquittances and money which I have at the end of every month in
my chest and other men's hands. However I do well believe that I am
effectually L5,000, the greatest sum I ever was in my life yet, and this
day I have as I have said before agreed with Sir W. Warren and got of
him L300 gift. At night a while to the office and then home and supped
and to my accounts again till I was ready to sleepe, there being no
pleasure to handle them, if they are not kept in good order. So to bed.

4th. Up, and with Sir W. Pen in his coach to White Hall, in his way
talking simply and fondly as he used to do, but I find myself to slight
him and his simple talke, I thank God, and that my condition will enable
me to do it. Thence, after doing our business with the Duke of Yorke,
with Captain Cocke home to the 'Change in his coach. He promises me
presently a dozen of silver salts, and proposes a business for which he
hath promised Mrs. Williams for my Lord Bruncker a set of plate shall
cost him L500 and me the like, which will be a good business indeed.
After done several businesses at the 'Change I home, and being washing
day dined upon cold meate, and so abroad by coach to Hales's, and there
sat till night, mightily pleased with my picture, which is now almost
finished. So by coach home, it being the fast day and to my chamber and
so after supper to bed, consulting how to send my wife into the country
to advise about Pall's marriage, which I much desire, and my father too,
and two or three offers are now in hand.

5th. Up, and before office time to Lumbard Streete, and there at Viner's
was shewn the silver plates, made for Captain Cocke to present my Lord
Bruncker; and I chose a dozen of the same weight to be bespoke for
myself, which he told me yesterday he would give me on the same
occasion. To the office, where the falsenesse and impertinencies of Sir
W. Pen would make a man mad to think of. At noon would have avoided, but
could not, dining with my Lord Bruncker and his mistresse with Captain
Cocke at the Sun Taverne in Fish Streete, where a good dinner, but
the woman do tire me, and indeed how simply my Lord Bruncker, who is
otherwise a wise man, do proceed at the table in serving of Cocke,
without any means of understanding in his proposal, or defence when
proposed, would make a man think him a foole. After dinner home, where
I find my wife hath on a sudden, upon notice of a coach going away
to-morrow, taken a resolution of going in it to Brampton, we having
lately thought it fit for her to go to satisfy herself and me in the
nature of the fellow that is there proposed to my sister. So she to fit
herself for her journey and I to the office all the afternoon till late,
and so home and late putting notes to "It is decreed, nor shall thy
fate, &c." and then to bed. The plague is, to our great grief, encreased
nine this week, though decreased a few in the total. And this encrease
runs through many parishes, which makes us much fear the next year.

6th. Up mighty betimes upon my wife's going this day toward Brampton. I
could not go to the coach with her, but W. Hewer did and hath leave from
me to go the whole day's journey with her. All the morning upon business
at the office, and at noon dined, and Mrs. Hunt coming lent her L5 on
her occasions and so carried her to Axe Yard end at Westminster and
there left her, a good and understanding woman, and her husband I
perceive thrives mightily in his business of the Excise. Thence to Mr.
Hales and there sat, and my picture almost finished, which by the word
of Mr. and Mrs. Pierce (who come in accidently) is mighty like, and I
am sure I am mightily pleased both in the thing and the posture. Thence
with them home a little, and so to White Hall and there met by agreement
with Sir Stephen Fox and Mr. Ashburnham, and discoursed the business
of our Excise tallys; the former being Treasurer of the guards, and
the other Cofferer of the King's household. I benefitted much by their
discourse. We come to no great conclusion upon our discourse, but
parted, and I home, where all things, methinks, melancholy in the
absence of my wife. This day great newes of the Swedes declaring for
us against the Dutch, and, so far as that, I believe it. After a little
supper to bed.

7th. Lay pretty long to-day, lying alone and thinking of several
businesses. So up to the office and there till noon. Thence with my
Lord Bruncker home by coach to Mrs. Williams's, where Bab. Allen and
Dr. Charleton dined. Bab and I sang and were mighty merry as we could be
there, where the rest of the company did not overplease. Thence took her
by coach to Hales's, and there find Mrs. Pierce and her boy and Mary.
She had done sitting the first time, and indeed her face is mighty like
at first dash. Thence took them to the cakehouse, and there called in
the coach for cakes and drank, and thence I carried them to my Lord
Chancellor's new house to shew them that, and all mightily pleased,
thence set each down at home, and so I home to the office, where about
ten of the clock W. Hewer comes to me to tell me that he has left my
wife well this morning at Bugden, which was great riding, and brings me
a letter from her. She is very well got thither, of which I am heartily
glad. After writing several letters, I home to supper and to bed. The
Parliament of which I was afraid of their calling us of the Navy to an
account of the expense of money and stores and wherein we were so
little ready to give them a good answer [will soon meet]. The Bishop of
Munster, every body says, is coming to peace with the Dutch, we having
not supplied him with the money promised him.

8th (Lord's day). Up, and was in great trouble how to get a passage to
White Hall, it raining, and no coach to be had. So I walked to the Old
Swan, and there got a scull. To the Duke of Yorke, where we all met
to hear the debate between Sir Thomas Allen and Mr. Wayth; the former
complaining of the latter's ill usage of him at the late pay of his
ship. But a very sorry poor occasion he had for it. The Duke did
determine it with great judgement, chiding both, but encouraging Wayth
to continue to be a check to all captains in any thing to the King's
right. And, indeed, I never did see the Duke do any thing more in order,
nor with more judgement than he did pass the verdict in this business.
The Court full this morning of the newes of Tom Cheffin's death, the
King's closett-keeper. He was well last night as ever, flaying at tables
in the house, and not very ill this morning at six o'clock, yet dead
before seven: they think, of an imposthume in his breast. But it looks
fearfully among people nowadays, the plague, as we hear, encreasing
every where again. To the Chappell, but could not get in to hear well.
But I had the pleasure once in my life to see an Archbishop (this was
of Yorke) in a pulpit. Then at a loss how to get home to dinner, having
promised to carry Mrs. Hunt thither. At last got my Lord Hinchingbroke's
coach, he staying at Court; and so took her up in Axe-yard, and home and
dined. And good discourse of the old matters of the Protector and his
family, she having a relation to them. The Protector

     [Richard Cromwell subsequently returned to England, and resided in
     strict privacy at Cheshunt for some years before his death in 1712]

lives in France: spends about L500 per annum. Thence carried her
home again and then to Court and walked over to St. James's Chappell,
thinking to have heard a Jesuite preach, but come too late. So got a
hackney and home, and there to business. At night had Mercer comb my
head and so to supper, sing a psalm, and to bed.

9th. Up betimes, and with my Joyner begun the making of the window in
my boy's chamber bigger, purposing it shall be a roome to eat and for
having musique in. To the office, where a meeting upon extraordinary
business, at noon to the 'Change about more, and then home with Creed
and dined, and then with him to the Committee of Tangier, where I got
two or three things done I had a mind to of convenience to me. Thence by
coach to Mrs. Pierce's, and with her and Knipp and Mrs. Pierce's boy
and girle abroad, thinking to have been merry at Chelsey; but being come
almost to the house by coach near the waterside, a house alone, I think
the Swan, a gentleman walking by called to us to tell us that the house
was shut up of the sicknesse. So we with great affright turned back,
being holden to the gentleman; and went away (I for my part in great
disorder) for Kensington, and there I spent about 30s. upon the jades
with great pleasure, and we sang finely and staid till about eight at
night, the night coming on apace and so set them down at Pierce's, and
so away home, where awhile with Sir W. Warren about business, and then
to bed,

10th. Up betimes, and many people to me about business. To the office
and there sat till noon, and then home and dined, and to the office
again all the afternoon, where we sat all, the first time of our
resolution to sit both forenoons and afternoons. Much business at night
and then home, and though late did see some work done by the plasterer
to my new window in the boy's chamber plastered. Then to supper, and
after having my head combed by the little girle to bed. Bad news that
the plague is decreased in the general again and two increased in the
sickness.

11th. To White Hall, having first set my people to worke about setting
me rails upon the leads of my wife's closett, a thing I have long
designed, but never had a fit opportunity till now. After having done
with the Duke of Yorke, I to Hales's, where there was nothing found
to be done more to my picture, but the musique, which now pleases
me mightily, it being painted true. Thence home, and after dinner to
Gresham College, where a great deal of do and formality in choosing of
the Council and Officers. I had three votes to be of the Council, who
am but a stranger, nor expected any. So my Lord Bruncker being confirmed
President I home, where I find to my great content my rails up upon my
leads. To the office and did a little business, and then home and did
a great jobb at my Tangier accounts, which I find are mighty apt to
run into confusion, my head also being too full of other businesses and
pleasures. This noon Bagwell's wife come to me to the office, after her
being long at Portsmouth. After supper, and past 12 at night to bed.

12th. Up and to the office, where all the morning. At noon dined at home
and so to my office again, and taking a turne in the garden my Lady Pen
comes to me and takes me into her house, where I find her daughter and a
pretty lady of her acquaintance, one Mrs. Lowder, sister, I suppose, of
her servant Lowder's, with whom I, notwithstanding all my resolution to
follow business close this afternoon, did stay talking and playing the
foole almost all the afternoon, and there saw two or three foolish sorry
pictures of her doing, but very ridiculous compared to what my wife do.
She grows mighty homely and looks old. Thence ashamed at myself for this
losse of time, yet not able to leave it, I to the office, where my Lord
Bruncker come; and he and I had a little fray, he being, I find, a very
peevish man, if he be denied what he expects, and very simple in his
argument in this business (about signing a warrant for paying Sir Thos.
Allen L1000 out of the groats); but we were pretty good friends before
we parted, and so we broke up and I to the writing my letters by the
post, and so home to supper and to bed.

13th. Up, being called up by my wife's brother, for whom I have got
a commission from the Duke of Yorke for Muster-Master of one of the
divisions, of which Harman is Rere-Admirall, of which I am glad as well
as he. After I had acquainted him with it, and discoursed a little of
it, I went forth and took him with me by coach to the Duke of Albemarle,
who being not up, I took a walk with Balty into the Parke, and to the
Queene's Chappell, it being Good Friday, where people were all upon
their knees very silent; but, it seems, no masse this day. So back and
waited on the Duke and received some commands of his, and so by coach to
Mr. Hales's, where it is pretty strange to see that his second doing, I
mean the second time of her sitting, is less like Mrs. Pierce than
the first, and yet I am confident will be most like her, for he is so
curious that I do not see how it is possible for him to mistake. Here
he and I presently resolved of going to White Hall, to spend an houre
in the galleries there among the pictures, and we did so to my great
satisfaction, he shewing me the difference in the payntings, and when I
come more and more to distinguish and observe the workmanship, I do
not find so many good things as I thought there was, but yet great
difference between the works of some and others; and, while my head and
judgment was full of these, I would go back again to his house to
see his pictures, and indeed, though, I think, at first sight some
difference do open, yet very inconsiderably but that I may judge his to
be very good pictures. Here we fell into discourse of my picture, and
I am for his putting out the Landskipp, though he says it is very well
done, yet I do judge it will be best without it, and so it shall be put
out, and be made a plain sky like my wife's picture, which will be very
noble. Thence called upon an old woman in Pannier Ally to agree for
ruling of some paper for me and she will do it pretty cheap. Here I
found her have a very comely black mayde to her servant, which I liked
very well. So home to dinner and to see my joiner do the bench upon my
leads to my great content. After dinner I abroad to carry paper to my
old woman, and so to Westminster Hall, and there beyond my intention or
design did see and speak with Betty Howlett, at her father's still, and
it seems they carry her to her own house to begin the world with her
young husband on Monday next, Easter Monday. I please myself with the
thoughts of her neighbourhood, for I love the girl mightily. Thence
home, and thither comes Mr. Houblon and a brother, with whom I evened
for the charter parties of their ships for Tangier, and paid them the
third advance on their freight to full satisfaction, and so, they being
gone, comes Creed and with him till past one in the morning, evening his
accounts till my head aked and I was fit for nothing, however, coming at
last luckily to see through and settle all to my mind, it did please me
mightily, and so with my mind at rest to bed, and he with me and hard to
sleep.

14th. Up about seven and finished our papers, he and I, and I delivered
him tallys and some money and so away I to the office, where we sat all
the morning. At noon dined at home and Creed with me, then parted, and I
to the office, and anon called thence by Sir H. Cholmley and he and I to
my chamber, and there settled our matters of accounts, and did give
him tallys and money to clear him, and so he being gone and all these
accounts cleared I shall be even with the King, so as to make a very
clear and short account in a very few days, which pleases me very well.
Here he and I discoursed a great while about Tangier, and he do convince
me, as things are now ordered by my Lord Bellasses and will be by
Norwood (men that do only mind themselves), the garrison will never come
to any thing, and he proposes his owne being governor, which in truth I
do think will do very well, and that he will bring it to something.
He gone I to my office, where to write letters late, and then home and
looked over a little more my papers of accounts lately passed, and so to
bed.

15th (Easter Day). Up and by water to Westminster to the Swan to lay
down my cloak, and there found Sarah alone, with whom after I had staid
awhile I to White Hall Chapel, and there coming late could hear nothing
of the Bishop of London's sermon. So walked into the Park to the
Queene's chappell, and there heard a good deal of their mass, and some
of their musique, which is not so contemptible, I think, as our people
would make it, it pleasing me very well; and, indeed, better than the
anthem I heard afterwards at White Hall, at my coming back. I staid till
the King went down to receive the Sacrament, and stood in his closett
with a great many others, and there saw him receive it, which I did
never see the manner of before. But I do see very little difference
between the degree of the ceremonies used by our people in the
administration thereof, and that in the Roman church, saving that
methought our Chappell was not so fine, nor the manner of doing it
so glorious, as it was in the Queene's chappell. Thence walked to Mr.
Pierces, and there dined, I alone with him and her and their children:
very good company and good discourse, they being able to tell me all the
businesses of the Court; the amours and the mad doings that are there;
how for certain Mrs. Stewart do do everything with the King that a
mistress should do; and that the King hath many bastard children that
are known and owned, besides the Duke of Monmouth. After a great deale
of this discourse I walked thence into the Parke with her little boy
James with me, who is the wittiest boy and the best company in the
world, and so back again through White Hall both coming and going,
and people did generally take him to be my boy and some would aske me.
Thence home to Mr. Pierce again; and he being gone forth, she and I and
the children out by coach to Kensington, to where we were the other day,
and with great pleasure stayed till night; and were mighty late getting
home, the horses tiring and stopping at every twenty steps. By the way
we discoursed of Mrs. Clerke, who, she says, is grown mighty high, fine,
and proud, but tells me an odd story how Captain Rolt did see her the
other day accost a gentleman in Westminster Hall and went with him, and
he dogged them to Moorefields to a little blind bawdy house, and there
staid watching three hours and they come not out, so could stay no
longer but left them there, and he is sure it was she, he knowing her
well and describing her very clothes to Mrs. Pierce, which she knows are
what she wears. Seeing them well at home I homeward, but the horses at
Ludgate Hill made a final stop; so there I 'lighted, and with a linke,
it being about 10 o'clock, walked home, and after singing a Psalm or two
and supped to bed.

16th. Up, and set my people, Mercer, W. Hewer, Tom and the girle at work
at ruling and stitching my ruled book for the Muster-Masters, and I hard
toward the settling of my Tangier accounts. At noon dined alone, the
girl Mercer taking physique can eat nothing, and W. Hewer went forth to
dinner. So up to my accounts again, and then comes Mrs. Mercer and fair
Mrs. Turner, a neighbour of hers that my wife knows by their means, to
visit me. I staid a great while with them, being taken with this pretty
woman, though a mighty silly, affected citizen woman she is. Then I left
them to come to me at supper anon, and myself out by coach to the old
woman in Pannyer Alley for my ruled papers, and they are done, and I am
much more taken with her black maid Nan. Thence further to Westminster,
thinking to have met Mrs. Martin, but could not find her, so back and
called at Kirton's to borrow 10s. to pay for my ruled papers, I having
not money in my pocket enough to pay for them. But it was a pretty
consideration that on this occasion I was considering where I could with
most confidence in a time of need borrow 10s., and I protest I could not
tell where to do it and with some trouble and fear did aske it here. So
that God keepe me from want, for I shall be in a very bad condition to
helpe myself if ever I should come to want or borrow. Thence called for
my papers and so home, and there comes Mrs. Turner and Mercer and supped
with me, and well pleased I was with their company, but especially Mrs.
Turner's, she being a very pretty woman of person and her face pretty
good, the colour of her haire very fine and light. They staid with me
talking till about eleven o'clock and so home, W. Hewer, who supped with
me, leading them home. So I to bed.

17th. Up, and to the office, where all the morning. At noon dined at
home, my brother Balty with me, who is fitting himself to go to sea. So
after dinner to my accounts and did proceed a good way in settling
them, and thence to the office, where all the afternoon late, writing
my letters and doing business, but, Lord! what a conflict I had with
myself, my heart tempting me 1000 times to go abroad about some pleasure
or other, notwithstanding the weather foule. However I reproached myself
with my weaknesse in yielding so much my judgment to my sense, and
prevailed with difficulty and did not budge, but stayed within, and, to
my great content, did a great deale of business, and so home to supper
and to bed. This day I am told that Moll Davis, the pretty girle, that
sang and danced so well at the Duke's house, is dead.

18th. [Up] and by coach with Sir W. Batten and Sir Thos. Allen to White
Hall, and there after attending the Duke as usual and there concluding
of many things preparatory to the Prince and Generall's going to sea on
Monday next, Sir W. Batten and Sir T. Allen and I to Mr. Lilly's, the
painter's; and there saw the heads, some finished, and all begun, of
the Flaggmen in the late great fight with the Duke of Yorke against the
Dutch. The Duke of Yorke hath them done to hang in his chamber, and very
finely they are done indeed. Here is the Prince's, Sir G. Askue's, Sir
Thomas Teddiman's, Sir Christopher Mings, Sir Joseph Jordan, Sir William
Barkeley, Sir Thomas Allen, and Captain Harman's, as also the Duke
of Albemarle's; and will be my Lord Sandwich's, Sir W. Pen's, and Sir
Jeremy Smith's. Being very well satisfied with this sight, and other
good pictures hanging in the house, we parted, and I left them, and [to]
pass away a little time went to the printed picture seller's in the way
thence to the Exchange, and there did see great plenty of fine prints;
but did not buy any, only a print of an old pillar in Rome made for a
Navall Triumph,

     [The columna rostrata erected in the Forum to C. Duilius, who
     obtained a triumph for the first naval victory over the
     Carthaginians, B.C. 261.  Part of the column was discovered in the
     ruins of the Forum near the Arch of Septimius, and transferred to
     the Capitol.--B.]

which for the antiquity of the shape of ships, I buy and keepe. Thence
to the Exchange, that is, the New Exchange, and looked over some play
books and intend to get all the late new plays. So to Westminster, and
there at the Swan got a bit of meat and dined alone; and so away toward
King's Street, and spying out of my coach Jane that lived heretofore at
Jevons, my barber's, I went a little further and stopped, and went on
foot back, and overtook her, taking water at Westminster Bridge, and
spoke to her, and she telling me whither she was going I over the water
and met her at Lambeth, and there drank with her; she telling me how he
that was so long her servant, did prove to be a married man, though
her master told me (which she denies) that he had lain with her several
times in his house. There left her 'sans essayer alcune cose con elle',
and so away by boat to the 'Change, and took coach and to Mr. Hales,
where he would have persuaded me to have had the landskipp stand in my
picture, but I like it not and will have it otherwise, which I perceive
he do not like so well, however is so civil as to say it shall be
altered. Thence away to Mrs. Pierces, who was not at home, but gone to
my house to visit me with Mrs. Knipp. I therefore took up the little
girle Betty and my mayde Mary that now lives there and to my house,
where they had been but were gone, so in our way back again met them
coming back again to my house in Cornehill, and there stopped laughing
at our pretty misfortunes, and so I carried them to Fish Streete, and
there treated them with prawns and lobsters, and it beginning to grow
darke we away, but the jest is our horses would not draw us up the Hill,
but we were fain to 'light and stay till the coachman had made them draw
down to the bottom of the Hill, thereby warming their legs, and then
they came up cheerfully enough, and we got up and I carried them home,
and coming home called at my paper ruler's and there found black Nan,
which pleases me mightily, and having saluted her again and again away
home and to bed..... In all my ridings in the coach and intervals my
mind hath been full these three weeks of setting in musique "It is
decreed, &c."

19th. Lay long in bed, so to the office, where all the morning. At noon
dined with Sir W. Warren at the Pope's Head. So back to the office, and
there met with the Commissioners of the Ordnance, where Sir W. Pen being
almost drunk vexed me, and the more because Mr. Chichly observed it with
me, and it was a disparagement to the office. They gone I to my office.
Anon comes home my wife from Brampton, not looked for till Saturday,
which will hinder me of a little pleasure, but I am glad of her coming.
She tells me Pall's business with Ensum is like to go on, but I must
give, and she consents to it, another 100. She says she doubts my father
is in want of money, for rents come in mighty slowly. My mother grows
very unpleasant and troublesome and my father mighty infirm through
his old distemper, which altogether makes me mighty thoughtfull. Having
heard all this and bid her welcome I to the office, where late, and so
home, and after a little more talk with my wife, she to bed and I after
her.

20th. Up, and after an houre or two's talke with my poor wife, who gives
me more and more content every day than other, I abroad by coach to
Westminster, and there met with Mrs. Martin, and she and I over the
water to Stangold, and after a walke in the fields to the King's Head,
and there spent an houre or two with pleasure with her, and eat a tansy
and so parted, and I to the New Exchange, there to get a list of all
the modern plays which I intend to collect and to have them bound
up together. Thence to Mr. Hales's, and there, though against his
particular mind, I had my landskipp done out, and only a heaven made in
the roome of it, which though it do not please me thoroughly now it
is done, yet it will do better than as it was before. Thence to Paul's
Churchyarde, and there bespoke some new books, and so to my ruling
woman's and there did see my work a doing, and so home and to my office
a little, but was hindered of business I intended by being sent for to
Mrs. Turner, who desired some discourse with me and lay her condition
before me, which is bad and poor. Sir Thomas Harvey intends again to
have lodgings in her house, which she prays me to prevent if I can,
which I promised. Thence to talke generally of our neighbours. I find
she tells me the faults of all of them, and their bad words of me and my
wife, and indeed do discover more than I thought. So I told her, and so
will practise that I will have nothing to do with any of them. She ended
all with a promise of shells to my wife, very fine ones indeed, and
seems to have great respect and honour for my wife. So home and to bed.

21st. Up betimes and to the office, there to prepare some things against
the afternoon for discourse about the business of the pursers and
settling the pursers' matters of the fleete according to my proposition.
By and by the office sat, and they being up I continued at the office to
finish my matters against the meeting before the Duke this afternoon,
so home about three to clap a bit of meate in my mouth, and so away with
Sir W. Batten to White Hall, and there to the Duke, but he being to go
abroad to take the ayre, he dismissed us presently without doing any
thing till to-morrow morning. So my Lord Bruncker and I down to walk in
the garden [at White Hall], it being a mighty hot and pleasant day; and
there was the King, who, among others, talked to us a little; and among
other pretty things, he swore merrily that he believed the ketch that
Sir W. Batten bought the last year at Colchester was of his own getting,
it was so thick to its length. Another pleasant thing he said of
Christopher Pett, commending him that he will not alter his moulds of
his ships upon any man's advice; "as," says he, "Commissioner Taylor I
fear do of his New London, that he makes it differ, in hopes of mending
the Old London, built by him." "For," says he, "he finds that God hath
put him into the right, and so will keep in it while he is in." "And,"
says the King, "I am sure it must be God put him in, for no art of
his owne ever could have done it;" for it seems he cannot give a good
account of what he do as an artist. Thence with my Lord Bruncker in his
coach to Hide Parke, the first time I have been there this year. There
the King was; but I was sorry to see my Lady Castlemaine, for the
mourning forceing all the ladies to go in black, with their hair plain
and without any spots, I find her to be a much more ordinary woman than
ever I durst have thought she was; and, indeed, is not so pretty as Mrs.
Stewart, whom I saw there also. Having done at the Park he set me down
at the Exchange, and I by coach home and there to my letters, and they
being done, to writing a large letter about the business of the pursers
to Sir W. Batten against to-morrow's discourse, and so home and to bed.

22nd (Lord's day). Up, and put on my new black coate, long down to my
knees, and with Sir W. Batten to White Hall, where all in deep mourning
for the Queene's mother. There had great discourse, before the Duke
and Sir W. Coventry begun the discourse of the day about the purser's
business, which I seconded, and with great liking to the Duke, whom
however afterward my Lord Bruncker and Sir W. Pen did stop by some thing
they said, though not much to the purpose, yet because our proposition
had some appearance of certain charge to the King it was ruled that for
this year we should try another the same in every respect with ours,
leaving out one circumstance of allowing the pursers the victuals of all
men short of the complement. I was very well satisfied with it and am
contented to try it, wishing it may prove effectual. Thence away with
Sir W. Batten in his coach home, in our way he telling me the certaine
newes, which was afterward confirmed to me this day by several, that the
Bishopp of Munster has made a league [with] the Hollanders, and that our
King and Court are displeased much at it: moreover we are not sure of
Sweden. I home to my house, and there dined mighty well, my poor wife
and Mercer and I. So back again walked to White Hall, and there to and
again in the Parke, till being in the shoemaker's stockes.--[A cant
expression for tight shoes.]--I was heartily weary, yet walked however
to the Queene's Chappell at St. James's, and there saw a little mayde
baptized; many parts and words whereof are the same with that of our
Liturgy, and little that is more ceremonious than ours. Thence walked to
Westminster and eat a bit of bread and drank, and so to Worster House,
and there staid, and saw the Council up, and then back, walked to the
Cockepitt, and there took my leave of the Duke of Albemarle, who is
going to-morrow to sea. He seems mightily pleased with me, which I am
glad of; but I do find infinitely my concernment in being careful to
appear to the King and Duke to continue my care of his business, and to
be found diligent as I used to be. Thence walked wearily as far as Fleet
Streete and so there met a coach and home to supper and to bed, having
sat a great while with Will Joyce, who come to see me, and it is the
first time I have seen him at my house since the plague, and find him
the same impertinent, prating coxcombe that ever he was.

23rd. Being mighty weary last night, lay long this morning, then up and
to the office, where Sir W. Batten, Lord Bruncker and I met, and toward
noon took coach and to White Hall, where I had the opportunity to take
leave of the Prince, and again of the Duke of Albemarle; and saw them
kiss the King's hands and the Duke's; and much content, indeed, there
seems to be in all people at their going to sea, and [they] promise
themselves much good from them. This morning the House of Parliament do
meet, only to adjourne again till winter. The plague, I hear, encreases
in the towne much, and exceedingly in the country everywhere. Thence
walked to Westminster Hall, and after a little stay, there being nothing
now left to keep me there, Betty Howlett being gone, I took coach and
away home, in my way asking in two or three places the worth of pearles,
I being now come to the time that I have long ago promised my wife a
necklace. Dined at home and took Balty with me to Hales's to show him
his sister's picture, and thence to Westminster, and there I to the Swan
and drank, and so back again alone to Hales's and there met my wife and
Mercer, Mrs. Pierce being sitting, and two or three idle people of her
acquaintance more standing by. Her picture do come on well. So staid
until she had done and then set her down at home, and my wife and I and
the girle by coach to Islington, and there eat and drank in the coach
and so home, and there find a girle sent at my desire by Mrs. Michell of
Westminster Hall, to be my girle under the cooke-mayde, Susan. But I am
a little dissatisfied that the girle, though young, is taller and bigger
than Su, and will not, I fear, be under her command, which will trouble
me, and the more because she is recommended by a friend that I would not
have any unkindness with, but my wife do like very well of her. So to
my accounts and journall at my chamber, there being bonfires in the
streete, for being St. George's day, and the King's Coronation, and the
day of the Prince and Duke's going to sea. So having done my business,
to bed.

24th. Up, and presently am told that the girle that came yesterday hath
packed up her things to be gone home again to Enfield, whence she come,
which I was glad of, that we might be at first rid of her altogether
rather than be liable to her going away hereafter. The reason was that
London do not agree with her. So I did give her something, and away she
went. By and by comes Mr. Bland to me, the first time since his coming
from Tangier, and tells me, in short, how all things are out of order
there, and like to be; and the place never likely to come to anything
while the soldiers govern all, and do not encourage trade. He gone I to
the office, where all the morning, and so to dinner, and there in the
afternoon very busy all day till late, and so home to supper and to bed.

25th. Up, and to White Hall to the Duke as usual, and did our business
there. So I away to Westminster (Batty with me, whom I had presented to
Sir W. Coventry) and there told Mrs. Michell of her kinswoman's running
away, which troubled her. So home, and there find another little girle
come from my wife's mother, likely to do well. After dinner I to the
office, where Mr. Prin come to meet about the Chest business; and till
company come, did discourse with me a good while alone in the garden
about the laws of England, telling me the many faults in them; and among
others, their obscurity through multitude of long statutes, which he is
about to abstract out of all of a sort; and as he lives, and Parliaments
come, get them put into laws, and the other statutes repealed, and then
it will be a short work to know the law, which appears a very noble good
thing. By and by Sir W. Batten and Sir W. Rider met with us, and we did
something to purpose about the Chest, and hope we shall go on to do so.
They up, I to present Batty to Sir W. Pen, who at my entreaty did write
a most obliging letter to Harman to use him civilly, but the dissembling
of the rogue is such, that it do not oblige me at all. So abroad to my
ruler's of my books, having, God forgive me! a mind to see Nan there,
which I did, and so back again, and then out again to see Mrs. Bettons,
who were looking out of the window as I come through Fenchurch Streete.
So that indeed I am not, as I ought to be, able to command myself in
the pleasures of my eye. So home, and with my wife and Mercer spent our
evening upon our new leads by our bedchamber singing, while Mrs. Mary
Batelier looked out of the window to us, and we talked together, and
at last bid good night. However, my wife and I staid there talking of
several things with great pleasure till eleven o'clock at night, and it
is a convenience I would not want for any thing in the world, it being,
methinks, better than almost any roome in my house. So having, supped
upon the leads, to bed. The plague, blessed be God! is decreased sixteen
this week.

26th. To the office, where all the morning. At noon home to dinner, and
in the afternoon to my office again, where very busy all the afternoon
and particularly about fitting of Mr. Yeabsly's accounts for the view of
the Lords Commissioners for Tangier. At night home to supper and to bed.

27th. Up (taking Balty with me, who lay at my house last [night] in
order to his going away to-day to sea with the pursers of the Henery,
whom I appointed to call him), abroad to many several places about
several businesses, to my Lord Treasurer's, Westminster, and I know not
where. At noon to the 'Change a little, and there bespoke some maps to
hang in my new roome (my boy's roome) which will be very-pretty. Home to
dinner, and after dinner to the hanging up of maps, and other things
for the fitting of the roome, and now it will certainly be one of the
handsomest and most usefull roomes in my house. So that what with this
room and the room on my leads my house is half as good again as it was.
All this afternoon about this till I was so weary and it was late I
could do no more but finished the room. So I did not get out to the
office all the day long. At night spent a good deale of time with my
wife and Mercer teaching them a song, and so after supper to bed.

28th. Up and to the office. At noon dined at home. After dinner abroad
with my wife to Hales's to see only our pictures and Mrs. Pierce's,
which I do not think so fine as I might have expected it. My wife to her
father's, to carry him some ruling work, which I have advised her to let
him do. It will get him some money. She also is to look out again for
another little girle, the last we had being also gone home the very same
day she came. She was also to look after a necklace of pearle, which she
is mighty busy about, I being contented to lay out L80 in one for her.
I home to my business. By and by comes my wife and presently after, the
tide serving, Balty took leave of us, going to sea, and upon very good
terms, to be Muster-Master of a squadron, which will be worth L100 this
yeare to him, besides keeping him the benefit of his pay in the Guards.
He gone, I very busy all the afternoon till night, among other things,
writing a letter to my brother John, the first I have done since my
being angry with him, and that so sharpe a one too that I was sorry
almost to send it when I had wrote it, but it is preparatory to my
being kind to him, and sending for him up hither when he hath passed his
degree of Master of Arts. So home to supper and to bed.

29th (Lord's day). Up, and to church, where Mr. Mills, a lazy, simple
sermon upon the Devil's having no right to any thing in this world. So
home to dinner, and after dinner I and my boy down by water to Redriffe
and thence walked to Mr. Evelyn's, where I walked in his garden till he
come from Church, with great pleasure reading Ridly's discourse, all my
way going and coming, upon the Civill and Ecclesiastical Law. He being
come home, he and I walked together in the garden with mighty pleasure,
he being a very ingenious man; and the more I know him, the more I love
him. His chief business with me was to propose having my cozen Thomas
Pepys in Commission of the Peace, which I do not know what to say to
till I speake with him, but should be glad of it and will put him upon
it. Thence walked back again reading and so took water and home, where
I find my uncle and aunt Wight, and supped with them upon my leads with
mighty pleasure and mirthe, and they being gone I mighty weary to bed,
after having my haire of my head cut shorter, even close to my skull,
for coolnesse, it being mighty hot weather.

30th. Up and, being ready, to finish my journall for four days past.
To the office, where busy all the morning. At noon dined alone, my wife
gone abroad to conclude about her necklace of pearle. I after dinner
to even all my accounts of this month; and, bless God! I find myself,
notwithstanding great expences of late; viz. L80 now to pay for a
necklace; near L40 for a set of chairs and couch; near L40 for my three
pictures: yet I do gather, and am now worth L5200. My wife comes home
by and by, and hath pitched upon a necklace with three rows, which is a
very good one, and L80 is the price. In the evening, having finished
my accounts to my full content and joyed that I have evened them so
plainly, remembering the trouble my last accounts did give me by being
let alone a little longer than ordinary, by which I am to this day at
a loss for L50, I hope I shall never commit such an error again, for
I cannot devise where the L50 should be, but it is plain I ought to be
worth L50 more than I am, and blessed be God the error was no greater.
In the evening with my [wife] and Mercer by coach to take the ayre as
far as Bow, and eat and drank in the coach by the way and with much
pleasure and pleased with my company. At night home and up to the leads,
but were contrary to expectation driven down again with a stinke by
Sir W. Pen's shying of a shitten pot in their house of office close by,
which do trouble me for fear it do hereafter annoy me. So down to sing a
little and then to bed. So ends this month with great layings-out. Good
health and gettings, and advanced well in the whole of my estate, for
which God make me thankful.




MAY 1666

May 1st. Up, and all the morning at the office. At noon, my cozen Thomas
Pepys did come to me, to consult about the business of his being a
justice of the Peace, which he is much against; and among other reasons,
tells me, as a confidant, that he is not free to exercise punishment
according to the Act against Quakers and other people, for religion. Nor
do he understand Latin, and so is not capable of the place as formerly,
now all warrants do run in Latin. Nor is he in Kent, though he be of
Deptford parish, his house standing in Surry. However, I did bring him
to incline towards it, if he be pressed to take it. I do think it may be
some repute to me to have my kinsman in Commission there, specially if
he behave himself to content in the country. He gone and my wife gone
abroad, I out also to and fro, to see and be seen, among others to find
out in Thames Streete where Betty Howlett is come to live, being married
to Mrs. Michell's son; which I did about the Old Swan, but did not think
fit to go thither or see them. Thence by water to Redriffe, reading
a new French book my Lord Bruncker did give me to-day, "L'Histoire
Amoureuse des Gaules,"

     [This book, which has frequently been reprinted, was written by
     Roger de Rabutin, Comte de Bussy, for the amusement of his mistress,
     Madame de Montglas, and consists of sketches of the chief ladies of
     the court, in which he libelled friends and foes alike.  These
     circulated in manuscript, and were printed at Liege in 1665.  Louis
     XIV. was so much annoyed with the book that he sent the author to
     the Bastille for over a year.]

being a pretty libel against the amours of the Court of France. I walked
up and down Deptford yarde, where I had not been since I come from
living at Greenwich, which is some months. There I met with Mr. Castle,
and was forced against my will to have his company back with me. So we
walked and drank at Halfway house and so to his house, where I drank a
cupp of syder, and so home, where I find Mr. Norbury newly come to town
to see us. After he gone my wife tells me the ill newes that our Susan
is sicke and gone to bed, with great pain in her head and back, which
troubles us all. However we to bed expecting what to-morrow would
produce. She hath we conceive wrought a little too much, having neither
maid nor girle to help her.

2nd. Up and find the girle better, which we are glad of, and with Sir W.
Batten to White Hall by coach. There attended the Duke as usual. Thence
with Captain Cocke, whom I met there, to London, to my office, to
consult about serving him in getting him some money, he being already
tired of his slavery to my Lord Bruncker, and the charge it costs
him, and gets no manner of courtesy from him for it. He gone I home to
dinner, find the girle yet better, so no fear of being forced to send
her out of doors as we intended. After dinner. I by water to White Hall
to a Committee for Tangier upon Mr. Yeabsly's business, which I got
referred to a Committee to examine. Thence among other stops went to my
ruler's house, and there staid a great while with Nan idling away the
afternoon with pleasure. By and by home, so to my office a little, and
then home to supper with my wife, the girle being pretty well again, and
then to bed.

3rd. Up, and all the morning at the office. At noon home, and contrary
to my expectation find my little girle Su worse than she was, which
troubled me, and the more to see my wife minding her paynting and
not thinking of her house business, this being the first day of her
beginning the second time to paynt. This together made me froward that I
was angry with my wife, and would not have Browne to think to dine at my
table with me always, being desirous to have my house to myself without
a stranger and a mechanique to be privy to all my concernments. Upon
this my wife and I had a little disagreement, but it ended by and by,
and then to send up and down for a nurse to take the girle home and
would have given anything. I offered to the only one that we could get
20s. per weeke, and we to find clothes, and bedding and physique, and
would have given 30s., as demanded, but desired an houre or two's time.
So I away by water to Westminster, and there sent for the girle's mother
to Westminster Hall to me; she came and undertakes to get her daughter
a lodging and nurse at next doore to her, though she dare not, for the
parish's sake, whose sexton her husband is, to [have] her into her
owne house. Thence home, calling at my bookseller's and other trifling
places, and in the evening the mother come and with a nurse she has got,
who demanded and I did agree at 10s. per weeke to take her, and so she
away, and my house mighty uncouth, having so few in it, and we shall
want a servant or two by it, and the truth is my heart was a little sad
all the afternoon and jealous of myself. But she went, and we all glad
of it, and so a little to the office, and so home to supper and to bed.

4th. Up and by water to Westminster to Charing Cross (Mr. Gregory for
company with me) to Sir Ph. Warwicke's, who was not within. So I took
Gregory to White Hall, and there spoke with Joseph Williamson to have
leave in the next Gazette to have a general pay for the Chest at Chatham
declared upon such a day in June. Here I left Gregory, and I by coach
back again to Sir Philip Warwicke's, and in the Park met him walking,
so discoursed about the business of striking a quarter's tallys for
Tangier, due this day, which he hath promised to get my Lord Treasurer's
warrant for, and so away hence, and to Mr. Hales, to see what he had
done to Mrs. Pierces picture, and whatever he pretends, I do not think
it will ever be so good a picture as my wife's. Thence home to the
office a little and then to dinner, and had a great fray with my wife
again about Browne's coming to teach her to paynt, and sitting with me
at table, which I will not yield to. I do thoroughly believe she means
no hurte in it; but very angry we were, and I resolved all into my
having my will done, without disputing, be the reason what it will; and
so I will have it. After dinner abroad again and to the New Exchange
about play books, and to White Hall, thinking to have met Sir G.
Carteret, but failed. So to the Swan at Westminster, and there spent a
quarter of an hour with Jane, and thence away home, and my wife coming
home by and by (having been at her mother's to pray her to look out for
a mayde for her) by coach into the fields to Bow, and so home back in
the evening, late home, and after supper to bed, being much out of order
for lack of somebody in the room of Su. This evening, being weary of my
late idle courses, and the little good I shall do the King or myself in
the office, I bound myself to very strict rules till Whitsunday next.

5th. At the office all the morning. After dinner upon a letter from
the fleete from Sir W. Coventry I did do a great deale of worke for the
sending away of the victuallers that are in the river, &c., too much to
remember. Till 10 at night busy about letters and other necessary matter
of the office. About 11 home, it being a fine moonshine and so my wife
and Mercer come into the garden, and, my business being done, we sang
till about twelve at night, with mighty pleasure to ourselves and
neighbours, by their casements opening, and so home to supper and to
bed.

6th (Lord's day). To church. Home, and after dinner walked to White
Hall, thinking to have seen Mr. Coventry, but failed, and therefore
walked clear on foot back again. Busy till night in fitting my
Victualling papers in order, which I through my multitude of business
and pleasure have not examined these several months. Walked back again
home, and so to the Victualling Office, where I met Mr. Gawden, and have
received some satisfaction, though it be short of what I expected, and
what might be expected from me. So after evened I have gone, and so to
supper and to bed.

7th. Up betimes to set my Victualling papers in order against Sir W.
Coventry comes, which indeed makes me very melancholy, being conscious
that I am much to seeke in giving a good answer to his queries about the
Victualling business. At the office mighty busy, and brought myself into
a pretty plausible condition before Sir W. Coventry come, and did give
him a pretty tolerable account of every thing and went with him into the
Victualling office, where we sat and examined his businesses and state
of the victualling of the fleete, which made me in my heart blushe that
I could say no more to it than I did or could. But I trust in God I
shall never be in that condition again. We parted, and I with pretty
good grace, and so home to dinner, where my wife troubled more and more
with her swollen cheek. So to dinner, my sister-in-law with us, who I
find more and more a witty woman; and then I to my Lord Treasurer's and
the Exchequer about my Tangier businesses, and with my content passed by
all things and persons without so much as desiring any stay or loss
of time with them, being by strong vowe obliged on no occasion to stay
abroad but my publique offices. So home again, where I find Mrs. Pierce
and Mrs. Ferrers come to see my wife. I staid a little with them, being
full of business, and so to the office, where busy till late at night
and so weary and a little conscious of my failures to-day, yet proud
that the day is over without more observation on Sir W. Coventry's part,
and so to bed and to sleepe soundly.

8th. Up, and to the office all the morning. At noon dined at home, my
wife's cheek bad still. After dinner to the office again and thither
comes Mr. Downing, the anchor-smith, who had given me 50 pieces in gold
the last month to speake for him to Sir W. Coventry, for his being smith
at Deptford; but after I had got it granted to him, he finds himself not
fit to go on with it, so lets it fall. So has no benefit of my motion. I
therefore in honour and conscience took him home the money, and, though
much to my grief, did yet willingly and forcibly force him to take it
again, the poor man having no mind to have it. However, I made him take
it, and away he went, and I glad to have given him so much cause to
speake well of me. So to my office again late, and then home to supper
to a good lobster with my wife, and then a little to my office again,
and so to bed.

9th. Up by five o'clock, which I have not a long time done, and down the
river by water to Deptford, among other things to examine the state of
Ironworke, in order to the doing something with reference to Downing
that may induce him to returne me the 50 pieces. Walked back again
reading of my Civill Law Book, and so home and by coach to White Hall,
where we did our usual business before the Duke, and heard the Duke
commend Deane's ship "The Rupert" before "The Defyance," built lately by
Castle, in hearing of Sir W. Batten, which pleased me mightily. Thence
by water to Westminster, and there looked after my Tangier order, and so
by coach to Mrs. Pierces, thinking to have gone to Hales's, but she was
not ready, so away home and to dinner, and after dinner out by coach to
Lovett's to have forwarded what I have doing there, but find him and his
pretty wife gone to my house to show me something. So away to my Lord
Treasurer's, and thence to Pierces, where I find Knipp, and I took them
to Hales's to see our pictures finished, which are very pretty, but I
like not hers half so well as I thought at first, it being not so like,
nor so well painted as I expected, or as mine and my wife's are. Thence
with them to Cornhill to call and choose a chimney-piece for Pierces
closett, and so home, where my wife in mighty pain and mightily vexed
at my being abroad with these women; and when they were gone called them
whores and I know not what, which vexed me, having been so innocent with
them. So I with them to Mrs. Turner's and there sat with them a while,
anon my wife sends for me, I come, and what was it but to scold at me
and she would go abroad to take the ayre presently, that she would. So
I left my company and went with her to Bow, but was vexed and spoke not
one word to her all the way going nor coming, or being come home, but
went up straight to bed. Half an hour after (she in the coach leaning on
me as being desirous to be friends) she comes up mighty sicke with a fit
of the cholique and in mighty pain and calls for me out of the bed; I
rose and held her, she prays me to forgive her, and in mighty pain
we put her to bed, where the pain ceased by and by, and so had some
asparagus to our bed side for supper and very kindly afterward to sleepe
and good friends in the morning.

10th. So up, and to the office, where all the morning. At noon home to
dinner and there busy all the afternoon till past six o'clock, and then
abroad with my wife by coach, who is now at great ease, her cheeke being
broke inward. We took with us Mrs. Turner, who was come to visit my wife
just as we were going out. A great deale of tittle tattle discourse to
little purpose, I finding her, though in other things a very discreete
woman, as very a gossip speaking of her neighbours as any body. Going
out towards Hackney by coach for the ayre, the silly coachman carries
us to Shoreditch, which was so pleasant a piece of simplicity in him and
us, that made us mighty merry. So back again late, it being wondrous hot
all the day and night and it lightning exceeding all the way we went and
came, but without thunder. Coming home we called at a little ale-house,
and had an eele pye, of which my wife eat part and brought home the
rest. So being come home we to supper and to bed. This day come our new
cook maid Mary, commended by Mrs. Batters.

11th. Up betimes, and then away with Mr. Yeabsly to my Lord Ashly's,
whither by and by comes Sir H. Cholmly and Creed, and then to my Lord,
and there entered into examination of Mr. Yeabsly's accounts, wherein as
in all other things I find him one of the most distinct men that ever
I did see in my life. He raised many scruples which were to be answered
another day and so parted, giving me an alarme how to provide myself
against the day of my passing my accounts. Thence I to Westminster to
look after the striking of my tallys, but nothing done or to be done
therein. So to the 'Change, to speake with Captain Cocke, among other
things about getting of the silver plates of him, which he promises
to do; but in discourse he tells me that I should beware of my
fellow-officers; and by name told me that my Lord Bruncker should say in
his hearing, before Sir W. Batten, of me, that he could undo the man, if
he would; wherein I think he is a foole; but, however, it is requisite
I be prepared against the man's friendship. Thence home to dinner alone,
my wife being abroad. After dinner to the setting some things in order
in my dining-room; and by and by comes my wife home and Mrs. Pierce
with her, so I lost most of this afternoon with them, and in the evening
abroad with them, our long tour by coach, to Hackney, so to Kingsland,
and then to Islington, there entertaining them by candlelight very well,
and so home with her, set her down, and so home and to bed.

12th. Up to the office very betimes to draw up a letter for the Duke of
Yorke relating to him the badness of our condition in this office for
want of money. That being in good time done we met at the office and
there sat all the morning. At noon home, where I find my wife troubled
still at my checking her last night in the coach in her long stories out
of Grand Cyrus, which she would tell, though nothing to the purpose, nor
in any good manner.

     [Sir Walter Scott observes, in his "Life of Dryden," that the
     romances of Calprenede and Scuderi, those ponderous and unmerciful
     folios, now consigned to oblivion, were, in their day, not only
     universally read and admired, but supposed to furnish the most
     perfect models of gallantry and heroism.  Dr. Johnson read them all.
     "I have," says Mrs. Chapone, "and yet I am still alive, dragged
     through 'Le Grand Cyrus,' in twelve huge volumes; 'Cleopatra,' in
     eight or ten; 'Ibrahim,' 'Clelie,' and some others, whose names, as
     well as all the rest of them, I have forgotten" ("Letters to Mrs.
     Carter").  No wonder that Pepys sat on thorns, when his wife began
     to recite "Le Grand Cyrus" in the coach, "and trembled at the
     impending tale."--B.]

This she took unkindly, and I think I was to blame indeed; but she do
find with reason, that in the company of Pierce, Knipp, or other women
that I love, I do not value her, or mind her as I ought. However very
good friends by and by, and to dinner, and after dinner up to the
putting our dining room in order, which will be clean again anon, but
not as it is to be because of the pictures which are not come home.
To the office and did much business, in the evening to Westminster and
White Hall about business and among other things met Sir G. Downing on
White Hall bridge, and there walked half an hour, talking of the success
of the late new Act; and indeed it is very much, that that hath stood
really in the room of L800,000 now since Christmas, being itself but
L1,250,000. And so I do really take it to be a very considerable thing
done by him; for the beginning, end, and every part of it, is to be
imputed to him. So home by water, and there hard till 12 at night at
work finishing the great letter to the Duke of Yorke against to-morrow
morning, and so home to bed. This day come home again my little girle
Susan, her sicknesse proving an ague, and she had a fit soon almost
as she come home. The fleete is not yet gone from the Nore. The plague
encreases in many places, and is 53 this week with us.

13th (Lord's day). Up, and walked to White Hall, where we all met to
present a letter to the Duke of Yorke, complaining solemnly of the want
of money, and that being done, I to and again up and down Westminster,
thinking to have spent a little time with Sarah at the Swan, or Mrs.
Martin, but was disappointed in both, so walked the greatest part of the
way home, where comes Mr. Symons, my old acquaintance, to dine with me,
and I made myself as good company as I could to him, but he was mighty
impertinent methought too yet, and thereby I see the difference between
myself now and what it was heretofore, when I reckoned him a very brave
fellow. After dinner he and I walked together as far as Cheapside, and
I quite through to Westminster again, and fell by chance into St.
Margett's' Church, where I heard a young man play the foole upon the
doctrine of purgatory. At this church I spied Betty Howlett, who indeed
is mighty pretty, and struck me mightily. After church time, standing in
the Church yarde, she spied me, so I went to her, her father and mother
and husband being with her. They desired and I agreed to go home with
Mr. Michell, and there had the opportunity to have saluted two or three
times Betty and make an acquaintance which they are pleased with, though
not so much as I am or they think I am. I staid here an houre or more
chatting with them in a little sorry garden of theirs by the Bowling
Alley, and so left them and I by water home, and there was in great pain
in mind lest Sir W. Pen, who is going down to the Fleete, should come
to me or send for me to be informed in the state of things, and
particularly the Victualling, that by my pains he might seem wise. So
after spending an houre with my wife pleasantly in her closett, I to bed
even by daylight.

14th. Comes betimes a letter from Sir W. Coventry, that he and Sir G.
Carteret are ordered presently down to the Fleete. I up and saw Sir
W. Pen gone also after them, and so I finding it a leisure day fell to
making cleane my closett in my office, which I did to my content and set
up my Platts again, being much taken also with Griffin's mayde, that
did cleane it, being a pretty mayde. I left her at it, and toward
Westminster myself with my wife by coach and meeting took up Mr. Lovett
the varnisher with us, who is a pleasant speaking and humoured man, so
my wife much taken with him, and a good deale of worke I believe I
shall procure him. I left my wife at the New Exchange and myself to
the Exchequer, to looke after my Tangier tallys, and there met Sir G.
Downing, who shewed me his present practise now begun this day to paste
up upon the Exchequer door a note of what orders upon the new Act are
paid and now in paying, and my Lord of Oxford coming by, also took him,
and shewed him his whole method of keeping his books, and everything of
it, which indeed is very pretty, and at this day there is assigned upon
the Act L804,000. Thence at the New Exchange took up my wife again, and
so home to dinner, and after dinner to my office again to set things in
order. In the evening out with my wife and my aunt Wight, to take the
ayre, and happened to have a pleasant race between our hackney-coach and
a gentleman's. At Bow we eat and drank and so back again, it being very
cool in the evening. Having set home my aunt and come home, I fell to
examine my wife's kitchen book, and find 20s. mistake, which made me
mighty angry and great difference between us, and so in the difference
to bed.

15th. Up and to the office, where we met and sat all the morning. At
noon home to dinner, and after dinner by coach to Sir Philip Warwicke's,
he having sent for me, but was not within, so I to my Lord Crew's, who
is very lately come to towne, and with him talking half an houre of
the business of the warr, wherein he is very doubtful, from our want of
money, that we shall fail. And I do concur with him therein. After some
little discourse of ordinary matters, I away to Sir Philip Warwicke's
again, and was come in, and gone out to my Lord Treasurer's; whither
I followed him, and there my business was, to be told that my Lord
Treasurer hath got L10,000 for us in the Navy, to answer our great
necessities, which I did thank him for; but the sum is not considerable.
So home, and there busy all the afternoon till night, and then home to
supper and to bed.

16th. Up very betimes, and so down the river to Deptford to look after
some business, being by and by to attend the Duke and Mr. Coventry,
and so I was wiling to carry something fresh that I may look as a
man minding business, which I have done too much for a great while to
forfeit, and is now so great a burden upon my mind night and day that I
do not enjoy myself in the world almost. I walked thither, and come back
again by water, and so to White Hall, and did our usual business before
the Duke, and so to the Exchequer, where the lazy rogues have not yet
done my tallys, which vexes me. Thence to Mr. Hales, and paid him for my
picture, and Mr. Hill's, for the first L14 for the picture, and 25s. for
the frame, and for the other L7 for the picture, it being a copy of his
only, and 5s. for the frame; in all, L22 10s. I am very well satisfied
in my pictures, and so took them in another coach home along with me,
and there with great pleasure my wife and I hung them up, and, that
being done, to dinner, where Mrs. Barbara Sheldon come to see us and
dined with us, and we kept her all the day with us, I going down to
Deptford, and, Lord! to see with what itching desire I did endeavour to
see Bagwell's wife, but failed, for which I am glad, only I observe the
folly of my mind that cannot refrain from pleasure at a season above all
others in my life requisite for me to shew my utmost care in. I walked
both going and coming, spending my time reading of my Civill and
Ecclesiastical Law book. Being returned home, I took my wife and Mrs.
Barbary and Mercer out by coach and went our Grand Tour, and baited at
Islington, and so late home about 11 at night, and so with much pleasure
to bed.

17th. Up, lying long, being wearied yesterday with long walking. So
to the office, where all the morning with fresh occasion of vexing at
myself for my late neglect of business, by which I cannot appear half so
usefull as I used to do. Home at noon to dinner, and then to my office
again, where I could not hold my eyes open for an houre, but I drowsed
(so little sensible I apprehend my soul is of the necessity of minding
business), but I anon wakened and minded my business, and did a great
deale with very great pleasure, and so home at night to supper and to
bed, mightily pleased with myself for the business that I have done, and
convinced that if I would but keepe constantly to do the same I might
have leisure enough and yet do all my business, and by the grace of God
so I will. So to bed.

18th. Up by 5 o'clock, and so down by water to Deptford and Blackewall
to dispatch some business. So walked to Dickeshoare, and there took boat
again and home, and thence to Westminster, and attended all the morning
on the Exchequer for a quarter's tallys for Tangier. But, Lord! to see
what a dull, heavy sort of people they are there would make a man mad.
At noon had them and carried them home, and there dined with great
content with my people, and within and at the office all the afternoon
and night, and so home to settle some papers there, and so to bed, being
not very well, having eaten too much lobster at noon at dinner with Mr.
Hollyard, he coming in and commending it so much.

19th. Up, and to the office all the morning. At noon took Mr. Deane
(lately come to towne) home with me to dinner, and there after giving
him some reprimands and good advice about his deportment in the place
where by my interest he is at Harwich, and then declaring my resolution
of being his friend still, we did then fall to discourse about his ship
"Rupert," built by him there, which succeeds so well as he hath got
great honour by it, and I some by recommending him; the King, Duke, and
every body saying it is the best ship that was ever built. And then he
fell to explain to me his manner of casting the draught of water which a
ship will draw before-hand: which is a secret the King and all admire in
him; and he is the first that hath come to any certainty before-hand,
of foretelling the draught of water of a ship before she be launched. I
must confess I am much pleased in his successe in this business, and do
admire at the confidence of Castle who did undervalue the draught Deane
sent up to me, that I was ashamed to owne it or him, Castle asking of me
upon the first sight of it whether he that laid it down had ever built a
ship or no, which made me the more doubtfull of him. He being gone, I to
the office, where much business and many persons to speake with me. Late
home and to bed, glad to be at a little quiett.

20th (Lord's day). With my wife to church in the morning. At noon dined
mighty nobly, ourselves alone. After dinner my wife and Mercer by coach
to Greenwich, to be gossip to Mrs. Daniel's child. I out to Westminster,
and straight to Mrs. Martin's, and there did what I would with her, she
staying at home all the day for me; and not being well pleased with her
over free and loose company, I away to Westminster Abbey, and there fell
in discourse with Mr. Blagrave, whom I find a sober politique man, that
gets money and increase of places, and thence by coach home, and thence
by water after I had discoursed awhile with Mr. Yeabsly, whom I met and
took up in my coach with me, and who hath this day presented my Lord
Ashly with L100 to bespeak his friendship to him in his accounts now
before us; and my Lord hath received it, and so I believe is as bad, as
to bribes, as what the world says of him. Calling on all the Victualling
ships to know what they had of their complements, and so to Deptford, to
enquire after a little business there, and thence by water back again,
all the way coming and going reading my Lord Bacon's "Faber Fortunae,"
which I can never read too often, and so back home, and there find my
wife come home, much pleased with the reception she had there, and she
was godmother, and did hold the child at the Font, and it is called
John. So back again home, and after setting my papers in order and
supping, to bed, desirous to rise betimes in the morning.

21st. Up between 4 and 5 o'clock and to set several papers to rights,
and so to the office, where we had an extraordinary meeting. But, Lord!
how it torments me to find myself so unable to give an account of my
Victualling business, which puts me out of heart in every thing else,
so that I never had a greater shame upon me in my owne mind, nor more
trouble as to publique business than I have now, but I will get out of
it as soon as possibly I can. At noon dined at home, and after dinner
comes in my wife's brother Balty and his wife, he being stepped ashore
from the fleete for a day or two. I away in some haste to my Lord Ashly,
where it is stupendous to see how favourably, and yet closely, my Lord
Ashly carries himself to Mr. Yeabsly, in his business, so as I think
we shall do his business for him in very good manner. But it is a most
extraordinary thing to observe, and that which I would not but have had
the observation of for a great deal of money. Being done there, and
much forwarded Yeabsly's business, I with Sir H. Cholmly to my Lord
Bellassis, who is lately come from Tangier to visit him, but is not
within. So to Westminster Hall a little about business and so home by
water, and then out with my wife, her brother, sister, and Mercer to
Islington, our grand tour, and there eat and drank. But in discourse
I am infinitely pleased with Balty, his deportment in his business of
Muster-Master, and hope mighty well from him, and am glad with all my
heart I put him into this business. Late home and to bed, they also
lying at my house, he intending to go away to-morrow back again to sea.

22nd. Up betimes and to my business of entering some Tangier payments
in my book in order, and then to the office, where very busy all the
morning. At noon home to dinner, Balty being gone back to sea and his
wife dining with us, whom afterward my wife carried home. I after
dinner to the office, and anon out on several occasions, among others
to Lovett's, and there staid by him and her and saw them (in their
poor conditioned manner) lay on their varnish, which however pleased me
mightily to see. Thence home to my business writing letters, and so at
night home to supper and to bed.

23rd. Up by 5 o'clock and to my chamber settling several matters in
order. So out toward White Hall, calling in my way on my Lord Bellassis,
where I come to his bedside, and did give me a full and long account
of his matters, how he left them at Tangier. Declares himself fully
satisfied with my care: seems cunningly to argue for encreasing the
number of men there. Told me the whole story of his gains by the Turky
prizes, which he owns he hath got about L5000 by. Promised me the same
profits Povy was to have had; and in fine, I find him a pretty subtle
man; and so I left him, and to White Hall before the Duke and did our
usual business, and eased my mind of two or three things of weight
that lay upon me about Lanyon's salary, which I have got to be L150 per
annum. Thence to Westminster to look after getting some little for some
great tallys, but shall find trouble in it. Thence homeward and met with
Sir Philip Warwicke, and spoke about this, in which he is scrupulous.
After that to talk of the wants of the Navy. He lays all the fault now
upon the new Act, and owns his owne folly in thinking once so well of it
as to give way to others' endeavours about it, and is grieved at heart
to see what passe things are like to come to. Thence to the Excise
Office to the Commissioners to get a meeting between them and myself and
others about our concernments in the Excise for Tangier, and so to the
'Change awhile, and thence home with Creed, and find my wife at dinner
with Mr. Cooke, who is going down to Hinchinbrooke. After dinner
Creed and I and wife and Mercer out by coach, leaving them at the New
Exchange, while I to White Hall, and there staid at Sir G. Carteret's
chamber till the Council rose, and then he and I, by agreement this
morning, went forth in his coach by Tiburne, to the Parke; discoursing
of the state of the Navy as to money, and the state of the Kingdom too,
how ill able to raise more: and of our office as to the condition of the
officers; he giving me caution as to myself, that there are those that
are my enemies as well as his, and by name my Lord Bruncker, who hath
said some odd speeches against me. So that he advises me to stand on my
guard; which I shall do, and unless my too-much addiction to pleasure
undo me, will be acute enough for any of them. We rode to and again
in the Parke a good while, and at last home and set me down at Charing
Crosse, and thence I to Mrs. Pierces to take up my wife and Mercer,
where I find her new picture by Hales do not please her, nor me indeed,
it making no show, nor is very like, nor no good painting. Home to
supper and to bed, having my right eye sore and full of humour of late,
I think, by my late change of my brewer, and having of 8s. beer.

24th. Up very betimes, and did much business in my chamber. Then to
the office, where busy all the morning. At noon rose in the pleasantest
humour I have seen Sir W. Coventry and the whole board in this
twelvemonth from a pleasant crossing humour Sir W. Batten was in, he
being hungry, and desirous to be gone. Home, and Mr. Hunt come to dine
with me, but I was prevented dining till 4 o'clock by Sir H. Cholmly and
Sir J. Bankes's coming in about some Tangier business. They gone I to
dinner, the others having dined. Mr. Sheply is also newly come out of
the country and come to see us, whom I am glad to see. He left all
well there; but I perceive under some discontent in my Lord's behalfe,
thinking that he is under disgrace with the King; but he is not so at
all, as Sir G. Carteret assures me. They gone I to the office and did
business, and so in the evening abroad alone with my wife to Kingsland,
and so back again and to bed, my right eye continuing very ill of the
rheum, which hath troubled it four or five days.

25th. Up betimes and to my chamber to do business, where the greatest
part of the morning. Then out to the 'Change to speake with Captain
[Cocke], who tells me my silver plates are ready for me, and shall be
sent me speedily; and proposes another proposition of serving us with
a thousand tons of hempe, and tells me it shall bring me 6500, if the
bargain go forward, which is a good word. Thence to Sir G. Carteret, who
is at the pay of the tickets with Sir J. Minnes this day, and here I sat
with them a while, the first time I ever was there, and thence to dinner
with him, a good dinner. Here come a gentleman over from France arrived
here this day, Mr. Browne of St. Mellos, who, among other things, tells
me the meaning of the setting out of doggs every night out of the towne
walls, which are said to secure the city; but it is not so, but only
to secure the anchors, cables, and ships that lie dry, which might
otherwise in the night be liable to be robbed. And these doggs are set
out every night, and called together in every morning by a man with a
home, and they go in very orderly. Thence home, and there find Knipp at
dinner with my wife, now very big, and within a fortnight of lying down.
But my head was full of business and so could have no sport. So I left
them, promising to return and take them out at night, and so to the
Excise Office, where a meeting was appointed of Sir Stephen Fox, the
Cofferer, and myself, to settle the business of our tallys, and it was
so pretty well against another meeting. Thence away home to the office
and out again to Captain Cocke (Mr. Moore for company walking with me
and discoursing and admiring of the learning of Dr. Spencer), and there
he and I discoursed a little more of our matters, and so home, and
(Knipp being gone) took out my wife and Mercer to take the ayre a
little, and so as far as Hackney and back again, and then to bed.

26th. Up betimes and to the office, where all the morning. At noon dined
at home. So to the office again, and a while at the Victualling Office
to understand matters there a little, and thence to the office and
despatched much business, to my great content, and so home to supper and
to bed.

27th (Lord's day). Rose betimes, and to my office till church time to
write two copies of my Will fair, bearing date this day, wherein I
have given my sister Pall L500, my father for his owne and my mother's
support L2,000, to my wife the rest of my estate, but to have L2500
secured to her, though by deducting out of what I have given my father
and my sister. I dispatched all before church time and then to church,
my wife with me. Thence home to dinner, whither come my uncle Wight, and
aunt and uncle Norbury, and Mr. Shepley. A good dinner and very merry.
After dinner we broke up and I by water to Westminster to Mrs. Martin's,
and there sat with her and her husband and Mrs. Burrows, the pretty, an
hour or two, then to the Swan a while, and so home by water, and with my
wife by and by by water as low as Greenwich, for ayre only, and so back
again home to supper and to bed with great pleasure.

28th. Up and to my chamber to do some business there, and then to the
office, where a while, and then by agreement to the Excise Office, where
I waited all the morning for the Cofferer and Sir St. Foxe's coming,
but they did not, so I and the Commissioners lost their labour and
expectation of doing the business we intended. Thence home, where I find
Mr. Lovett and his wife came to see us. They are a pretty couple, and
she a fine bred woman. They dined with us, and Browne, the paynter, and
she plays finely on the lute. My wife and I were well pleased with her
company. After dinner broke up, I to the office and they abroad. All the
afternoon I busy at the office, and down by water to Deptford. Walked
back to Redriffe, and so home to the office again, being thoughtfull
how to answer Sir W. Coventry against to-morrow in the business of the
Victualling, but that I do trust to Tom Wilson, that he will be ready
with a book for me to-morrow morning. So to bed, my wife telling me
where she hath been to-day with my aunt Wight, and seen Mrs. Margaret
Wight, and says that she is one of the beautifullest women that ever she
saw in her life, the most excellent nose and mouth. They have been also
to see pretty Mrs. Batelier, and conclude her to be a prettier woman
than Mrs. Pierce, whom my wife led my aunt to see also this day.

29th (King's birth-day and Restauration day). Waked with the ringing
of the bells all over the towne; so up before five o'clock, and to the
office, where we met, and I all the morning with great trouble upon
my spirit to think how I should come off in the afternoon when Sir W.
Coventry did go to the Victualling office to see the state of matters
there, and methinks by his doing of it without speaking to me, and only
with Sir W. Pen, it must be of design to find my negligence. However,
at noon I did, upon a small invitation of Sir W. Pen's, go and dine with
Sir W. Coventry at his office, where great good cheer and many pleasant
stories of Sir W. Coventry; but I had no pleasure in them. However, I
had last night and this morning made myself a little able to report
how matters were, and did readily go with them after dinner to the
Victualling office; and there, beyond belief, did acquit myself very
well to full content; so that, beyond expectation, I got over this
second rub in this business; and if ever I fall on it again, I deserve
to be undone. Being broke up there, I with a merry heart home to my
office, and thither my wife comes to me, to tell me, that if I would see
the handsomest woman in England, I shall come home presently; and who
should it be but the pretty lady of our parish, that did heretofore sit
on the other side of our church, over against our gallery, that is
since married; she with Mrs. Anne Jones, one of this parish, that dances
finely, and Mrs. sister did come to see her this afternoon, and so I
home and there find Creed also come to me. So there I spent most of the
afternoon with them, and indeed she is a pretty black woman, her name
Mrs. Horsely. But, Lord! to see how my nature could not refrain from the
temptation; but I must invite them to Foxhall, to Spring Gardens,
though I had freshly received minutes of a great deale of extraordinary
business. However I could not helpe it, but sent them before with Creed,
and I did some of my business; and so after them, and find them there,
in an arbour, and had met with Mrs. Pierce, and some company with her.
So here I spent 20s. upon them, and were pretty merry. Among other
things, had a fellow that imitated all manner of birds, and doggs, and
hogs, with his voice, which was mighty pleasant. Staid here till night:
then set Mrs. Pierce in at the New Exchange; and ourselves took coach,
and so set Mrs. Horsely home, and then home ourselves, but with great
trouble in the streets by bonefires, it being the King's birth-day and
day of Restauration; but, Lord! to see the difference how many there
were on the other side, and so few ours, the City side of the Temple,
would make one wonder the difference between the temper of one sort of
people and the other: and the difference among all between what they
do now, and what it was the night when Monk come into the City. Such a
night as that I never think to see again, nor think it can be. After I
come home I was till one in the morning with Captain Cocke drawing up a
contract with him intended to be offered to the Duke to-morrow, which,
if it proceeds, he promises me L500.

30th. Up and to my office, there to settle some business in order.to our
waiting on the Duke to-day. That done to White Hall to Sir W. Coventry's
chamber, where I find the Duke gone out with the King to-day on hunting.
So after some discourse with him, I by water to Westminster, and there
drew a draught of an order for my Lord Treasurer to sign for my having
some little tallys made me in lieu of two great ones, of L2000 each, to
enable me to pay small sums therewith. I shewed it to Sir R. Long and
had his approbation, and so to Sir Ph. Warwicke's, and did give it him
to get signed. So home to my office, and there did business. By and by
toward noon word is brought me that my father and my sister are come. I
expected them to-day, but not so soon. I to them, and am heartily glad
to see them, especially my father, who, poor man, looks very well, and
hath rode up this journey on horseback very well, only his eyesight and
hearing is very bad. I staid and dined with them, my wife being gone by
coach to Barnet, with W. Hewer and Mercer, to meet them, and they did
come Ware way. After dinner I left them to dress themselves and I abroad
by appointment to my Lord Ashly, who, it is strange to see, how prettily
he dissembles his favour to Yeabsly's business, which none in the world
could mistrust only I, that am privy to his being bribed. Thence
to White Hall, and there staid till the Council was up, with Creed
expecting a meeting of Tangier to end Yeabsly's business, but we could
not procure it. So I to my Lord Treasurer's and got my warrant, and
then to Lovett's, but find nothing done there. So home and did a little
business at the office, and so down by water to Deptford and back again
home late, and having signed some papers and given order in business,
home, where my wife is come home, and so to supper with my father, and
mighty pleasant we were, and my wife mighty kind to him and Pall, and
so after supper to bed, myself being sleepy, and my right eye still very
sore, as it has been now about five days or six, which puts me out of
tune. To-night my wife tells me newes has been brought her that Balty's
wife is brought to bed, by some fall or fit, before her time, of a great
child but dead. If the woman do well we have no reason to be sorry,
because his staying a little longer without a child will be better for
him and her.

31st. Waked very betimes in the morning by extraordinary thunder and
rain, which did keep me sleeping and waking till very late, and it being
a holiday and my eye very sore, and myself having had very little sleep
for a good while till nine o'clock, and so up, and so saw all my family
up, and my father and sister, who is a pretty good-bodied woman, and not
over thicke, as I thought she would have been, but full of freckles,
and not handsome in face. And so I out by water among the ships, and to
Deptford and Blackewall about business, and so home and to dinner with
my father and sister and family, mighty pleasant all of us; and, among
other things, with a sparrow that our Mercer hath brought up now for
three weeks, which is so tame that it flies up and down, and upon the
table, and eats and pecks, and do everything so pleasantly, that we are
mightily pleased with it. After dinner I to my papers and accounts of
this month to sett all straight, it being a publique Fast-day appointed
to pray for the good successe of the fleete. But it is a pretty thing to
consider how little a matter they make of this keeping of a Fast, that
it was not so much as declared time enough to be read in the churches
the last Sunday; but ordered by proclamation since: I suppose upon some
sudden newes of the Dutch being come out. To my accounts and settled
them clear; but to my grief find myself poorer than I was the last by
near L20, by reason of my being forced to return L50 to Downing, the
smith, which he had presented me with. However, I am well contented,
finding myself yet to be worth L5,200. Having done, to supper with my
wife, and then to finish the writing fair of my accounts, and so to bed.
This day come to town Mr. Homewood, and I took him home in the evening
to my chamber, and discoursed with him about my business of the
Victualling, which I have a mind to employ him in, and he is desirous of
also, but do very ingenuously declare he understands it not so well as
other things, and desires to be informed in the nature of it before he
attempts it, which I like well, and so I carried him to Mr. Gibson to
discourse with him about it, and so home again to my accounts. Thus
ends this month, with my mind oppressed by my defect in my duty of the
Victualling, which lies upon me as a burden, till I get myself into
a better posture therein, and hinders me and casts down my courage in
every thing else that belongs to me, and the jealousy I have of Sir W.
Coventry's being displeased with me about it; but I hope in a little
time to remedy all. As to publique business; by late tidings of the
French fleete being come to Rochelle (how true, though, I know not) our
fleete is divided; Prince Rupert being gone with about thirty ships to
the Westward as is conceived to meet the French, to hinder their coming
to join with the Dutch. My Lord Duke of Albemarle lies in the Downes
with the rest, and intends presently to sail to the Gunfleete.




JUNE 1666

June 1st. Being prevented yesterday in meeting by reason of the fast
day, we met to-day all the morning. At noon I and my father, wife and
sister, dined at Aunt Wight's here hard by at Mr. Woolly's, upon sudden
warning, they being to go out of town to-morrow. Here dined the faire
Mrs. Margaret Wight, who is a very fine lady, but the cast of her eye,
got only by an ill habit, do her much wrong and her hands are bad;
but she hath the face of a noble Roman lady. After dinner my uncle
and Woolly and I out into their yarde, to talke about what may be done
hereafter to all our profits by prizegoods, which did give us reason to
lament the losse of the opportunity of the last yeare, which, if we were
as wise as we are now, and at the peaceable end of all those troubles
that we met with, all might have been such a hit as will never come
again in this age, and so I do really believe it. Thence home to my
office and there did much business, and at night home to my father to
supper and to bed.

2nd. Up, and to the office, where certain newes is brought us of a
letter come to the King this morning from the Duke of Albemarle, dated
yesterday at eleven o'clock, as they were sailing to the Gunfleete, that
they were in sight of the Dutch fleete, and were fitting themselves
to fight them; so that they are, ere this, certainly engaged; besides,
several do averr they heard the guns all yesterday in the afternoon.
This put us at the Board into a tosse. Presently come orders for our
sending away to the fleete a recruite of 200 soldiers. So I rose from
the table, and to the Victualling office, and thence upon the River
among several vessels, to consider of the sending them away; and lastly,
down to Greenwich, and there appointed two yachts to be ready for them;
and did order the soldiers to march to Blackewall. Having set all things
in order against the next flood, I went on shore with Captain Erwin at
Greenwich, and into the Parke, and there we could hear the guns from
the fleete most plainly. Thence he and I to the King's Head and there
bespoke a dish of steaks for our dinner about four o'clock. While that
was doing, we walked to the water-side, and there seeing the King and
Duke come down in their barge to Greenwich-house, I to them, and did
give them an account [of] what I was doing. They went up to the Parke
to hear the guns of the fleete go off. All our hopes now are that Prince
Rupert with his fleete is coming back and will be with the fleete this
even: a message being sent to him to that purpose on Wednesday last; and
a return is come from him this morning, that he did intend to sail from
St. Ellen's point about four in the afternoon on Wednesday [Friday],
which was yesterday; which gives us great hopes, the wind being very
fair, that he is with them this even, and the fresh going off of the
guns makes us believe the same. After dinner, having nothing else to do
till flood, I went and saw Mrs. Daniel, to whom I did not tell that the
fleets were engaged, because of her husband, who is in the R. Charles.
Very pleasant with her half an hour, and so away and down to Blackewall,
and there saw the soldiers (who were by this time gotten most of them
drunk) shipped off. But, Lord! to see how the poor fellows kissed their
wives and sweethearts in that simple manner at their going off, and
shouted, and let off their guns, was strange sport. In the evening come
up the River the Katharine yacht, Captain Fazeby, who hath brought over
my Lord of Alesbury and Sir Thomas Liddall (with a very pretty daughter,
and in a pretty travelling-dress) from Flanders, who saw the Dutch
fleete on Thursday, and ran from them; but from that houre to this hath
not heard one gun, nor any newes of any fight. Having put the soldiers
on board, I home and wrote what I had to write by the post, and so home
to supper and to bed, it being late.

3rd (Lord's-day; Whit-sunday). Up, and by water to White Hall, and there
met with Mr. Coventry, who tells me the only news from the fleete is
brought by Captain Elliott, of The Portland, which, by being run on
board by The Guernsey, was disabled from staying abroad; so is come in
to Aldbrough. That he saw one of the Dutch great ships blown up, and
three on fire. That they begun to fight on Friday; and at his coming
into port, he could make another ship of the King's coming in, which he
judged to be the Rupert: that he knows of no other hurt to our ships.
With this good newes I home by water again, and to church in the
sermon-time, and with great joy told it my fellows in the pew. So home
after church time to dinner, and after dinner my father, wife, sister,
and Mercer by water to Woolwich, while I walked by land, and saw the
Exchange as full of people, and hath been all this noon as of any other
day, only for newes. I to St. Margaret's, Westminster, and there saw at
church my pretty Betty Michell, and thence to the Abbey, and so to Mrs.
Martin, and there did what 'je voudrais avec her.... So by and by he
come in, and after some discourse with him I away to White Hall, and
there met with this bad newes farther, that the Prince come to Dover but
at ten o'clock last night, and there heard nothing of a fight; so that
we are defeated of all our hopes of his helpe to the fleete. It is also
reported by some Victuallers that the Duke of Albemarle and Holmes their
flags were shot down, and both fain to come to anchor to renew their
rigging and sails. A letter is also come this afternoon, from Harman
in the Henery; which is she [that] was taken by Elliott for the Rupert;
that being fallen into the body of the Dutch fleete, he made his way
through them, was set on by three fire-ships one after another, got two
of them off, and disabled the third; was set on fire himself; upon
which many of his men leapt into the sea and perished; among others, the
parson first. Have lost above 100 men, and a good many women (God knows
what is become of Balty), and at last quenched his own fire and got to
Aldbrough; being, as all say, the greatest hazard that ever any ship
escaped, and as bravely managed by him. The mast of the third fire-ship
fell into their ship on fire, and hurt Harman's leg, which makes him
lame now, but not dangerous. I to Sir G. Carteret, who told me there
hath been great bad management in all this; that the King's orders
that went on Friday for calling back the Prince, were sent but by the
ordinary post on Wednesday; and come to the Prince his hands but on
Friday; and then, instead of sailing presently, he stays till four in
the evening. And that which is worst of all, the Hampshire, laden with
merchants' money, come from the Straights, set out with or but just
before the fleete, and was in the Downes by five in the clock yesterday
morning; and the Prince with his fleete come to Dover but at ten of the
clock at night. This is hard to answer, if it be true. This puts great
astonishment into the King, and Duke, and Court, every body being out of
countenance. So meeting Creed, he and I by coach to Hide Parke alone to
talke of these things, and do blesse God that my Lord Sandwich was
not here at this time to be concerned in a business like to be so
misfortunate. It was a pleasant thing to consider how fearfull I was of
being seen with Creed all this afternoon, for fear of people's thinking
that by our relation to my Lord Sandwich we should be making ill
construction of the Prince's failure. But, God knows, I am heartily
sorry for the sake of the whole nation, though, if it were not for that,
it would not be amisse to have these high blades find some checke to
their presumption and their disparaging of as good men. Thence set him
down in Covent Guarden and so home by the 'Change, which is full of
people still, and all talk highly of the failure of the Prince in
not making more haste after his instructions did come, and of our
managements here in not giving it sooner and with more care and oftener.
Thence. After supper to bed.

4th. Up, and with Sir J. Minnes and Sir W. Pen to White Hall in the
latter's coach, where, when we come, we find the Duke at St. James's,
whither he is lately gone to lodge. So walking through the Parke we saw
hundreds of people listening at the Gravel-pits,--[Kensington]--and to
and again in the Parke to hear the guns, and I saw a letter, dated last
night, from Strowd, Governor of Dover Castle, which says that the Prince
come thither the night before with his fleete, but that for the guns
which we writ that we heard, it is only a mistake for thunder;

     [Evelyn was in his garden when he heard the guns, and be at once set
     off to Rochester and the coast, but he found that nothing had been
     heard at Deal (see his "Diary," June 1st, 1666).]

and so far as to yesterday it is a miraculous thing that we all Friday,
and Saturday and yesterday, did hear every where most plainly the guns
go off, and yet at Deale and Dover to last night they did not hear one
word of a fight, nor think they heard one gun. This, added to what I
have set down before the other day about the Katharine, makes room for
a great dispute in philosophy, how we should hear it and they not, the
same wind that brought it to us being the same that should bring it to
them: but so it is. Major Halsey, however (he was sent down on purpose
to hear newes), did bring newes this morning that he did see the Prince
and his fleete at nine of the clock yesterday morning, four or five
leagues to sea behind the Goodwin, so that by the hearing of the guns
this morning we conclude he is come to the fleete. After wayting upon
the Duke, Sir W. Pen (who was commanded to go to-night by water down to
Harwich, to dispatch away all the ships he can) and I home, drinking
two bottles of Cocke ale in the streete in his new fine coach, where no
sooner come, but newes is brought me of a couple of men come to speak
with me from the fleete; so I down, and who should it be but Mr. Daniel,
all muffled up, and his face as black as the chimney, and covered with
dirt, pitch, and tarr, and powder, and muffled with dirty clouts, and
his right eye stopped with okum. He is come last night at five o'clock
from the fleete, with a comrade of his that hath endangered another eye.
They were set on shore at Harwich this morning, and at two o'clock, in
a catch with about twenty more wounded men from the Royall Charles. They
being able to ride, took post about three this morning, and were here
between eleven and twelve. I went presently into the coach with them,
and carried them to Somerset-House-stairs, and there took water (all the
world gazing upon us, and concluding it to be newes from the fleete, and
every body's face appeared expecting of newes) to the Privy-stairs, and
left them at Mr. Coventry's lodging (he, though, not being there); and
so I into the Parke to the King, and told him my Lord Generall was well
the last night at five o'clock, and the Prince come with his fleete and
joyned with his about seven. The King was mightily pleased with this
newes, and so took me by the hand and talked a little of it. Giving him
the best account I could; and then he bid me to fetch the two seamen to
him, he walking into the house. So I went and fetched the seamen into
the Vane room to him, and there he heard the whole account.

                                THE FIGHT.

How we found the Dutch fleete at anchor on Friday half seas over,
between Dunkirke and Ostend, and made them let slip their anchors. They
about ninety, and we less than sixty. We fought them, and put them to
the run, till they met with about sixteen sail of fresh ships, and so
bore up again. The fight continued till night, and then again the next
morning from five till seven at night. And so, too, yesterday morning
they begun again, and continued till about four o'clock, they chasing
us for the most part of Saturday and yesterday, we flying from them. The
Duke himself, then those people were put into the catch, and by and by
spied the Prince's fleete coming, upon which De Ruyter called a little
council (being in chase at this time of us), and thereupon their fleete
divided into two squadrons; forty in one, and about thirty in the other
(the fleete being at first about ninety, but by one accident or other,
supposed to be lessened to about seventy); the bigger to follow the
Duke, the less to meet the Prince. But the Prince come up with the
Generall's fleete, and the Dutch come together again and bore towards
their own coast, and we with them; and now what the consequence of this
day will be, at that time fighting, we know not. The Duke was forced
to come to anchor on Friday, having lost his sails and rigging. No
particular person spoken of to be hurt but Sir W. Clerke, who hath lost
his leg, and bore it bravely. The Duke himself had a little hurt in his
thigh, but signified little. The King did pull out of his pocket about
twenty pieces in gold, and did give it Daniel for himself and his
companion; and so parted, mightily pleased with the account he did
give him of the fight, and the successe it ended with, of the Prince's
coming, though it seems the Duke did give way again and again. The King
did give order for care to be had of Mr. Daniel and his companion; and
so we parted from him, and then met the Duke [of York], and gave him the
same account: and so broke up, and I left them going to the surgeon's
and I myself by water to the 'Change, and to several people did give
account of the business. So home about four o'clock to dinner, and was
followed by several people to be told the newes, and good newes it is.
God send we may hear a good issue of this day's business! After I
had eat something I walked to Gresham College, where I heard my Lord
Bruncker was, and there got a promise of the receipt of the fine
varnish, which I shall be glad to have. Thence back with Mr. Hooke to
my house and there lent some of my tables of naval matters, the names
of rigging and the timbers about a ship, in order to Dr. Wilkins' book
coming out about the Universal Language. Thence, he being gone, to the
Crown, behind the 'Change, and there supped at the club with my Lord
Bruncker, Sir G. Ent, and others of Gresham College; and all our
discourse is of this fight at sea, and all are doubtful of the successe,
and conclude all had been lost if the Prince had not come in, they
having chased us the greatest part of Saturday and Sunday. Thence with
my Lord Bruncker and Creed by coach to White Hall, where fresh letters
are come from Harwich, where the Gloucester, Captain Clerke, is come in,
and says that on Sunday night upon coming in of the Prince, the Duke did
fly; but all this day they have been fighting; therefore they did face
again, to be sure. Captain Bacon of The Bristoll is killed. They cry
up Jenings of The Ruby, and Saunders of The Sweepstakes. They condemn
mightily Sir Thomas Teddiman for a coward, but with what reason time
must shew. Having heard all this Creed and I walked into the Parke
till 9 or 10 at night, it being fine moonshine, discoursing of the
unhappinesse of our fleete, what it would have been if the Prince
had not come in, how much the Duke hath failed of what he was so
presumptuous of, how little we deserve of God Almighty to give us better
fortune, how much this excuses all that was imputed to my Lord Sandwich,
and how much more he is a man fit to be trusted with all those matters
than those that now command, who act by nor with any advice, but rashly
and without any order. How bad we are at intelligence that should give
the Prince no sooner notice of any thing but let him come to Dover
without notice of any fight, or where the fleete were, or any thing
else, nor give the Duke any notice that he might depend upon the
Prince's reserve; and lastly, of how good use all may be to checke our
pride and presumption in adventuring upon hazards upon unequal force
against a people that can fight, it seems now, as well as we, and that
will not be discouraged by any losses, but that they will rise again.
Thence by water home, and to supper (my father, wife, and sister having
been at Islington today at Pitt's) and to bed.

5th. Up, and to the office, where all the morning, expecting every houre
more newes of the fleete and the issue of yesterday's fight, but
nothing come. At noon, though I should have dined with my Lord Mayor and
Aldermen at an entertainment of Commissioner Taylor's, yet it being a
time of expectation of the successe of the fleete, I did not go, but
dined at home, and after dinner by water down to Deptford (and Woolwich,
where I had not been since I lodged there, and methinks the place has
grown natural to me), and thence down to Longreach, calling on all the
ships in the way, seeing their condition for sayling, and what they
want. Home about 11 of the clock, and so eat a bit and to bed, having
received no manner of newes this day, but of The Rainbow's being put in
from the fleete, maimed as the other ships are, and some say that Sir W.
Clerke is dead of his leg being cut off.

6th. Up betimes, and vexed with my people for having a key taken out of
the chamber doors and nobody knew where it was, as also with my boy for
not being ready as soon as I, though I called him, whereupon I boxed him
soundly, and then to my business at the office and on the Victualling
Office, and thence by water to St. James's, whither he [the Duke of
York] is now gone, it being a monthly fast-day for the plague. There we
all met, and did our business as usual with the Duke, and among other
things had Captain Cocke's proposal of East country goods read, brought
by my Lord Bruncker, which I make use of as a monkey do the cat's foot.
Sir W. Coventry did much oppose it, and it's likely it will not do;
so away goes my hopes of L500. Thence after the Duke into the Parke,
walking through to White Hall, and there every body listening for guns,
but none heard, and every creature is now overjoyed and concludes upon
very good grounds that the Dutch are beaten because we have heard no
guns nor no newes of our fleete. By and by walking a little further, Sir
Philip Frowde did meet the Duke with an expresse to Sir W. Coventry
(who was by) from Captain Taylor, the Storekeeper at Harwich, being the
narration of Captain Hayward of The Dunkirke; who gives a very serious
account, how upon Monday the two fleetes fought all day till seven at
night, and then the whole fleete of Dutch did betake themselves to a
very plain flight, and never looked back again. That Sir Christopher
Mings is wounded in the leg; that the Generall is well. That it is
conceived reasonably, that of all the Dutch fleete, which, with what
recruits they had, come to one hundred sayle, there is not above fifty
got home; and of them, few if any of their flags. And that little
Captain Bell, in one of the fire-ships, did at the end of the day fire a
ship of 70 guns. We were all so overtaken with this good newes, that the
Duke ran with it to the King, who was gone to chappell, and there all
the Court was in a hubbub, being rejoiced over head and ears in this
good newes. Away go I by coach to the New Exchange, and there did spread
this good newes a little, though I find it had broke out before. And so
home to our own church, it being the common Fast-day, and it was just
before sermon; but, Lord! how all the people in the church stared upon
me to see me whisper to Sir John Minnes and my Lady Pen. Anon I saw
people stirring and whispering below, and by and by comes up the sexton
from my Lady Ford to tell me the newes (which I had brought), being now
sent into the church by Sir W. Batten in writing, and handed from pew
to pew. But that which pleased me as much as the newes, was, to have the
fair Mrs. Middleton at our church, who indeed is a very beautiful lady.
Here after sermon comes to our office 40 people almost of all sorts and
qualities to hear the newes, which I took great delight to tell them.
Then home and found my wife at dinner, not knowing of my being at
church, and after dinner my father and she out to Hales's, where my
father is to begin to sit to-day for his picture, which I have a desire
to have. I all the afternoon at home doing some business, drawing up my
vowes for the rest of the yeare to Christmas; but, Lord! to see in what
a condition of happiness I am, if I would but keepe myself so; but my
love of pleasure is such, that my very soul is angry with itself for my
vanity in so doing. Anon took coach and to Hales's, but he was gone out,
and my father and wife gone. So I to Lovett's, and there to my trouble
saw plainly that my project of varnished books will not take, it not
keeping colour, not being able to take polishing upon a single paper.
Thence home, and my father and wife not coming in, I proceeded with my
coach to take a little ayre as far as Bow all alone, and there turned
back and home; but before I got home, the bonefires were lighted all the
towne over, and I going through Crouched Friars, seeing Mercer at her
mother's gate, stopped, and 'light, and into her mother's, the first
time I ever was there, and find all my people, father and all, at a
very fine supper at W. Hewer's lodging, very neatly, and to my great
pleasure. After supper, into his chamber, which is mighty fine
with pictures and every thing else, very curious, which pleased me
exceedingly. Thence to the gate, with the women all about me, and Mrs.
Mercer's son had provided a great many serpents, and so I made the women
all fire some serpents. By and by comes in our faire neighbour, Mrs.
Turner, and two neighbour's daughters, Mrs. Tite, the elder of whom, a
long red-nosed silly jade; the younger, a pretty black girle, and the
merriest sprightly jade that ever I saw. With them idled away the whole
night till twelve at night at the bonefire in the streets. Some of the
people thereabouts going about with musquets, and did give me two or
three vollies of their musquets, I giving them a crowne to drink; and
so home. Mightily pleased with this happy day's newes, and the more,
because confirmed by Sir Daniel Harvy, who was in the whole fight with
the Generall, and tells me that there appear but thirty-six in all of
the Dutch fleete left at the end of the voyage when they run home. The
joy of the City was this night exceeding great.

7th. Up betimes, and to my office about business (Sir W. Coventry having
sent me word that he is gone down to the fleete to see how matters
stand, and to be back again speedily); and with the same expectation of
congratulating ourselves with the victory that I had yesterday. But my
Lord Bruncker and Sir T. H. that come from Court, tell me quite contrary
newes, which astonishes me: that is to say, that we are beaten, lost
many ships and good commanders; have not taken one ship of the enemy's;
and so can only report ourselves a victory; nor is it certain that we
were left masters of the field. But, above all, that The Prince run on
shore upon the Galloper, and there stuck; was endeavoured to be fetched
off by the Dutch, but could not; and so they burned her; and Sir G.
Ascue is taken prisoner, and carried into Holland. This newes do much
trouble me, and the thoughts of the ill consequences of it, and the
pride and presumption that brought us to it. At noon to the 'Change, and
there find the discourse of towne, and their countenances much changed;
but yet not very plain. So home to dinner all alone, my father and
people being gone all to Woolwich to see the launching of the new ship
The Greenwich, built by Chr. Pett. I left alone with little Mrs. Tooker,
whom I kept with me in my chamber all the afternoon, and did what I
would with her. By and by comes Mr. Wayth to me; and discoursing of our
ill successe, he tells me plainly from Captain Page's own mouth (who
hath lost his arm in the fight), that the Dutch did pursue us two hours
before they left us, and then they suffered us to go on homewards, and
they retreated towards their coast: which is very sad newes. Then to
my office and anon to White Hall, late, to the Duke of York to see what
commands he hath and to pray a meeting to-morrow for Tangier in behalf
of Mr. Yeabsly, which I did do and do find the Duke much damped in his
discourse, touching the late fight, and all the Court talk sadly of it.
The Duke did give me several letters he had received from the fleete,
and Sir W. Coventry and Sir W. Pen, who are gone down thither, for me to
pick out some works to be done for the setting out the fleete again;
and so I took them home with me, and was drawing out an abstract of them
till midnight. And as to newes, I do find great reason to think that we
are beaten in every respect, and that we are the losers. The Prince upon
the Galloper, where both the Royall Charles and Royall Katharine had
come twice aground, but got off. The Essex carried into Holland; the
Swiftsure missing (Sir William Barkeley) ever since the beginning of
the fight. Captains Bacon, Tearne, Wood, Mootham, Whitty, and Coppin,
slayne. The Duke of Albemarle writes, that he never fought with worse
officers in his life, not above twenty of them behaving themselves like
men. Sir William Clerke lost his leg; and in two days died. The Loyall
George, Seven Oakes, and Swiftsure, are still missing, having never,
as the Generall writes himself, engaged with them. It was as great an
alteration to find myself required to write a sad letter instead of a
triumphant one to my Lady Sandwich this night, as ever on any occasion I
had in my life. So late home and to bed.

8th. Up very betimes and to attend the Duke of York by order, all of
us to report to him what the works are that are required of us and to
divide among us, wherein I have taken a very good share, and more than
I can perform, I doubt. Thence to the Exchequer about some Tangier
businesses, and then home, where to my very great joy I find Balty come
home without any hurt, after the utmost imaginable danger he hath gone
through in the Henery, being upon the quarterdeck with Harman all the
time; and for which service Harman I heard this day commended most
seriously and most eminently by the Duke of Yorke. As also the Duke
did do most utmost right to Sir Thomas Teddiman, of whom a scandal was
raised, but without cause, he having behaved himself most eminently
brave all the whole fight, and to extraordinary great service and
purpose, having given Trump himself such a broadside as was hardly
ever given to any ship. Mings is shot through the face, and into the
shoulder, where the bullet is lodged. Young Holmes' is also ill wounded,
and Ather in The Rupert. Balty tells me the case of The Henery; and it
was, indeed, most extraordinary sad and desperate. After dinner Balty
and I to my office, and there talked a great deal of this fight; and I
am mightily pleased in him and have great content in, and hopes of his
doing well. Thence out to White Hall to a Committee for Tangier, but
it met not. But, Lord! to see how melancholy the Court is, under the
thoughts of this last overthrow (for so it is), instead of a victory,
so much and so unreasonably expected. Thence, the Committee not meeting,
Creed and I down the river as low as Sir W. Warren's, with whom I
did motion a business that may be of profit to me, about buying some
lighters to send down to the fleete, wherein he will assist me. So back
again, he and I talking of the late ill management of this fight, and
of the ill management of fighting at all against so great a force
bigger than ours, and so to the office, where we parted, but with this
satisfaction that we hear the Swiftsure, Sir W. Barkeley, is come in
safe to the Nore, after her being absent ever since the beginning of
the fight, wherein she did not appear at all from beginning to end. But
wherever she has been, they say she is arrived there well, which I pray
God however may be true. At the office late, doing business, and so home
to supper and to bed.

9th. Up, and to St. James's, there to wait on the Duke of Yorke, and had
discourse with him about several businesses of the fleete. But, Lord! to
see how the Court is divided about The Swiftsure and The Essex's being
safe. And wagers and odds laid on both sides. I did tell the Duke how
Sir W. Batten did tell me this morning that he was sure the Swiftsure is
safe. This put them all in a great joy and certainty of it, but this
I doubt will prove nothing. Thence to White Ball in expectation of a
meeting of Tangier, and we did industriously labour to have it this
morning; but we could not get a fifth person there, so after much pains
and thoughts on my side on behalfe of Yeabsly, we were fain to breake
up. But, Lord! to see with what patience Lord Ashly did stay all the
morning to get a Committee, little thinking that I know the reason of
his willingnesse. So I home to dinner and back again to White Hall,
and, being come thither a little too soon, went to Westminster Hall, and
bought a payre of gloves, and to see how people do take this late fight
at sea, and I find all give over the thoughts of it as a victory and to
reckon it a great overthrow. So to White Hall, and there when we were
come all together in certain expectation of doing our business
to Yeabsly's full content, and us that were his friends, my Lord
Peterborough (whether through some difference between him and my Lord
Ashly, or him and me or Povy, or through the falsenesse of Creed, I know
not) do bring word that the Duke of Yorke (who did expressly bid me wait
at the Committee for the dispatch of the business) would not have us go
forward in this business of allowing the losse of the ships till Sir
G. Carteret and Sir W. Coventry were come to towne, which was the very
thing indeed which we would have avoided. This being told us, we broke
up doing nothing, to my great discontent, though I said nothing, and
afterwards I find by my Lord Ashly's discourse to me that he is troubled
mightily at it, and indeed it is a great abuse of him and of the whole
Commissioners that nothing of that nature can be done without Sir G.
Carteret or Sir W. Coventry. No sooner was the Committee up, and I going
[through] the Court homeward, but I am told Sir W. Coventry is come to
town; so I to his chamber, and there did give him an account how matters
go in our office, and with some content I parted from him, after we had
discoursed several things of the haste requisite to be made in getting
the fleete out again and the manner of doing it. But I do not hear that
he is at all pleased or satisfied with the late fight; but he tells me
more newes of our suffering, by the death of one or two captains more
than I knew before. But he do give over the thoughts of the safety of
The Swiftsure or Essex. Thence homewards, landed at the Old Swan, and
there find my pretty Betty Michell and her husband at their doore in
Thames Streete, which I was glad to find, and went into their shop, and
they made me drink some of their strong water, the first time I was ever
with them there. I do exceedingly love her. After sitting a little and
talking with them about several things at great distance I parted and
home to my business late. But I am to observe how the drinking of some
strong water did immediately put my eyes into a fit of sorenesse again
as they were the other day. I mean my right eye only. Late at night I
had an account brought me by Sir W. Warren that he has gone through
four lighters for me, which pleases me very well. So home to bed, much
troubled with our disappointment at the Tangier Committee.

10th (Lord's day). Up very betimes, and down the river to Deptford,
and did a good deale of business in sending away and directing several
things to the Fleete. That being done, back to London to my office, and
there at my office till after Church time fitting some notes to carry to
Sir W. Coventry in the afternoon. At noon home to dinner, where my cozen
Joyces, both of them, they and their wives and little Will, come by
invitation to dinner to me, and I had a good dinner for them; but, Lord!
how sicke was I of W. Joyce's company, both the impertinencies of it and
his ill manners before me at my table to his wife, which I could hardly
forbear taking notice of; but being at my table and for his wife's sake,
I did, though I will prevent his giving me the like occasion again at
my house I will warrant him. After dinner I took leave and by water to
White Hall, and there spent all the afternoon in the Gallery, till the
Council was up, to speake with Sir W. Coventry. Walking here I met with
Pierce the surgeon, who is lately come from the fleete, and tells me
that all the commanders, officers, and even the common seamen do condemn
every part of the late conduct of the Duke of Albemarle: both in his
fighting at all, in his manner of fighting, running among them in his
retreat, and running the ships on ground; so as nothing can be worse
spoken of. That Holmes, Spragg, and Smith do all the business, and the
old and wiser commanders nothing. So as Sir Thomas Teddiman (whom the
King and all the world speak well of) is mightily discontented, as being
wholly slighted. He says we lost more after the Prince come, than before
too. The Prince was so maimed, as to be forced to be towed home. He says
all the fleete confess their being chased home by the Dutch; and yet the
body of the Dutch that did it, was not above forty sayle at most. And
yet this put us into the fright, as to bring all our ships on ground. He
says, however, that the Duke of Albemarle is as high almost as ever,
and pleases himself to think that he hath given the Dutch their bellies
full, without sense of what he hath lost us; and talks how he knows now
the way to beat them. But he says, that even Smith himself, one of his
creatures, did himself condemn the late conduct from the beginning to
the end. He tells me further, how the Duke of Yorke is wholly given up
to his new mistresse, my Lady Denham, going at noon-day with all his
gentlemen with him to visit her in Scotland Yard; she declaring she will
not be his mistresse, as Mrs. Price, to go up and down the Privy-stairs,
but will be owned publicly; and so she is. Mr. Bruncker, it seems, was
the pimp to bring it about, and my Lady Castlemaine, who designs thereby
to fortify herself by the Duke; there being a falling-out the other
day between the King and her: on this occasion, the Queene, in ordinary
talke before the ladies in her drawing-room, did say to my Lady
Castlemaine that she feared the King did take cold, by staying so late
abroad at her house. She answered before them all, that he did not stay
so late abroad with her, for he went betimes thence (though he do not
before one, two, or three in the morning), but must stay somewhere else.
The King then coming in and overhearing, did whisper in the eare aside,
and told her she was a bold impertinent woman, and bid her to be gone
out of the Court, and not come again till he sent for, her; which she
did presently, and went to a lodging in the Pell Mell, and kept there
two or three days, and then sent to the King to know whether she might
send for her things away out of her house. The King sent to her, she
must first come and view them: and so she come, and the King went to
her, and all friends again. He tells me she did, in her anger, say she
would be even with the King, and print his letters to her. So putting
all together, we are and are like to be in a sad condition. We are
endeavouring to raise money by borrowing it of the City; but I do not
think the City will lend a farthing. By and by the Council broke up, and
I spoke with Sir W. Coventry about business, with whom I doubt not in a
little time to be mighty well, when I shall appear to mind my business
again as I used to do, which by the grace of God I will do. Gone from
him I endeavoured to find out Sir G. Carteret, and at last did at Mr.
Ashburnham's, in the Old Palace Yarde, and thence he and I stepped
out and walked an houre in the church-yarde, under Henry the Seventh's
Chappell, he being lately come from the fleete; and tells me, as I hear
from every body else, that the management in the late fight was bad from
top to bottom. That several said this would not have been if my Lord
Sandwich had had the ordering of it. Nay, he tells me that certainly had
my Lord Sandwich had the misfortune to have done as they have done, the
King could not have saved him. There is, too, nothing but discontent
among the officers; and all the old experienced men are slighted. He
tells me to my question (but as a great secret), that the dividing of
the fleete did proceed first from a proposition from the fleete,
though agreed to hence. But he confesses it arose from want of due
intelligence, which he confesses we do want. He do, however, call the
fleete's retreat on Sunday a very honourable retreat, and that the Duke
of Albemarle did do well in it, and would have been well if he had done
it sooner, rather than venture the loss of the fleete and crown, as he
must have done if the Prince had not come. He was surprised when I told
him I heard that the King did intend to borrow some money of the City,
and would know who had spoke of it to me; I told him Sir Ellis Layton
this afternoon. He says it is a dangerous discourse; for that the City
certainly will not be invited to do it, and then for the King to ask it
and be denied, will be the beginning of our sorrow. He seems to fear we
shall all fall to pieces among ourselves. This evening we hear that Sir
Christopher Mings is dead of his late wounds; and Sir W. Coventry did
commend him to me in a most extraordinary manner. But this day, after
three days' trial in vain, and the hazard of the spoiling of the ship
in lying till next spring, besides the disgrace of it, newes is brought
that the Loyall London is launched at Deptford. Having talked thus much
with Sir G. Carteret we parted there, and I home by water, taking in
my boat with me young Michell and my Betty his wife, meeting them
accidentally going to look a boat. I set them down at the Old Swan and
myself, went through bridge to the Tower, and so home, and after supper
to bed.

11th. Up, and down by water to Sir W. Warren's (the first time I was
in his new house on the other side the water since he enlarged it) to
discourse about our lighters that he hath bought for me, and I hope to
get L100 by this jobb. Having done with him I took boat again (being
mightily struck with a woman in a hat, a seaman's mother,--[Mother or
mauther, a wench.]--that stood on the key) and home, where at the office
all the morning with Sir W. Coventry and some others of our board hiring
of fireships, and Sir W. Coventry begins to see my pains again, which I
do begin to take, and I am proud of it, and I hope shall continue it. He
gone, at noon I home to dinner, and after dinner my father and wife out
to the painter's to sit again, and I, with my Lady Pen and her daughter,
to see Harman; whom we find lame in bed. His bones of his anckle are
broke, but he hopes to do well soon; and a fine person by his discourse
he seems to be and my hearty [friend]; and he did plainly tell me that
at the Council of War before the fight, it was against his reason to
begin the fight then, and the reasons of most sober men there, the wind
being such, and we to windward, that they could not use their lower tier
of guns, which was a very sad thing for us to have the honour and weal
of the nation ventured so foolishly. I left them there, and walked to
Deptford, reading in Walsingham's Manual, a very good book, and there
met with Sir W. Batten and my Lady at Uthwayt's. Here I did much
business and yet had some little mirthe with my Lady, and anon we
all come up together to our office, where I was very late doing much
business. Late comes Sir J. Bankes to see me, and tells me that coming
up from Rochester he overtook three or four hundred seamen, and he
believes every day they come flocking from the fleete in like numbers;
which is a sad neglect there, when it will be impossible to get others,
and we have little reason to think that these will return presently
again. He gone, I to end my letters to-night, and then home to supper
and to bed.

12th. Up, and to the office, where we sat all the morning. At noon to
dinner, and then to White Hall in hopes of a meeting of Tangier about
Yeabsly's business, but it could not be obtained, Sir G. Carteret nor
Sir W. Coventry being able to be there, which still vexes [me] to see
the poor man forced still to attend, as also being desirous to see
what my profit is, and get it. Walking here in the galleries I find the
Ladies of Honour dressed in their riding garbs, with coats and doublets
with deep skirts, just for all the world like mine, and buttoned their
doublets up the breast, with perriwigs and with hats; so that, only for
a long petticoat dragging under their men's coats, nobody could take
them for women in any point whatever; which was an odde sight, and a
sight did not please me. It was Mrs. Wells and another fine lady that I
saw thus. Thence down by water to Deptford, and there late seeing some
things dispatched down to the fleete, and so home (thinking indeed to
have met with Bagwell, but I did not) to write my letters very late, and
so to supper and to bed.

13th. Up, and by coach to St. James's, and there did our business before
the Duke as usual, having, before the Duke come out of his bed, walked
in an ante-chamber with Sir H. Cholmly, who tells me there are great
jarrs between the Duke of Yorke and the Duke of Albemarle, about the
later's turning out one or two of the commanders put in by the Duke of
Yorke. Among others, Captain Du Tell, a Frenchman, put in by the Duke
of Yorke, and mightily defended by him; and is therein led by Monsieur
Blancford, that it seems hath the same command over the Duke of Yorke as
Sir W. Coventry hath; which raises ill blood between them. And I do in
several little things observe that Sir W. Coventry hath of late, by the
by, reflected on the Duke of Albemarle and his captains, particularly in
that of old Teddiman, who did deserve to be turned out this fight, and
was so; but I heard Sir W. Coventry say that the Duke of Albemarle put
in one as bad as he is in his room, and one that did as little. After we
had done with the Duke of Yorke, I with others to White Hall, there to
attend again a Committee of Tangier, but there was none, which vexed me
to the heart, and makes me mighty doubtfull that when we have one, it
will be prejudiced against poor Yeabsly and to my great disadvantage
thereby, my Lord Peterborough making it his business, I perceive
(whether in spite to me, whom he cannot but smell to be a friend to
it, or to my Lord Ashly, I know not), to obstruct it, and seems to take
delight in disappointing of us; but I shall be revenged of him. Here
I staid a very great while, almost till noon, and then meeting Balty I
took him with me, and to Westminster to the Exchequer about breaking
of two tallys of L2000 each into smaller tallys, which I have been
endeavouring a good while, but to my trouble it will not, I fear, be
done, though there be no reason against it, but only a little trouble to
the clerks; but it is nothing to me of real profit at all. Thence with
Balty to Hales's by coach, it being the seventh day from my making my
late oathes, and by them I am at liberty to dispense with any of my
oathes every seventh day after I had for the six days before going
performed all my vowes. Here I find my father's picture begun, and so
much to my content, that it joys my very heart to thinke that I should
have his picture so well done; who, besides that he is my father, and a
man that loves me, and hath ever done so, is also, at this day, one of
the most carefull and innocent men, in the world. Thence with mighty
content homeward, and in my way at the Stockes did buy a couple of
lobsters, and so home to dinner, where I find my wife and father had
dined, and were going out to Hales's to sit there, so Balty and I alone
to dinner, and in the middle of my grace, praying for a blessing upon
(these his good creatures), my mind fell upon my lobsters: upon which I
cried, Odd zooks! and Balty looked upon me like a man at a losse what
I meant, thinking at first that I meant only that I had said the grace
after meat instead of that before meat. But then I cried, what is become
of my lobsters? Whereupon he run out of doors to overtake the coach, but
could not, so came back again, and mighty merry at dinner to thinke of
my surprize. After dinner to the Excise Office by appointment, and there
find my Lord Bellasses and the Commissioners, and by and by the whole
company come to dispute the business of our running so far behindhand
there, and did come to a good issue in it, that is to say, to resolve
upon having the debt due to us, and the Household and the Guards
from the Excise stated, and so we shall come to know the worst of our
condition and endeavour for some helpe from my Lord Treasurer. Thence
home, and put off Balty, and so, being invited, to Sir Christopher
Mings's funeral, but find them gone to church. However I into the church
(which is a fair, large church, and a great chappell) and there heard
the service, and staid till they buried him, and then out. And there
met with Sir W. Coventry (who was there out of great generosity, and no
person of quality there but he) and went with him into his coach, and
being in it with him there happened this extraordinary case, one of
the most romantique that ever I heard of in my life, and could not have
believed, but that I did see it; which was this:--About a dozen able,
lusty, proper men come to the coach-side with tears in their eyes, and
one of them that spoke for the rest begun and says to Sir W. Coventry,
"We are here a dozen of us that have long known and loved, and served
our dead commander, Sir Christopher Mings, and have now done the last
office of laying him in the ground. We would be glad we had any other to
offer after him, and in revenge of him. All we have is our lives; if
you will please to get His Royal Highness to give us a fireship among
us all, here is a dozen of us, out of all which choose you one to be
commander, and the rest of us, whoever he is, will serve him; and, if
possible, do that that shall show our memory of our dead commander, and
our revenge." Sir W. Coventry was herewith much moved (as well as I, who
could hardly abstain from weeping), and took their names, and so parted;
telling me that he would move His Royal Highness as in a thing very
extraordinary, which was done. Thereon see the next day in this book. So
we parted. The truth is, Sir Christopher Mings was a very stout man, and
a man of great parts, and most excellent tongue among ordinary men; and
as Sir W. Coventry says, could have been the most useful man at such a
pinch of time as this. He was come into great renowne here at home, and
more abroad in the West Indys. He had brought his family into a way of
being great; but dying at this time, his memory and name (his father
being always and at this day a shoemaker, and his mother a Hoyman's
daughter; of which he was used frequently to boast) will be quite forgot
in a few months as if he had never been, nor any of his name be the
better by it; he having not had time to will any estate, but is dead
poor rather than rich. So we left the church and crowd, and I home
(being set down on Tower Hill), and there did a little business and then
in the evening went down by water to Deptford, it being very late, and
there I staid out as much time as I could, and then took boat again
homeward, but the officers being gone in, returned and walked to Mrs.
Bagwell's house, and there (it being by this time pretty dark and past
ten o'clock) went into her house and did what I would. But I was not a
little fearfull of what she told me but now, which is, that her servant
was dead of the plague, that her coming to me yesterday was the first
day of her coming forth, and that she had new whitened the house all
below stairs, but that above stairs they are not so fit for me to go up
to, they being not so. So I parted thence, with a very good will, but
very civil, and away to the waterside, and sent for a pint of sacke
and so home, drank what I would and gave the waterman the rest; and so
adieu. Home about twelve at night, and so to bed, finding most of my
people gone to bed. In my way home I called on a fisherman and bought
three eeles, which cost me three shillings.

14th. Up, and to the office, and there sat all the morning. At noon
dined at home, and thence with my wife and father to Hales's, and there
looked only on my father's picture (which is mighty like); and so away
to White Hall to a committee for Tangier, where the Duke of York was,
and Sir W. Coventry, and a very full committee; and instead of having
a very prejudiced meeting, they did, though indeed inclined against
Yeabsly, yield to the greatest part of his account, so as to allow of
his demands to the value of L7,000 and more, and only give time for him
to make good his pretence to the rest; which was mighty joy to me: and
so we rose up. But I must observe the force of money, which did make my
Lord Ashly to argue and behave himself in the business with the greatest
friendship, and yet with all the discretion imaginable; and [it] will be
a business of admonition and instruction to me concerning him (and other
men, too, for aught I know) as long as I live. Thence took Creed with
some kind of violence and some hard words between us to St. James's, to
have found out Sir W. Coventry to have signed the order for his payment
among others that did stay on purpose to do it (and which is strange
among the rest my Lord Ashly, who did cause Creed to write it presently
and kept two or three of them with him by cunning to stay and sign it),
but Creed's ill nature (though never so well bribed, as it hath lately
in this case by twenty pieces) will not be overcome from his usual
delays. Thence failing of meeting Sir W. Coventry I took leave of Creed
(very good friends) and away home, and there took out my father, wife,
sister, and Mercer our grand Tour in the evening, and made it ten at
night before we got home, only drink at the doore at Islington at the
Katherine Wheel, and so home and to the office a little, and then to
bed.

15th. Up betimes, and to my Journall entries, but disturbed by many
businesses, among others by Mr. Houblon's coming to me about evening
their freight for Tangier, which I did, and then Mr. Bland, who
presented me yesterday with a very fine African mat, to lay upon the
ground under a bed of state, being the first fruits of our peace
with Guyland. So to the office, and thither come my pretty widow Mrs.
Burrows, poor woman, to get her ticket paid for her husband's service,
which I did her myself, and did 'baisser her moucher', and I do hope
may thereafter have some day 'sa' company. Thence to Westminster to the
Exchequer, but could not persuade the blockheaded fellows to do what I
desire, of breaking my great tallys into less, notwithstanding my Lord
Treasurer's order, which vexed [me] so much that I would not bestow more
time and trouble among a company of dunces, and so back again home, and
to dinner, whither Creed come and dined with me and after dinner Mr.
Moore, and he and I abroad, thinking to go down the river together, but
the tide being against me would not, but returned and walked an houre
in the garden, but, Lord! to hear how he pleases himself in behalf of
my Lord Sandwich, in the miscarriage of the Duke of Albemarle, and do
inveigh against Sir W. Coventry as a cunning knave, but I thinke that
without any manner of reason at all, but only his passion. He being gone
I to my chamber at home to set my Journall right and so to settle
my Tangier accounts, which I did in very good order, and then in the
evening comes Mr. Yeabsly to reckon with me, which I did also, and have
above L200 profit therein to myself, which is a great blessing, the
God of heaven make me thankfull for it. That being done, and my eyes
beginning to be sore with overmuch writing, I to supper and to bed.

16th. Up betimes and to my office, and there we sat all the morning and
dispatched much business, the King, Duke of Yorke, and Sir W. Coventry
being gone down to the fleete. At noon home to dinner and then down
to Woolwich and Deptford to look after things, my head akeing from
the multitude of businesses I had in my head yesterday in settling
my accounts. All the way down and up, reading of "The Mayor of
Quinborough," a simple play. At Deptford, while I am there, comes Mr.
Williamson, Sir Arthur Ingram and Jacke Fen, to see the new ships, which
they had done, and then I with them home in their boat, and a very fine
gentleman Mr. Williamson is. It seems the Dutch do mightily insult of
their victory, and they have great reason.

     [This treatment seems to have been that of the Dutch populace alone,
     and there does not appear to have been cause of complaint against
     the government.  Respecting Sir W. Berkeley's body the following
     notice was published in the "London Gazette" of July 15th, 1666 (No.
     69) "Whitehall, July 15.  This day arrived a trumpet from the States
     of Holland, who came over from Calais in the Dover packet-boat, with
     a letter to his Majesty, that the States have taken order for the
     embalming the body of Sir William Berkeley, which they have placed
     in the chapel of the great church at the Hague, a civility they
     profess to owe to his corpse, in respect to the quality of his
     person, the greatness of his command, and of the high courage and
     valour he showed in the late engagement; desiring his Majesty to
     signify his pleasure about the further disposal of it."  "Frederick
     Ruysch, the celebrated Dutch anatomist, undertook, by order of the
     States-General, to inject the body of the English Admiral Berkeley,
     killed in the sea-fight of 1666; and the body, already somewhat
     decomposed, was sent over to England as well prepared as if it had
     been the fresh corpse of a child.  This produced to Ruysch, on the
     part of the States-General, a recompense worthy of their liberality,
     and the merit of the anatomist," "James's Medical Dictionary."]

Sir William Barkeley was killed before his ship taken; and there he lies
dead in a sugar-chest, for every body to see, with his flag standing up
by him. And Sir George Ascue is carried up and down the Hague for people
to see. Home to my office, where late, and then to bed.

17th (Lord's day). Being invited to Anthony Joyce's to dinner, my wife
and sister and Mercer and I walked out in the morning, it being fine
weather, to Christ Church, and there heard a silly sermon, but sat where
we saw one of the prettiest little boys with the prettiest mouth that
ever I saw in [my] life. Thence to Joyce's, where William Joyce and
his wife were, and had a good dinner; but, Lord! how sicke was I of
the company, only hope I shall have no more of it a good while; but am
invited to Will's this week; and his wife, poor unhappy woman, cried to
hear me say that I could not be there, she thinking that I slight her:
so they got me to promise to come. Thence my father and I walked to
Gray's Inne Fields, and there spent an houre or two walking and talking
of several businesses; first, as to his estate, he told me it produced
about L80 per ann., but then there goes L30 per. ann. taxes and other
things, certain charge, which I do promise to make good as far as this
L30, at which the poor man was overjoyed and wept. As to Pall he tells
me he is mightily satisfied with Ensum, and so I promised to give her
L500 presently, and to oblige myself to 100 more on the birth of her
first child, he insuring her in L10 per ann. for every L100, and in the
meantime till she do marry I promise to allow her L10 per ann. Then as
to John I tell him I will promise him nothing, but will supply him as so
much lent him, I declaring that I am not pleased with him yet, and that
when his degree is over I will send for him up hither, and if he be good
for any thing doubt not to get him preferment. This discourse ended to
the joy of my father and no less to me to see that I am able to do this,
we return to Joyce's and there wanting a coach to carry us home I walked
out as far as the New Exchange to find one, but could not. So down to
the Milke-house, and drank three glasses of whay, and then up into the
Strand again, and there met with a coach, and so to Joyce's and took up
my father, wife, sister, and Mercer, and to Islington, where we drank,
and then our tour by Hackney home, where, after a little, business at
my office and then talke with my Lady and Pegg Pen in the garden, I home
and to bed, being very weary.

18th. Up betimes and in my chamber most of the morning setting things to
rights there, my Journall and accounts with my father and brother, then
to the office a little, and so to Lumbard Streete, to borrow a little
money upon a tally, but cannot. Thence to the Exchequer, and there after
much wrangling got consent that I should have a great tally broken into
little ones. Thence to Hales's to see how my father's picture goes on,
which pleases me mighty well, though I find again, as I did in Mrs.
Pierce's, that a picture may have more of a likeness in the first or
second working than it shall have when finished, though this is very
well and to my full content, but so it is, and certainly mine was not so
like at the first, second, or third sitting as it was afterward. Thence
to my Lord Bellasses, by invitation, and there dined with him, and his
lady and daughter; and at dinner there played to us a young boy, lately
come from France, where he had been learning a yeare or two on the
viallin, and plays finely. But impartially I do not find any goodnesse
in their ayres (though very good) beyond ours when played by the same
hand, I observed in several of Baptiste's'

     [Jean Baptiste Lulli, son of a Tuscan peasant, born 1633, died 1687.
     He invented the dramatic overture.  "But during the first years of
     Charles II. all musick affected by the beau mond run in the french
     way; and the rather because at that time the master of the court
     musick in France, whose name was Baptista (an Italian frenchifyed)
     had influenced the french style by infusing a great portion of the
     Italian harmony into it, whereby the ayre was exceedingly improved"
     (North's "Memoires of Musick," ed. Rimbault, 1846, p, 102).]

(the present great composer) and our Bannister's. But it was pretty to
see how passionately my Lord's daughter loves musique, the most that
ever I saw creature in my life. Thence after dinner home and to the
office and anon to Lumbard Streete again, where much talke at Colvill's,
he censuring the times, and how matters are ordered, and with reason
enough; but, above all, the thinking to borrow money of the City, which
will not be done, but be denied, they being little pleased with the
King's affairs, and that must breed differences between the King and
the City. Thence down by water to Deptford, to order things away to the
fleete and back again, and after some business at my office late home
to supper and to bed. Sir W. Coventry is returned this night from the
fleete, he being the activest man in the world, and we all (myself
particularly) more afeard of him than of the King or his service, for
aught I see; God forgive us! This day the great newes is come of the
French, their taking the island of St. Christopher's' from us; and it
is to be feared they have done the like of all those islands thereabouts
this makes the city mad.

19th. Up, and to my office, there to fit business against the rest meet,
which they did by and by, and sat late. After the office rose (with
Creed with me) to Wm. Joyce's to dinner, being invited, and there find
my father and sister, my wife and Mercer, with them, almost dined. I
made myself as complaisant as I could till I had dined, but yet much
against my will, and so away after dinner with Creed to Penny's, my
Tailor, where I bespoke a thin stuff suit, and did spend a little time
evening some little accounts with Creed and so parted, and I to Sir. G.
Carteret's by appointment; where I perceive by him the King is going to
borrow some money of the City; but I fear it will do no good, but hurt.
He tells me how the Generall--[The Duke of Albemarle.]--is displeased,
and there have been some high words between the Generall and Sir W.
Coventry. And it may be so; for I do not find Sir W. Coventry so highly
commending the Duke as he used to be, but letting fall now and then some
little jerkes: as this day, speaking of newes from Holland, he says, "I
find their victory begins to shrinke there, as well as ours here."
Here I met with Captain Cocke, and he tells me that the first thing
the Prince said to the King upon his coming, was complaining of the
Commissioners of the Navy; that they could have been abroad in three
or four days but for us; that we do not take care of them which I am
troubled at, and do fear may in violence break out upon this office some
time or other; for we shall not be able to carry on the business. Thence
home, and at my business till late at night, then with my wife into the
garden and there sang with Mercer, whom I feel myself begin to love too
much by handling of her breasts in a' morning when she dresses me, they
being the finest that ever I saw in my life, that is the truth of it. So
home and to supper with beans and bacon and to bed.

20th. Up, but in some pain of the collique. I have of late taken too
much cold by washing my feet and going in a thin silke waistcoate,
without any other coate over it, and open-breasted, but I hope it will
go over. I did this morning (my father being to go away to-morrow) give
my father some money to buy him a horse, and for other things to himself
and my mother and sister, among them L20, besides undertaking to pay
for other things for them to about L3, which the poor man takes with
infinite kindnesse, and I do not thinke I can bestow it better. Thence
by coach to St. James's as usual to wait on the Duke of York, after
having discoursed with Collonell Fitzgerald, whom I met in my way and he
returned with me to Westminster, about paying him a sum of 700 and
odd pounds, and he bids me defalk L25 for myself,--[Abate from an
amount.]--which is a very good thing; having done with the Duke I to the
Exchequer and there after much ado do get my business quite over of the
difficulty of breaking a great tally into little ones and so shall have
it done tomorrow. Thence to the Hall and with Mrs. Martin home and staid
with her a while, and then away to the Swan and sent for a bit of meat
and dined there, and thence to Faythorne, the picture-seller's, and
there chose two or three good Cutts to try to vernish, and so to Hales's
to see my father's picture, which is now near finished and is very good,
and here I staid and took a nap of an hour, thinking my father and wife
would have come, but they did not; so I away home as fast as I could,
fearing lest my father this day going abroad to see Mr. Honiwood at
Major Russell's might meet with any trouble, and so in great pain home;
but to spite me, in Cheapside I met Mrs. Williams in a coach, and she
called me, so I must needs 'light and go along with her and poor Knipp
(who is so big as she can tumble and looks-every day to lie down) as
far as Paternoster Row, which I did do and there staid in Bennett's shop
with them, and was fearfull lest the people of the shop, knowing me,
should aske after my father and give Mrs. Williams any knowledge of
me to my disgrace. Having seen them done there and accompanied them to
Ludgate I 'light and into my owne coach and home, where I find my father
and wife had had no intent of coming at all to Hales's. So I at home all
the evening doing business, and at night in the garden (it having been
these three or four days mighty hot weather) singing in the evening, and
then home to supper and to bed.

21st. Up, and at the office all the morning; whereby several
circumstances I find Sir W. Coventry and the Duke of Albemarle do not
agree as they used to do; Sir W. Coventry commending Aylett (in some
reproach to the Duke), whom the Duke hath put out for want of courage;
and found fault with Steward, whom the Duke keeps in, though as much in
fault as any commander in the fleete. At noon home to dinner, my father,
sister, and wife dining at Sarah Giles's, poor woman, where I should
have been, but my pride would not suffer me. After dinner to Mr.
Debasty's to speake with Sir Robert Viner, a fine house and a great
many fine ladies. He used me mighty civilly. My business was to set the
matter right about the letter of credit he did give my Lord Belassis,
that I may take up the tallys lodged with Viner for his security in the
answering of my Lord's bills, which we did set right very well, and
Sir Robert Viner went home with me and did give me the L5000 tallys
presently. Here at Mr. Debasty's I saw, in a gold frame, a picture of a
Outer playing on his flute which, for a good while, I took for paynting,
but at last observed it a piece of tapestry, and is the finest that ever
I saw in my life for figures, and good natural colours, and a very fine
thing it is indeed. So home and met Sir George Smith by the way, who
tells me that this day my Lord Chancellor and some of the Court have
been with the City, and the City have voted to lend the King L100,000;
which, if soon paid (as he says he believes it will), will be a greater
service than I did ever expect at this time from the City. So home to
my letters and then with my wife in the garden, and then upon our leades
singing in the evening and so to supper (while at supper comes young
Michell, whose wife I love, little Betty Howlet, to get my favour
about a ticket, and I am glad of this occasion of obliging him and give
occasion of his coming to me, for I must be better acquainted with him
and her), and after supper to bed.

22nd. Up, and before I went out Mr. Peter Barr sent me a tierce of
claret, which is very welcome. And so abroad down the river to Deptford
and there did some business, and then to Westminster, and there did
with much ado get my tallys (my small ones instead of one great one of
L2,000), and so away home and there all day upon my Tangier accounts
with Creed, and, he being gone, with myself, in settling other accounts
till past twelve at night, and then every body being in bed, I to bed,
my father, wife, and sister late abroad upon the water, and Mercer
being gone to her mother's and staid so long she could not get into the
office, which vexed me.

23rd. My father and sister very betimes took their leave; and my wife,
with all possible kindnesse, went with them to the coach, I being
mightily pleased with their company thus long, and my father with his
being here, and it rejoices my heart that I am in condition to do any
thing to comfort him, and could, were it not for my mother, have been
contented he should have stayed always here with me, he is such innocent
company. They being gone, I to my papers, but vexed at what I heard but
a little of this morning, before my wife went out, that Mercer and she
fell out last night, and that the girle is gone home to her mother's for
all-together: This troubles me, though perhaps it may be an ease to me
of so much charge. But I love the girle, and another we must be forced
to keepe I do foresee and then shall be sorry to part with her. At the
office all the morning, much disquiett in my mind in the middle of my
business about this girle. Home at noon to dinner, and what with the
going away of my father today and the losse of Mercer, I after dinner
went up to my chamber and there could have cried to myself, had not
people come to me about business. In the evening down to Tower Wharfe
thinking to go by water, but could not get watermen; they being now
so scarce, by reason of the great presse; so to the Custome House, and
there, with great threats, got a couple to carry me down to Deptford,
all the way reading Pompey the Great (a play translated from the French
by several noble persons; among others, my Lord Buckhurst), that to me
is but a mean play, and the words and sense not very extraordinary. From
Deptford I walked to Redriffe, and in my way was overtaken by Bagwell,
lately come from sea in the Providence, who did give me an account of
several particulars in the late fight, and how his ship was deserted
basely by the York, Captain Swanly, commander. So I home and there after
writing my letters home to supper and to bed, fully resolved to rise
betimes, and go down the river to-morrow morning, being vexed this night
to find none of the officers in the yarde at 7 at night, nor any body
concerned as if it were a Dutch warr. It seems Mercer's mother was here
in the morning to speak with my wife, but my wife would not. In the
afternoon I and my wife in writing did instruct W. Hewer in some
discourse to her, and she in the evening did come and satisfy my wife,
and by and by Mercer did come, which I was mighty glad of and eased of
much pain about her.

24th. Sunday. Midsummer Day. Up, but, being weary the last night, not so
soon as I intended. Then being dressed, down by water to Deptford, and
there did a great deale of business, being in a mighty hurry, Sir W.
Coventry writing to me that there was some thoughts that the Dutch
fleete were out or coming out. Business being done in providing for the
carrying down of some provisions to the fleete, I away back home and
after dinner by water to White Hall, and there waited till the councill
rose, in the boarded gallery, and there among other things I hear that
Sir Francis Prujean is dead, after being married to a widow about a
yeare or thereabouts. He died very rich, and had, for the last yeare,
lived very handsomely, his lady bringing him to it. He was no great
painstaker in person, yet died very rich; and, as Dr. Clerke says, was
of a very great judgment, but hath writ nothing to leave his name to
posterity. In the gallery among others met with Major Halsey, a great
creature of the Duke of Albemarle's; who tells me that the Duke, by
name, hath said that he expected to have the worke here up in the River
done, having left Sir W. Batten and Mr. Phipps there. He says that the
Duke of Albemarle do say that this is a victory we have had, having,
as he was sure, killed them 8000 men, and sunk about fourteen of their
ships; but nothing like this appears true. He lays much of the little
success we had, however, upon the fleete's being divided by order
from above, and the want of spirit in the commanders; and that he was
commanded by order to go out of the Downes to the Gun-fleete, and in
the way meeting the Dutch fleete, what should he do? should he not fight
them? especially having beat them heretofore at as great disadvantage.
He tells me further, that having been downe with the Duke of Albemarle,
he finds that Holmes and Spragge do govern most business of the Navy;
and by others I understand that Sir Thomas Allen is offended thereat;
that he is not so much advised with as he ought to be. He tells me also,
as he says, of his own knowledge, that several people before the Duke
went out did offer to supply the King with L100,000 provided he would be
treasurer of it, to see it laid out for the Navy; which he refused, and
so it died. But I believe none of this. This day I saw my Lady Falmouth,
with whom I remember now I have dined at my Lord Barkeley's heretofore,
a pretty woman: she was now in her second or third mourning, and pretty
pleasant in her looks. By and by the Council rises, and Sir W. Coventry
comes out; and he and I went aside, and discoursed of much business of
the Navy; and afterwards took his coach, and to Hide-Parke, he and I
alone: there we had much talke. First, he started a discourse of a talke
he hears about the towne, which, says he, is a very bad one, and fit to
be suppressed, if we knew how which is, the comparing of the successe
of the last year with that of this; saying that that was good, and that
bad. I was as sparing in speaking as I could, being jealous of him and
myself also, but wished it could be stopped; but said I doubted it could
not otherwise than by the fleete's being abroad again, and so finding
other worke for men's minds and discourse. Then to discourse of himself,
saying, that he heard that he was under the lash of people's discourse
about the Prince's not having notice of the Dutch being out, and for him
to comeback again, nor the Duke of Albemarle notice that the Prince was
sent for back again: to which he told me very particularly how careful
he was the very same night that it was resolved to send for the Prince
back, to cause orders to be writ, and waked the Duke, who was then in
bed, to sign them; and that they went by expresse that very night, being
the Wednesday night before the fight, which begun on the Friday; and
that for sending them by the post expresse, and not by gentlemen on
purpose, he made a sport of it, and said, I knew of none to send it
with, but would at least have lost more time in fitting themselves out,
than any diligence of theirs beyond that of the ordinary post would have
recovered. I told him that this was not so much the towne talke as the
reason of dividing the fleete. To this he told me he ought not to say
much; but did assure me in general that the proposition did first come
from the fleete, and the resolution not being prosecuted with orders
so soon as the Generall thought fit, the Generall did send Sir Edward
Spragge up on purpose for them; and that there was nothing in the whole
business which was not done with the full consent and advice of the Duke
of Albemarle.

But he did adde (as the Catholiques call 'le secret de la Masse'), that
Sir Edward Spragge--who had even in Sir Christopher Mings's time put in
to be the great favourite of the Prince, but much more now had a mind to
be the great man with him, and to that end had a mind to have the Prince
at a distance from the Duke of Albemarle, that they might be doing
something alone--did, as he believed, put on this business of dividing
the fleete, and that thence it came.

     [This division of the fleet was the original cause of the disaster,
     and at a later period the enemies of Clarendon charged him with
     having advised this action, but Coventry's communication to Pepys in
     the text completely exonerates Clarendon.]

He tells me as to the business of intelligence, the want whereof the
world did complain much of, that for that it was not his business,
and as he was therefore to have no share in the blame, so he would
not meddle to lay it any where else. That de Ruyter was ordered by the
States not to make it his business to come into much danger, but to
preserve himself as much as was fit out of harm's way, to be able to
direct the fleete. He do, I perceive, with some violence, forbear saying
any thing to the reproach of the Duke of Albemarle; but, contrarily,
speaks much of his courage; but I do as plainly see that he do not like
the Duke of Albemarle's proceedings, but, contrarily, is displeased
therewith. And he do plainly diminish the commanders put in by the Duke,
and do lessen the miscarriages of any that have been removed by him. He
concurs with me, that the next bout will be a fatal one to one side or
other, because, if we be beaten, we shall not be able to set out our
fleete again. He do confess with me that the hearts of our seamen are
much saddened; and for that reason, among others, wishes Sir Christopher
Mings was alive, who might inspire courage and spirit into them.
Speaking of Holmes, how great a man he is, and that he do for the
present, and hath done all the voyage, kept himself in good order and
within bounds; but, says he, a cat will be a cat still, and some time
or other out his humour must break again. He do not disowne but that the
dividing of the fleete upon the presumptions that were then had (which,
I suppose, was the French fleete being come this way), was a good
resolution. Having had all this discourse, he and I back to White Hall;
and there I left him, being [in] a little doubt whether I had behaved
myself in my discourse with the policy and circumspection which ought to
be used to so great a courtier as he is, and so wise and factious a man,
and by water home, and so, after supper, to bed.

25th. Up, and all the morning at my Tangier accounts, which the chopping
and changing of my tallys make mighty troublesome; but, however, I did
end them with great satisfaction to myself. At noon, without staying to
eat my dinner, I down by water to Deptford, and there coming find Sir
W. Batten and Sir Jeremy Smith (whom the dispatch of the Loyall London
detained) at dinner at Greenwich at the Beare Taverne, and thither I
to them and there dined with them. Very good company of strangers there
was, but I took no great pleasure among them, being desirous to be back
again. So got them to rise as soon as I could, having told them the
newes Sir W. Coventry just now wrote me to tell them, which is, that the
Dutch are certainly come out. I did much business at Deptford, and so
home, by an old poor man, a sculler, having no oares to be got, and all
this day on the water entertained myself with the play of Commenius,
and being come home did go out to Aldgate, there to be overtaken by Mrs.
Margot Pen in her father's coach, and my wife and Mercer with her, and
Mrs. Pen carried us to two gardens at Hackny, (which I every day grow
more and more in love with,) Mr. Drake's one, where the garden is good,
and house and the prospect admirable; the other my Lord Brooke's, where
the gardens are much better, but the house not so good, nor the prospect
good at all. But the gardens are excellent; and here I first saw oranges
grow: some green, some half, some a quarter, and some full ripe, on the
same tree, and one fruit of the same tree do come a year or two after
the other. I pulled off a little one by stealth (the man being mighty
curious of them) and eat it, and it was just as other little green small
oranges are; as big as half the end of my little finger. Here were also
great variety of other exotique plants, and several labarinths, and a
pretty aviary. Having done there with very great pleasure we away back
again, and called at the Taverne in Hackny by the church, and there
drank and eate, and so in the Goole of the evening home. This being the
first day of my putting on my black stuff bombazin suit, and I hope to
feel no inconvenience by it, the weather being extremely hot. So
home and to bed, and this night the first night of my lying without
a waistcoat, which I hope I shall very well endure. So to bed. This
morning I did with great pleasure hear Mr. Caesar play some good things
on his lute, while he come to teach my boy Tom, and I did give him 40s.
for his encouragement.

26th. Up and to my office betimes, and there all the morning, very busy
to get out the fleete, the Dutch being now for certain out, and we shall
not, we thinke, be much behindhand with them. At noon to the 'Change
about business, and so home to dinner, and after dinner to the setting
my Journall to rights, and so to the office again, where all the
afternoon full of business, and there till night, that my eyes were
sore, that I could not write no longer. Then into the garden, then my
wife and Mercer and my Lady Yen and her daughter with us, and here we
sung in the darke very finely half an houre, and so home to supper and
to bed. This afternoon, after a long drowth, we had a good shower of
rain, but it will not signify much if no more come. This day in the
morning come Mr. Chichly to Sir W. Coventry, to tell him the ill
successe of the guns made for the Loyall London; which is, that in the
trial every one of the great guns, the whole cannon of seven (as I take
it), broke in pieces, which is a strange mishap, and that which will
give more occasion to people's discourse of the King's business being
done ill. This night Mary my cookemayde, that hath been with us about
three months, but find herself not able to do my worke, so is gone with
great kindnesse away, and another (Luce) come, very ugly and plaine, but
may be a good servant for all that.

27th. Up, and to my office awhile, and then down the river a little way
to see vessels ready for the carrying down of 400 land soldiers to the
fleete. Then back to the office for my papers, and so to St. James's,
where we did our usual attendance on the Duke. Having done with him, we
all of us down to Sir W. Coventry's chamber (where I saw his father
my Lord Coventry's picture hung up, done by Stone, who then brought it
home. It is a good picture, drawn in his judge's robes, and the great
seale by him. And while it was hanging up, "This," says Sir W. Coventry,
merrily, "is the use we make of our fathers,") to discourse about the
proposition of serving us with hempe, delivered in by my Lord Brouncker
as from an unknown person, though I know it to be Captain Cocke's. My
Lord and Sir William Coventry had some earnest words about it, the one
promoting it for his private ends, being, as Cocke tells me himself,
to have L500 if the bargain goes on, and I am to have as much, and the
other opposing it for the unseasonableness of it, not knowing at all
whose the proposition is, which seems the more ingenious of the two.
I sat by and said nothing, being no great friend to the proposition,
though Cocke intends me a convenience by it. But what I observed most
from the discourse was this of Sir W. Coventry, that he do look upon
ourselves in a desperate condition. The issue of all standing upon this
one point, that by the next fight, if we beat, the Dutch will certainly
be content to take eggs for their money (that was his expression); or
if we be beaten, we must be contented to make peace, and glad if we can
have it without paying too dear for it. And withall we do rely wholly
upon the Parliament's giving us more money the next sitting, or else we
are undone. Being gone hence, I took coach to the Old Exchange, but did
not go into it, but to Mr. Cade's, the stationer, stood till the shower
was over, it being a great and welcome one after so much dry weather.
Here I understand that Ogleby is putting out some new fables of his
owne, which will be very fine and very satyricall. Thence home to
dinner, and after dinner carried my wife to her sister's and I to Mr.
Hales's, to pay for my father's picture, which cost me L10 the head and
25s. the frame. Thence to Lovett's, who has now done something towards
the varnishing of single paper for the making of books, which will do, I
think, very well. He did also carry me to a Knight's chamber in Graye's
Inne, where there is a frame of his making, of counterfeite tortoise
shell, which indeed is most excellently done. Then I took him with me to
a picture shop to choose a print for him to vernish, but did not agree
for one then. Thence to my wife to take her up and so carried her home,
and I at the office till late, and so to supper with my wife and to
bed. I did this afternoon visit my Lord Bellasses, who professes all
imaginable satisfaction in me. He spoke dissatisfiedly with Creed, which
I was pleased well enough with. My Lord is going down to his garrison to
Hull, by the King's command, to put it in order for fear of an invasion
which course I perceive is taken upon the sea-coasts round; for we have
a real apprehension of the King of France's invading us.

28th. Up, and at the office all the morning. At noon home to dinner, and
after dinner abroad to Lumbard Streete, there to reckon with Sir Robert
Viner for some money, and did sett all straight to my great content, and
so home, and all the afternoon and evening at the office, my mind full
at this time of getting my accounts over, and as much money in my hands
as I can, for a great turne is to be feared in the times, the French
having some great design (whatever it is) in hand, and our necessities
on every side very great. The Dutch are now known to be out, and we may
expect them every houre upon our coast. But our fleete is in pretty good
readinesse for them.

29th. Up, and within doors most of the morning, sending a porter
(Sanders) up and down to several people to pay them money to clear my
month's debts every where, being mighty desirous to have all clear
so soon as I can, and to that end did so much in settling my Tangier
accounts clear. At noon dined, having first been down at Deptford and
did a little business there and back again. After dinner to White Hall
to a Committee of Tangier, but I come a little too late, they were up,
so I to several places about business, among others to Westminster Hall,
and there did meet with Betty Michell at her own mother's shop. I would
fain have carried her home by water, but she was to sup at that end of
the town. So I away to White Hall, and thence, the Council being up,
walked to St. James's, and there had much discourse with Sir W. Coventry
at his chamber, who I find quite weary of the warr, decries our having
any warr at all, or himself to have been any occasion of it, that he
hopes this will make us shy of any warr hereafter, or to prepare better
for it, believes that one overthrow on the Dutch side would make them
desire peace, and that one on ours will make us willing to accept of
one: tells me that Commissioner Pett is fallen infinitely under the
displeasure of the Prince and Duke of Albemarle, not giving them
satisfaction in the getting out of the fleete, and that the complaint he
believes is come to the King, and by Sir W. Coventry's discourse I find
he do concur in it, and speaks of his having of no authority in the
place where he is, and I do believe at least it will end in his being
removed to some other yarde, and I am not sorry for it, but do fear that
though he deserves as bad, yet at this time the blame may not be so well
deserved. Thence home and to the office; where I met with a letter
from Dover, which tells me (and it did come by expresse) that newes
is brought over by a gentleman from Callice that the Dutch fleete, 130
sail, are come upon the French coast; and that the country is bringing
in picke-axes, and shovells, and wheel-barrows into Callice; that there
are 6,000 men armed with head, back, and breast (Frenchmen) ready to
go on board the Dutch fleete, and will be followed by 12,000 more. That
they pretend they are to come to Dover; and that thereupon the Governor
of Dover Castle is getting the victuallers' provision out of the towne
into the Castle to secure it. But I do think this is a ridiculous
conceit; but a little time will show. At night home to supper and to
bed,

30th. Up, and to the office, and mightily troubled all this morning with
going to my Lord Mayor (Sir Thomas Bludworth,

     [As his conduct during the Great Fire fully proved, when he is said
     to have boasted that he would extinguish the flames by the same
     means to which Swift tells us Gulliver had recourse at Lilliput.--B.]

a silly man, I think), and other places, about getting shipped some men
that they have these two last nights pressed in the City out of houses:
the persons wholly unfit for sea, and many of them people of very good
fashion, which is a shame to think of, and carried to Bridewell they
are, yet without being impressed with money legally as they ought to be.
But to see how the King's business is done; my Lord Mayor himself did
scruple at this time of extremity to do this thing, because he had not
money to pay the pressed-money to the men, he told me so himself; nor
to take up boats to carry them down through bridge to the ships I had
prepared to carry them down in; insomuch that I was forced to promise
to be his paymaster, and he did send his City Remembrancer afterwards to
the office, and at the table, in the face of the officers, I did there
out of my owne purse disburse L15 to pay for their pressing and diet
last night and this morning; which is a thing worth record of my Lord
Mayor. Busy about this all the morning, at noon dined and then to the
office again, and all the afternoon till twelve at night full of this
business and others, and among these others about the getting off men
pressed by our officers of the fleete into the service; even our owne
men that are at the office, and the boats that carry us. So that it is
now become impossible to have so much as a letter carried from place to
place, or any message done for us: nay, out of Victualling ships full
loaden to go down to the fleete, and out of the vessels of the officers
of the Ordnance, they press men, so that for want of discipline in this
respect I do fear all will be undone. Vexed with these things, but eased
in mind by my ridding of a great deale of business from the office, I
late home to supper and to bed. But before I was in bed, while I was
undressing myself, our new ugly mayde, Luce, had like to have broke her
necke in the darke, going down our upper stairs; but, which I was glad
of, the poor girle did only bruise her head, but at first did lie on the
ground groaning and drawing her breath, like one a-dying. This month
I end in much hurry of business, but in much more trouble in mind to
thinke what will become of publique businesses, having so many enemys
abroad, and neither force nor money at all, and but little courage
for ourselves, it being really true that the spirits of our seamen and
commanders too are really broke by the last defeate with the Dutch, and
this is not my conjecture only, but the real and serious thoughts of Sir
G. Carteret and Sir W. Coventry, whom I have at distinct times heard
the same thing come from with a great deale of grief and trouble. But,
lastly, I am providing against a foule day to get as much money into my
hands as I can, at least out of the publique hands, that so, if a turne,
which I fear, do come, I may have a little to trust to. I pray God give
me good successe in my choice how to dispose of what little I have, that
I may not take it out of publique hands, and put it into worse.




JULY 1666

July 1st (Sunday). Up betimes, and to the office receiving letters, two
or three one after another from Sir W. Coventry, and sent as many to
him, being full of variety of business and hurry, but among the chiefest
is the getting of these pressed men out of the City down the river to
the fleete. While I was hard at it comes Sir W. Pen to towne, which I
little expected, having invited my Lady and her daughter Pegg to dine
with me to-day; which at noon they did, and Sir W. Pen with them:
and pretty merry we were. And though I do not love him, yet I find it
necessary to keep in with him; his good service at Shearnesse in getting
out the fleete being much taken notice of, and reported to the King and
Duke [of York], even from the Prince and Duke of Albemarle themselves,
and made the most of to me and them by Sir W. Coventry: therefore I
think it discretion, great and necessary discretion, to keep in with
him. After dinner to the office again, where busy, and then down to
Deptford to the yard, thinking to have seen Bagwell's wife, whose
husband is gone yesterday back to the fleete, but I did not see her, so
missed what I went for, and so back to the Tower several times, about
the business of the pressed men, and late at it till twelve at night,
shipping of them. But, Lord! how some poor women did cry; and in my life
I never did see such natural expression of passion as I did here in some
women's bewailing themselves, and running to every parcel of men that
were brought, one after another, to look for their husbands, and wept
over every vessel that went off, thinking they might be there, and
looking after the ship as far as ever they could by moone-light, that
it grieved me to the heart to hear them. Besides, to see poor patient
labouring men and housekeepers, leaving poor wives and families,
taking up on a sudden by strangers, was very hard, and that without
press-money, but forced against all law to be gone. It is a great
tyranny. Having done this I to the Lieutenant of the Tower and bade him
good night, and so away home and to bed.

2nd. Up betimes, and forced to go to my Lord Mayor's, about the business
of the pressed men; and indeed I find him a mean man of understanding
and dispatch of any publique business. Thence out of curiosity to
Bridewell to see the pressed men, where there are about 300; but so
unruly that I durst not go among them: and they have reason to be so,
having been kept these three days prisoners, with little or no
victuals, and pressed out, and, contrary to all course of law, without
press-money, and men that are not liable to it. Here I met with prating
Colonel Cox, one of the City collonells heretofore a great presbyter:
but to hear how the fellow did commend himself, and the service he do
the King; and, like an asse, at Paul's did take me out of my way on
purpose to show me the gate (the little north gate) where he had two men
shot close by him on each hand, and his own hair burnt by a bullet-shot
in the insurrection of Venner, and himself escaped. Thence home and to
the Tower to see the men from Bridewell shipped. Being rid of him I home
to dinner, and thence to the Excise office by appointment to meet my
Lord Bellasses and the Commissioners, which we did and soon dispatched,
and so I home, and there was called by Pegg Pen to her house, where her
father and mother, and Mrs. Norton, the second Roxalana, a fine woman,
indifferent handsome, good body and hand, and good mine, and pretends to
sing, but do it not excellently. However I took pleasure there, and my
wife was sent for, and Creed come in to us, and so there we spent the
most of the afternoon. Thence weary of losing so much time I to the
office, and thence presently down to Deptford; but to see what a
consternation there is upon the water by reason of this great press,
that nothing is able to get a waterman to appear almost. Here I meant
to have spoke with Bagwell's mother, but her face was sore, and so I
did not, but returned and upon the water found one of the vessels loaden
with the Bridewell birds in a great mutiny, and they would not sail, not
they; but with good words, and cajoling the ringleader into the Tower
(where, when he was come, he was clapped up in the hole), they were got
very quietly; but I think it is much if they do not run the vessel on
ground. But away they went, and I to the Lieutenant of the Tower, and
having talked with him a little, then home to supper very late and to
bed weary.

3rd. Being very weary, lay long in bed, then to the office and there sat
all the day. At noon dined at home, Balty's wife with us, and in very
good humour I was and merry at dinner, and after dinner a song or two,
and so I abroad to my Lord Treasurer's (sending my sister home by the
coach), while I staid there by appointment to have met my Lord Bellasses
and Commissioners of Excise, but they did not meet me, he being abroad.
However Mr. Finch, one of the Commissioners, I met there, and he and
I walked two houres together in the garden, talking of many things;
sometimes of Mr. Povy, whose vanity, prodigality, neglect of his
business, and committing it to unfit hands hath undone him and outed
him of all his publique employments, and the thing set on foot by an
accidental revivall of a business, wherein he had three or fours years
ago, by surprize, got the Duke of Yorke to sign to the having a sum of
money paid out of the Excise, before some that was due to him, and now
the money is fallen short, and the Duke never likely to be paid.
This being revived hath undone Povy. Then we fell to discourse of the
Parliament, and the great men there: and among others, Mr. Vaughan,
whom he reports as a man of excellent judgement and learning, but most
passionate and 'opiniastre'. He had done himself the most wrong (though
he values it not), that is, the displeasure of the King in his standing
so long against the breaking of the Act for a trienniall parliament; but
yet do believe him to be a most loyall gentleman. He told me Mr. Prin's
character; that he is a man of mighty labour and reading and memory, but
the worst judge of matters, or layer together of what he hath read, in
the world; which I do not, however, believe him in; that he believes
him very true to the King in his heart, but can never be reconciled to
episcopacy; that the House do not lay much weight upon him, or any thing
he says. He told me many fine things, and so we parted, and I home and
hard to work a while at the office and then home and till midnight about
settling my last month's accounts wherein I have been interrupted by
public business, that I did not state them two or three days ago, but
I do now to my great joy find myself worth above L5600, for which the
Lord's name be praised! So with my heart full of content to bed. Newes
come yesterday from Harwich, that the Dutch had appeared upon our coast
with their fleete, and we believe did go to the Gun-fleete, and they
are supposed to be there now; but I have heard nothing of them to-day.
Yesterday Dr. Whistler, at Sir W. Pen's, told me that Alexander Broome,
a the great song-maker, is lately dead.

4th. Up, and visited very betimes by Mr. Sheply, who is come to town
upon business from Hinchingbrooke, where he left all well. I out and
walked along with him as far as Fleet Streete, it being a fast day, the
usual fast day for the plague, and few coaches to be had. Thanks be to
God, the plague is, as I hear, encreased but two this week; but in
the country in several places it rages mightily, and particularly
in Colchester, where it hath long been, and is believed will quite
depopulate the place. To St. James's, and there did our usual business
with the Duke, all of us, among other things, discoursing about the
places where to build ten great ships; the King and Council have
resolved on none to be under third-rates; but it is impossible to do it,
unless we have more money towards the doing it than yet we have in any
view. But, however, the shew must be made to the world. Thence to my
Lord Bellasses to take my leave of him, he being going down to the North
to look after the Militia there, for fear of an invasion. Thence home
and dined, and then to the office, where busy all day, and in the
evening Sir W. Pen come to me, and we walked together, and talked of the
late fight. I find him very plain, that the whole conduct of the late
fight was ill, and that that of truth's all, and he tells me that it is
not he, but two-thirds of the commanders of the whole fleete have told
him so: they all saying, that they durst not oppose it at the Council
of War, for fear of being called cowards, though it was wholly against
their judgement to fight that day with the disproportion of force, and
then we not being able to use one gun of our lower tier, which was a
greater disproportion than the other. Besides, we might very well have
staid in the Downs without fighting, or any where else, till the Prince
could have come up to them; or at least till the weather was fair, that
we might have the benefit of our whole force in the ships that we had.
He says three things must [be] remedied, or else we shall be undone
by this fleete. 1. That we must fight in a line, whereas we fight
promiscuously, to our utter and demonstrable ruine; the Dutch fighting
otherwise; and we, whenever we beat them. 2. We must not desert ships of
our own in distress, as we did, for that makes a captain desperate, and
he will fling away his ship, when there is no hopes left him of succour.
3. That ships, when they are a little shattered, must not take the
liberty to come in of themselves, but refit themselves the best
they can, and stay out--many of our ships coming in with very small
disablenesses. He told me that our very commanders, nay, our very
flag-officers, do stand in need of exercising among themselves, and
discoursing the business of commanding a fleete; he telling me that
even one of our flag-men in the fleete did not know which tacke lost
the wind, or which kept it, in the last engagement. He says it was pure
dismaying and fear that made them all run upon the Galloper, not having
their wits about them; and that it was a miracle they were not all
lost. He much inveighs upon my discoursing of Sir John Lawson's saying
heretofore, that sixty sail would do as much as one hundred; and says
that he was a man of no counsel at all, but had got the confidence to
say as the gallants did, and did propose to himself to make himself
great by them, and saying as they did; but was no man of judgement in
his business, but hath been out in the greatest points that have come
before them. And then in the business of fore-castles, which he did
oppose, all the world sees now the use of them for shelter of men. He
did talk very rationally to me, insomuch that I took more pleasure this
night in hearing him discourse, than I ever did in my life in any thing
that he said. He gone I to the office again, and so after some business
home to supper and to bed.

5th. Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning busy, then at
noon dined and Mr. Sheply with me, who come to towne the other day. I
lent him 630 in silver upon 30 pieces in gold. But to see how apt
every body is to neglect old kindnesses! I must charge myself with the
ingratitude of being unwilling to lend him so much money without some
pawne, if he should have asked it, but he did not aske it, poor man,
and so no harm done. After dinner, he gone, I to my office and Lumbard
Streete about money, and then to my office again, very busy, and so till
late, and then a song with my wife and Mercer in the garden, and so with
great content to bed.

6th. Up, and after doing some business at my office abroad to Lumbard
Street, about the getting of a good sum of money, thence home, in
preparation for my having some good sum in my hands, for fear of a
trouble in the State, that I may not have all I have in the world out
of my hands and so be left a beggar. Having put that in a way, I home
to the office, and so to the Tower; about shipping of some more pressed
men, and that done, away to Broad Streete, to Sir G. Carteret, who is
at a pay of tickets all alone, and I believe not less than one thousand
people in the streets. But it is a pretty thing to observe that both
there and every where else, a man shall see many women now-a-days of
mean sort in the streets, but no men; men being so afeard of the press.
I dined with Sir G. Carteret, and after dinner had much discourse about
our publique business; and he do seem to fear every day more and more
what I do; which is, a general confusion in the State; plainly answering
me to the question, who is it that the weight of the warr depends
[upon]? that it is only Sir W. Coventry. He tells me, too, the Duke of
Albemarle is dissatisfied, and that the Duchesse do curse Coventry as
the man that betrayed her husband to the sea: though I believe that it
is not so. Thence to Lumbard Streete, and received L2000, and carried it
home: whereof L1000 in gold. The greatest quantity not only that I ever
had of gold, but that ever I saw together, and is not much above half
a 100 lb. bag full, but is much weightier. This I do for security sake,
and convenience of carriage; though it costs me above L70 the change of
it, at 18 1/2d. per piece. Being at home, I there met with a letter from
Bab Allen,--[Mrs. Knipp]--to invite me to be god-father to her boy, with
Mrs. Williams, which I consented to, but know not the time when it is
to be. Thence down to the Old Swan, calling at Michell's, he not being
within, and there I did steal a kiss or two of her, and staying a little
longer, he come in, and her father, whom I carried to Westminster, my
business being thither, and so back again home, and very busy all the
evening. At night a song in the garden and to bed.

7th. At the office all the morning, at noon dined at home and Creed
with me, and after dinner he and I two or three hours in my chamber
discoursing of the fittest way for a man to do that hath money, and find
all he offers of turning some into gold and leaving some in a friend's
hand is nothing more than what I thought of myself, but is doubtful,
as well as I, what is best to be done of all these or other ways to be
thought on. He tells me he finds all things mighty dull at Court; and
that they now begin to lie long in bed; it being, as we suppose, not
seemly for them to be found playing and gaming as they used to be; nor
that their minds are at ease enough to follow those sports, and yet not
knowing how to employ themselves (though there be work enough for their
thoughts and councils and pains), they keep long in bed. But he thinks
with me, that there is nothing in the world can helpe us but the King's
personal looking after his business and his officers, and that with that
we may yet do well; but otherwise must be undone: nobody at this day
taking care of any thing, nor hath any body to call him to account for
it. Thence left him and to my office all the afternoon busy, and in some
pain in my back by some bruise or other I have given myself in my right
testicle this morning, and the pain lies there and hath done, and in
my back thereupon all this day. At night into the garden to my wife and
Lady Pen and Pegg, and Creed, who staid with them till to at night. My
Lady Pen did give us a tarte and other things, and so broke up late and
I to bed. It proved the hottest night that ever I was in in my life, and
thundered and lightened all night long and rained hard. But, Lord!
to see in what fears I lay a good while, hearing of a little noise of
somebody walking in the house: so rung the bell, and it was my mayds
going to bed about one o'clock in the morning. But the fear of being
robbed, having so much money in the house, was very great, and is still
so, and do much disquiet me.

8th (Lord's day). Up, and pretty well of my pain, so that it did not
trouble me at all, and I do clearly find that my pain in my back was
nothing but only accompanied my bruise in my stones. To church, wife
and Mercer and I, in expectation of hearing some mighty preacher to-day,
Mrs. Mary Batelier sending us word so; but it proved our ordinary
silly lecturer, which made me merry, and she laughed upon us to see
her mistake. At noon W. Hewer dined with us, and a good dinner, and I
expected to have had newes sent me of Knipp's christening to-day; but,
hearing nothing of it, I did not go, though I fear it is but their
forgetfulness and so I may disappoint them. To church, after dinner,
again, a thing I have not done a good while before, go twice in one day.
After church with my wife and Mercer and Tom by water through bridge to
the Spring Garden at Fox Hall, and thence down to Deptford and there did
a little business, and so back home and to bed.

9th. Up betimes, and with Sir W. Pen in his coach to Westminster to
Sir G. Downing's, but missed of him, and so we parted, I by water home,
where busy all the morning, at noon dined at home, and after dinner
to my office, where busy till come to by Lovett and his wife, who have
brought me some sheets of paper varnished on one side, which lies very
white and smooth and, I think, will do our business most exactly,
and will come up to the use that I intended them for, and I am apt to
believe will be an invention that will take in the world. I have made up
a little book of it to give Sir W. Coventry to-morrow, and am very well
pleased with it. Home with them, and there find my aunt Wight with my
wife come to take her leave of her, being going for the summer into the
country; and there was also Mrs. Mary Batelier and her sister, newly
come out of France, a black, very black woman, but mighty good-natured
people both, as ever I saw. Here I made the black one sing a French
song, which she did mighty innocently; and then Mrs. Lovett play on the
lute, which she do very well; and then Mercer and I sang; and so, with
great pleasure, I left them, having shewed them my chamber, and L1000
in gold, which they wondered at, and given them sweetmeats, and shewn my
aunt Wight my father's picture, which she admires. So I left them and to
the office, where Mr. Moore come to me and talking of my Lord's family
business tells me that Mr. Sheply is ignorantly, we all believe,
mistaken in his accounts above L700 more than he can discharge himself
of, which is a mighty misfortune, poor man, and may undo him, and yet
every body believes that he do it most honestly. I am troubled for him
very much. He gone, I hard at the office till night, then home to supper
and to bed.

10th. Up, and to the office, where busy all the morning, sitting, and
there presented Sir W. Coventry with my little book made up of Lovett's
varnished paper, which he and the whole board liked very well. At noon
home to dinner and then to the office; the yarde being very full of
women (I believe above three hundred) coming to get money for their
husbands and friends that are prisoners in Holland; and they lay
clamouring and swearing and cursing us, that my wife and I were afeard
to send a venison-pasty that we have for supper to-night to the cook's
to be baked, for fear of their offering violence to it: but it went, and
no hurt done. Then I took an opportunity, when they were all gone
into the foreyarde, and slipt into the office and there busy all the
afternoon, but by and by the women got into the garden, and come all
to my closett window, and there tormented me, and I confess their cries
were so sad for money, and laying down the condition of their families
and their husbands, and what they have done and suffered for the King,
and how ill they are used by us, and how well the Dutch are used here by
the allowance of their masters, and what their husbands are offered to
serve the Dutch abroad, that I do most heartily pity them, and was ready
to cry to hear them, but cannot helpe them. However, when the rest were
gone, I did call one to me that I heard complaine only and pity her
husband and did give her some money, and she blessed me and went away.
Anon my business at the office being done I to the Tower to speak with
Sir John Robinson about business, principally the bad condition of the
pressed men for want of clothes, so it is represented from the fleete,
and so to provide them shirts and stockings and drawers. Having done
with him about that, I home and there find my wife and the two Mrs.
Bateliers walking in the garden. I with them till almost 9 at night, and
then they and we and Mrs. Mercer, the mother, and her daughter Anne, and
our Mercer, to supper to a good venison-pasty and other good things, and
had a good supper, and very merry, Mistresses Bateliers being both very
good-humoured. We sang and talked, and then led them home, and there
they made us drink; and, among other things, did show us, in cages, some
birds brought from about Bourdeaux, that are all fat, and, examining one
of them, they are so, almost all fat. Their name is [Ortolans], which
are brought over to the King for him to eat, and indeed are excellent
things. We parted from them and so home to bed, it being very late, and
to bed.

11th. Up, and by water to Sir G. Downing's, there to discourse with him
about the reliefe of the prisoners in Holland; which I did, and we do
resolve of the manner of sending them some. So I away by coach to St.
James's, and there hear that the Duchesse is lately brought to bed of a
boy. By and by called to wait on the Duke, the King being present; and
there agreed, among other things, of the places to build the ten new
great ships ordered to be built, and as to the relief of prisoners in
Holland. And then about several stories of the basenesse of the King
of Spayne's being served with officers: they in Flanders having as good
common men as any Prince in the world, but the veriest cowards for
the officers, nay for the generall officers, as the Generall and
Lieutenant-generall, in the whole world. But, above all things, the
King did speake most in contempt of the ceremoniousnesse of the King of
Spayne, that he do nothing but under some ridiculous form or other,
and will not piss but another must hold the chamber-pot. Thence to
Westminster Hall and there staid a while, and then to the Swan and
kissed Sarah, and so home to dinner, and after dinner out again to Sir
Robert Viner, and there did agree with him to accommodate some business
of tallys so as I shall get in near L2000 into my own hands, which is
in the King's, upon tallys; which will be a pleasure to me, and
satisfaction to have a good sum in my own hands, whatever evil
disturbances should be in the State; though it troubles me to lose so
great a profit as the King's interest of ten per cent. for that money.
Thence to Westminster, doing several things by the way, and there failed
of meeting Mrs. Lane, and so by coach took up my wife at her sister's,
and so away to Islington, she and I alone, and so through Hackney, and
home late, our discourse being about laying up of some money safe in
prevention to the troubles I am afeard we may have in the state, and so
sleepy (for want of sleep the last night, going to bed late and rising
betimes in the morning) home, but when I come to the office, I there
met with a command from my Lord Arlington, to go down to a galliott at
Greenwich, by the King's particular command, that is going to carry
the Savoy Envoye over, and we fear there may be many Frenchmen there
on board; and so I have a power and command to search for and seize all
that have not passes from one of the Secretarys of State, and to bring
them and their papers and everything else in custody some whither. So I
to the Tower, and got a couple of musquetiers with me, and Griffen and
my boy Tom and so down; and, being come, found none on board but two or
three servants, looking to horses and doggs, there on board, and, seeing
no more, I staid not long there, but away and on shore at Greenwich,
the night being late and the tide against us; so, having sent before, to
Mrs. Clerke's and there I had a good bed, and well received, the whole
people rising to see me, and among the rest young Mrs. Daniel, whom I
kissed again and again alone, and so by and by to bed and slept pretty
well,

12th. But was up again by five o'clock, and was forced to rise, having
much business, and so up and dressed myself (enquiring, was told that
Mrs. Tooker was gone hence to live at London) and away with Poundy to
the Tower, and thence, having shifted myself, but being mighty drowsy
for want of sleep, I by coach to St. James's, to Goring House, there to
wait on my Lord Arlington to give him an account of my night's worke,
but he was not up, being not long since married: so, after walking
up and down the house below,--being the house I was once at Hartlib's
sister's wedding, and is a very fine house and finely furnished,--and
then thinking it too much for me to lose time to wait my Lord's rising,
I away to St. James's, and there to Sir W. Coventry, and wrote a letter
to my Lord Arlington giving him an account of what I have done, and
so with Sir W. Coventry into London, to the office. And all the way I
observed him mightily to make mirth of the Duke of Albemarle and his
people about him, saying, that he was the happiest man in the world for
doing of great things by sorry instruments. And so particularized in Sir
W. Clerke, and Riggs, and Halsey, and others. And then again said that
the only quality eminent in him was, that he did persevere; and indeed
he is a very drudge, and stands by the King's business. And this he
said, that one thing he was good at, that he never would receive an
excuse if the thing was not done; listening to no reasoning for it, be
it good or bad. But then I told him, what he confessed, that he would
however give the man, that he employs, orders for removing of any
obstruction that he thinks he shall meet with in the world, and
instanced in several warrants that he issued for breaking open of houses
and other outrages about the business of prizes, which people bore with
either for affection or fear, which he believes would not have been
borne with from the King, nor Duke, nor any man else in England, and
I thinke he is in the right, but it is not from their love of him, but
from something else I cannot presently say. Sir W. Coventry did further
say concerning Warcupp, his kinsman, that had the simplicity to tell Sir
W. Coventry, that the Duke did intend to go to sea and to leave him his
agent on shore for all things that related to the sea. But, says Sir
W. Coventry, I did believe but the Duke of Yorke would expect to be
his agent on shore for all sea matters. And then he begun to say what a
great man Warcupp was, and something else, and what was that but a great
lyer; and told me a story, how at table he did, they speaking about
antipathys, say, that a rose touching his skin any where, would make it
rise and pimple; and, by and by, the dessert coming, with roses upon it,
the Duchesse bid him try, and they did; but they rubbed and rubbed, but
nothing would do in the world, by which his lie was found at then. He
spoke contemptibly of Holmes and his mermidons, that come to take down
the ships from hence, and have carried them without any necessaries, or
any thing almost, that they will certainly be longer getting ready than
if they had staid here. In fine, I do observe, he hath no esteem nor
kindnesse for the Duke's matters, but, contrarily, do slight him and
them; and I pray God the Kingdom do not pay too dear by this jarring;
though this blockheaded Duke I did never expect better from. At the
office all the morning, at noon home and thought to have slept, my head
all day being full of business and yet sleepy and out of order, and so
I lay down on my bed in my gowne to sleep, but I could not, therefore
about three o'clock up and to dinner and thence to the office, where.
Mrs. Burroughs, my pretty widow, was and so I did her business and sent
her away by agreement, and presently I by coach after and took her up in
Fenchurch Streete and away through the City, hiding my face as much as
I could, but she being mighty pretty and well enough clad, I was not
afeard, but only lest somebody should see me and think me idle. I quite
through with her, and so into the fields Uxbridge way, a mile or two
beyond Tyburne, and then back and then to Paddington, and then back to
Lyssen green, a place the coachman led me to (I never knew in my life)
and there we eat and drank and so back to Chasing Crosse, and there I
set her down. All the way most excellent pretty company. I had her lips
as much as I would, and a mighty pretty woman she is and very modest and
yet kinde in all fair ways. All this time I passed with mighty pleasure,
it being what I have for a long time wished for, and did pay this day
5s. forfeite for her company. She being gone, I to White Hall and there
to Lord Arlington's, and met Mr. Williamson, and find there is no more
need of my trouble about the Galliott, so with content departed, and
went straight home, where at the office did the most at the office in
that wearied and sleepy state I could, and so home to supper, and after
supper falling to singing with Mercer did however sit up with her, she
pleasing me with her singing of "Helpe, helpe," 'till past midnight and
I not a whit drowsy, and so to bed.

13th. Lay sleepy in bed till 8 in the morning, then up and to the
office, where till about noon, then out to the 'Change and several
places, and so home to dinner. Then out again to Sir R. Vines, and there
to my content settled the business of two tallys, so as I shall
have L2000 almost more of my owne money in my hand, which pleases me
mightily, and so home and there to the office, where mighty busy, and
then home to supper and to even my Journall and to bed. Our fleete being
now in all points ready to sayle, but for the carrying of the two or
three new ships, which will keepe them a day or two or three more. It
is said the Dutch is gone off our coast, but I have no good reason to
believe it, Sir W. Coventry not thinking any such thing.

14th. Up betimes to the office, to write fair a laborious letter I wrote
as from the Board to the Duke of Yorke, laying out our want of money
again; and particularly the business of Captain Cocke's tenders of hemp,
which my Lord Bruncker brought in under an unknown hand without name.
Wherein his Lordship will have no great successe, I doubt. That being
done, I down to Thames-streete, and there agreed for four or five tons
of corke, to send this day to the fleete, being a new device to make
barricados with, instead of junke. By this means I come to see and kiss
Mr. Hill's young wife, and a blithe young woman she is. So to the office
and at noon home to dinner, and then sent for young Michell and employed
him all the afternoon about weighing and shipping off of the corke,
having by this means an opportunity of getting him 30 or 40s. Having
set him a doing, I home and to the office very late, very busy, and did
indeed dispatch much business, and so to supper and to bed. After a song
in the garden, which, and after dinner, is now the greatest pleasure I
take, and indeed do please me mightily, to bed, after washing my legs
and feet with warm water in my kitchen. This evening I had Davila

     [Enrico Caterino Davila (1576-1631) was one of the chief historical
     writers of Italy, and his "Storia delle guerre civili di Francia"
     covers a period of forty years, from the death of Henri II. to the
     Peace of Vervins in 1598.]

brought home to me, and find it a most excellent history as ever I read.

15th (Lord's day). Up, and to church, where our lecturer made a sorry
silly sermon, upon the great point of proving the truth of the Christian
religion. Home and had a good dinner, expecting Mr. Hunt, but there
comes only young Michell and his wife, whom my wife concurs with me to
be a pretty woman, and with her husband is a pretty innocent couple.
Mightily pleasant we were, and I mightily pleased in her company and
to find my wife so well pleased with them also. After dinner he and I
walked to White Hall, not being able to get a coach. He to the Abbey,
and I to White Hall, but met with nobody to discourse with, having
no great mind to be found idling there, and be asked questions of the
fleete, so walked only through to the Parke, and there, it being mighty
hot and I weary, lay down by the canaille, upon the grasse, and slept
awhile, and was thinking of a lampoone which hath run in my head this
weeke, to make upon the late fight at sea, and the miscarriages there;
but other businesses put it out of my head. Having lain there a while, I
then to the Abbey and there called Michell, and so walked in great pain,
having new shoes on, as far as Fleete Streete and there got a coach, and
so in some little ease home and there drank a great deale of small beer;
and so took up my wife and Betty Michell and her husband, and away
into the fields, to take the ayre, as far as beyond Hackny, and so back
again, in our way drinking a great deale of milke, which I drank to take
away, my heartburne, wherewith I have of late been mightily troubled,
but all the way home I did break abundance of wind behind, which did
presage no good but a great deal of cold gotten. So home and supped and
away went Michell and his wife, of whom I stole two or three salutes,
and so to bed in some pain and in fear of more, which accordingly I met
with, for I was in mighty pain all night long of the winde griping of
my belly and making of me shit often and vomit too, which is a thing not
usual with me, but this I impute to the milke that I drank after so much
beer, but the cold, to my washing my feet the night before.

16th. Lay in great pain in bed all the morning and most of the
afternoon, being in much pain, making little or no water, and indeed
having little within to make any with. And had great twinges with the
wind all the day in my belly with wind. And a looseness with it, which
however made it not so great as I have heretofore had it. A wonderful
dark sky, and shower of rain this morning, which at Harwich proved so
too with a shower of hail as big as walnuts. I had some broth made me
to drink, which I love, only to fill up room. Up in the afternoon, and
passed the day with Balty, who is come from sea for a day or two before
the fight, and I perceive could be willing fairly to be out of the next
fight, and I cannot much blame him, he having no reason by his place to
be there; however, would not have him to be absent, manifestly to avoid
being there. At night grew a little better and took a glyster of sacke,
but taking it by halves it did me not much good, I taking but a little
of it. However, to bed, and had a pretty good night of it,

17th. So as to be able to rise to go to the office and there sat, but
now and then in pain, and without making much water, or freely. However,
it grew better and better, so as after dinner believing the jogging in
a coach would do me good, I did take my wife out to the New Exchange
to buy things. She there while I with Balty went and bought a common
riding-cloake for myself, to save my best. It cost me but 30s., and will
do my turne mighty well. Thence home and walked in the garden with
Sir W. Pen a while, and saying how the riding in the coach do me good
(though I do not yet much find it), he ordered his to be got ready while
I did some little business at the office, and so abroad he and I after
8 o'clock at night, as far almost as Bow, and so back again, and so home
to supper and to bed. This day I did bid Balty to agree with the Dutch
paynter, which he once led me to, to see landskipps, for a winter piece
of snow, which indeed is a good piece, and costs me but 40s., which I
would not take the money again for, it being, I think, very good. After
a little supper to bed, being in less pain still, and had very good
rest.

18th. Up in good case, and so by coach to St. James's after my fellows,
and there did our business, which is mostly every day to complain of
want of money, and that only will undo us in a little time. Here, among
other things, before us all, the Duke of Yorke did say, that now at
length he is come to a sure knowledge that the Dutch did lose in the
late engagements twenty-nine captains and thirteen ships. Upon which Sir
W. Coventry did publickly move, that if his Royal Highness had this of
a certainty, it would be of use to send this down to the fleete, and
to cause it to be spread about the fleete, for the recovering of the
spirits of the officers and seamen; who are under great dejectedness
for want of knowing that they did do any thing against the enemy,
notwithstanding all that they did to us. Which, though it be true, yet
methought was one of the most dishonourable motions to our countrymen
that ever was made; and is worth remembering. Thence with Sir W. Pen
home, calling at Lilly's, to have a time appointed when to be drawn
among the other Commanders of Flags the last year's fight. And so full
of work Lilly is, that he was faro to take his table-book out to see
how his time is appointed, and appointed six days hence for him to come
between seven and eight in the morning. Thence with him home; and there
by appointment I find Dr. Fuller, now Bishop of Limericke, in Ireland;
whom I knew in his low condition at Twittenham. I had also by his desire
Sir W. Pen, and with him his lady and daughter, and had a good dinner,
and find the Bishop the same good man as ever; and in a word, kind to
us, and, methinks, one of the comeliest and most becoming prelates
in all respects that ever I saw in my life. During dinner comes an
acquaintance of his, Sir Thomas Littleton; whom I knew not while he was
in my house, but liked his discourse; and afterwards, by Sir W. Pen,
do come to know that he is one of the greatest speakers in the House of
Commons, and the usual second to the great Vaughan. So was sorry I did
observe him no more, and gain more of his acquaintance. After dinner,
they being gone, and I mightily pleased with my guests, I down the river
to Greenwich, about business, and thence walked to Woolwich, reading
"The Rivall Ladys" all the way, and find it a most pleasant and fine
writ play. At Woolwich saw Mr. Shelden, it being late, and there eat and
drank, being kindly used by him and Bab, and so by water to Deptford,
it being 10 o'clock before I got to Deptford, and dark, and there to
Bagwell's, and, having staid there a while, away home, and after supper
to bed. The Duke of Yorke said this day that by the letters from the
Generals they would sail with the Fleete this day or to-morrow.

19th. Up in very good health in every respect, only my late fever got
by my pain do break out about my mouth. So to the office, where all the
morning sitting. Full of wants of money, and much stores to buy, for to
replenish the stores, and no money to do it with, nor anybody to trust
us without it. So at noon home to dinner, Balty and his wife with us. By
and by Balty takes his leave of us, he going away just now towards the
fleete, where he will pass through one great engagement more before
he be two days older, I believe. I to the office, where busy all the
afternoon, late, and then home, and, after some pleasant discourse to
my wife, to bed. After I was in bed I had a letter from Sir W. Coventry
that tells me that the fleete is sailed this morning; God send us good
newes of them!

20th. Up, and finding by a letter late last night that the fleete is
gone, and that Sir W. Pen is ordered to go down to Sheernesse, and
finding him ready to go to St. James's this morning, I was willing to go
with him to see how things go,

     [Sir William Penn's instructions from the Duke of York directing him
     to embark on his Majesty's yacht "Henrietta," and to see to the
     manning of such ships has had been left behind by the fleet, dated
     on this day, 20th July, is printed in Penn's "Memorials of Sir W.
     Penn," vol. ii., p. 406.]

and so with him thither (but no discourse with the Duke), but to White
Hall, and there the Duke of York did bid Sir W. Pen to stay to discourse
with him and the King about business of the fleete, which troubled me a
little, but it was only out of envy, for which I blame myself, having no
reason to expect to be called to advise in a matter I understand not. So
I away to Lovett's, there to see how my picture goes on to be varnished
(a fine Crucifix),

     [This picture occasioned Pepys trouble long afterwards, having been
     brought as evidence that he was a Papist (see "Life," vol. i., p.
     xxxiii).]

which will be very fine; and here I saw some fine prints, brought from
France by Sir Thomas Crew, who is lately returned. So home, calling at
the stationer's for some paper fit to varnish, and in my way home met
with Lovett, to whom I gave it, and he did present me with a varnished
staffe, very fine and light to walk with. So home and to dinner, there
coming young Mrs. Daniel and her sister Sarah, and dined with us; and
old Mr. Hawly, whose condition pities me, he being forced to turne under
parish-clerke at St. Gyles's, I think at the other end of the towne.
Thence I to the office, where busy all the afternoon, and in the evening
with Sir W. Pen, walking with whom in the garden I am of late mighty
great, and it is wisdom to continue myself so, for he is of all the men
of the office at present most manifestly usefull and best thought of. He
and I supped together upon the seat in the garden, and thence, he gone,
my wife and Mercer come and walked and sang late, and then home to bed.

21st. Up and to the office, where all the morning sitting. At noon
walked in the garden with Commissioner Pett (newly come to towne), who
tells me how infinite the disorders are among the commanders and all
officers of the fleete. No discipline: nothing but swearing and cursing,
and every body doing what they please; and the Generalls, understanding
no better, suffer it, to the reproaching of this Board, or whoever
it will be. He himself hath been challenged twice to the field, or
something as good, by Sir Edward Spragge and Captain Seymour. He tells
me that captains carry, for all the late orders, what men they please;
demand and consume what provisions they please. So that he fears, and
I do no less, that God Almighty cannot bless us while we keep in this
disorder that we are in: he observing to me too, that there is no man
of counsel or advice in the fleete; and the truth is, the gentlemen
captains will undo us, for they are not to be kept in order, their
friends about the King and Duke, and their own house, is so free, that
it is not for any person but the Duke himself to have any command over
them. He gone I to dinner, and then to the office, where busy all the
afternoon. At night walked in the garden with my wife, and so I home to
supper and to bed. Sir W. Pen is gone down to Sheernesse to-day to see
things made ready against the fleete shall come in again, which makes
Pett mad, and calls him dissembling knave, and that himself takes all
the pains and is blamed, while he do nothing but hinder business and
takes all the honour of it to himself, and tells me plainly he will
fling, up his commission rather than bear it.

22nd (Lord's day). Up, and to my chamber, and there till noon mighty
busy, setting money matters and other things of mighty moment to rights
to the great content of my mind, I finding that accounts but a little
let go can never be put in order by strangers, for I cannot without
much difficulty do it myself. After dinner to them again till about
four o'clock and then walked to White Hall, where saw nobody almost but
walked up and down with Hugh May, who is a very ingenious man. Among
other things, discoursing of the present fashion of gardens to make
them plain, that we have the best walks of gravell in the world, France
having no nor Italy; and our green of our bowling allies is better than
any they have. So our business here being ayre, this is the best way,
only with a little mixture of statues, or pots, which may be handsome,
and so filled with another pot of such and such a flower or greene as
the season of the year will bear. And then for flowers, they are best
seen in a little plat by themselves; besides, their borders spoil the
walks of another garden: and then for fruit, the best way is to have
walls built circularly one within another, to the South, on purpose for
fruit, and leave the walking garden only for that use. Thence walked
through the House, where most people mighty hush and, methinks,
melancholy. I see not a smiling face through the whole Court; and, in
my conscience, they are doubtfull of the conduct again of the Generalls,
and I pray God they may not make their fears reasonable. Sir Richard
Fanshaw is lately dead at Madrid. Guyland is lately overthrowne wholly
in Barbary by the King of Tafiletta. The fleete cannot yet get clear of
the River, but expect the first wind to be out, and then to be sure they
fight. The Queene and Maids of Honour are at Tunbridge.

23rd. Up, and to my chamber doing several things there of moment, and
then comes Sympson, the Joyner; and he and I with great pains contriving
presses to put my books up in: they now growing numerous, and lying
one upon another on my chairs, I lose the use to avoyde the trouble of
removing them, when I would open a book. Thence out to the Excise office
about business, and then homewards met Colvill, who tells me he hath
L1000 ready for me upon a tally; which pleases me, and yet I know not
now what to do with it, having already as much money as is fit for me
to have in the house, but I will have it. I did also meet Alderman
Backewell, who tells me of the hard usage he now finds from Mr. Fen, in
not getting him a bill or two paid, now that he can be no more usefull
to him; telling me that what by his being abroad and Shaw's death he
hath lost the ball, but that he doubts not to come to give a kicke at it
still, and then he shall be wiser and keepe it while he hath it. But
he says he hath a good master, the King, who will not suffer him to be
undone, as otherwise he must have been, and I believe him. So home and
to dinner, where I confess, reflecting upon the ease and plenty that I
live in, of money, goods, servants, honour, every thing, I could not but
with hearty thanks to Almighty God ejaculate my thanks to Him while I
was at dinner, to myself. After dinner to the office and there till five
or six o'clock, and then by coach to St. James's and there with Sir W.
Coventry and Sir G. Downing to take the gyre in the Parke. All full
of expectation of the fleete's engagement, but it is not yet. Sir W.
Coventry says they are eighty-nine men-of-warr, but one fifth-rate,
and that, the Sweepstakes, which carries forty guns. They are most
infinitely manned. He tells me the Loyall London, Sir J. Smith (which,
by the way, he commends to be the-best ship in the world, large and
small), hath above eight hundred men; and moreover takes notice, which
is worth notice, that the fleete hath lane now near fourteen days
without any demand for a farthingworth of any thing of any kind, but
only to get men. He also observes, that with this excesse of men,
nevertheless, they have thought fit to leave behind them sixteen ships,
which they have robbed of their men, which certainly might have been
manned, and they been serviceable in the fight, and yet the fleete
well-manned, according to the excesse of supernumeraries, which we hear
they have. At least two or three of them might have been left manned,
and sent away with the Gottenburgh ships. They conclude this to be much
the best fleete, for force of guns, greatnesse and number of ships
and men, that ever England did see; being, as Sir W. Coventry
reckons, besides those left behind, eighty-nine men of warr and twenty
fire-ships, though we cannot hear that they have with them above
eighteen. The French are not yet joined with the Dutch, which do
dissatisfy the Hollanders, and if they should have a defeat, will
undo De Witt; the people generally of Holland do hate this league with
France. We cannot think of any business, but lie big with expectation of
the issue of this fight, but do conclude that, this fight being over,
we shall be able to see the whole issue of the warr, good or bad. So
homeward, and walked over the Parke (St. James's) with Sir G. Downing,
and at White Hall took a coach; and there to supper with much pleasure
and to bed.

24th. Up, and to the office, where little business done, our heads being
full of expectation of the fleete's being engaged, but no certain notice
of it, only Sheppeard in the Duke's yacht left them yesterday morning
within a league of the Dutch fleete, and making after them, they
standing into the sea. At noon to dinner, and after dinner with Mercer
(as of late my practice is) a song and so to the office, there to set up
again my frames about my Platts, which I have got to be all gilded,
and look very fine, and then to my business, and busy very late, till
midnight, drawing up a representation of the state of my victualling
business to the Duke, I having never appeared to him doing anything
yet and therefore I now do it in writing, I now having the advantage
of having had two fleetes dispatched in better condition than ever any
fleetes were yet, I believe; at least, with least complaint, and by this
means I shall with the better confidence get my bills out for my salary.
So home to bed.

25th. Up betimes to write fair my last night's paper for the Duke, and
so along with Sir W. Batten by hackney coach to St. James's, where the
Duke is gone abroad with the King to the Parke, but anon come back to
White Hall, and we, after an houre's waiting, walked thither (I having
desired Sir W. Coventry in his chamber to read over my paper about the
victualling, which he approves of, and I am glad I showed it him first,
it makes it the less necessary to show it the Duke at all, if I find
it best to let it alone). At White Hall we find [the Court] gone to
Chappell, it being St. James's-day. And by and by, while they are at
chappell, and we waiting chappell being done, come people out of the
Parke, telling us that the guns are heard plain. And so every body to
the Parke, and by and by the chappell done, and the King and Duke into
the bowling-green, and upon the leads, whither I went, and there the
guns were plain to be heard; though it was pretty to hear how confident
some would be in the loudnesse of the guns, which it was as much as
ever I could do to hear them. By and by the King to dinner, and I waited
there his dining; but, Lord! how little I should be pleased, I think,
to have so many people crowding about me; and among other things it
astonished me to see my Lord Barkeshire waiting at table, and serving
the King drink, in that dirty pickle as I never saw man in my life. Here
I met Mr. Williams, who in serious discourse told me he did hope well
of this fight because of the equality of force or rather our having the
advantage in number, and also because we did not go about it with the
presumption that we did heretofore, when, he told me, he did before the
last fight look upon us by our pride fated to be overcome. He would have
me to dine where he was invited to dine, at the Backe-stayres. So after
the King's meat was taken away, we thither; but he could not stay, but
left me there among two or three of the King's servants, where we dined
with the meat that come from his table; which was most excellent, with
most brave drink cooled in ice (which at this hot time was welcome), and
I drinking no wine, had metheglin for the King's owne drinking, which
did please me mightily. Thence, having dined mighty nobly, I away to
Mrs. Martin's new lodgings, where I find her, and was with her close,
but, Lord! how big she is already. She is, at least seems, in mighty
trouble for her husband at sea, when I am sure she cares not for him,
and I would not undeceive her, though I know his ship is one of those
that is not gone, but left behind without men. Thence to White Hall
again to hear news, but found none; so back toward Westminster, and
there met Mrs. Burroughs, whom I had a mind to meet, but being undressed
did appear a mighty ordinary woman. Thence by water home, and out again
by coach to Lovett's to see my Crucifix, which is not done. So to White
Hall again to have met Sir G. Carteret, but he is gone, abroad, so back
homewards, and seeing Mr. Spong took him up, and he and I to Reeves, the
glass maker's, and did set several glasses and had pretty discourse with
him, and so away, and set down Mr. Spong in London, and so home and with
my wife, late, twatling at my Lady Pen's, and so home to supper and
to bed. I did this afternoon call at my woman that ruled my paper to
bespeak a musique card, and there did kiss Nan. No news to-night from
the fleete how matters go yet.

26th. Up, and to the office, where all the morning. At noon dined at
home: Mr. Hunt and his wife, who is very gallant, and newly come from
Cambridge, because of the sicknesse, with us. Very merry at table, and
the people I do love mightily, but being in haste to go to White Hall
I rose, and Mr. Hunt with me, and by coach thither, where I left him in
the boarded gallery, and I by appointment to attend the Duke of Yorke
at his closett, but being not come, Sir G. Carteret and I did talke
together, and [he] advises me, that, if I could, I would get the papers
of examination touching the business of the last year's prizes, which
concern my Lord Sandwich, out of Warcupp's hands, who being now under
disgrace and poor, he believes may be brought easily to part with them.
My Lord Crew, it seems, is fearfull yet that maters may be enquired
into. This I will endeavour to do, though I do not thinke it signifies
much. By and by the Duke of Yorke comes and we had a meeting and,
among other things, I did read my declaration of the proceedings of the
Victualling hired this yeare, and desired his Royall Highnesse to give
me the satisfaction of knowing whether his Royall Highnesse were pleased
therewith. He told me he was, and that it was a good account, and that
the business of the Victualling was much in a better condition than it
was the last yeare; which did much joy me, being said in the company of
my fellows, by which I shall be able with confidence to demand my salary
and the rest of the subsurveyors. Thence away mightily satisfied to Mrs.
Pierces, there to find my wife. Mrs. Pierce hath lain in of a boy about
a month. The boy is dead this day. She lies in good state, and very
pretty she is, but methinks do every day grow more and more great, and a
little too much, unless they get more money than I fear they do. Thence
with my wife and Mercer to my Lord Chancellor's new house, and there
carried them up to the leads, where I find my Lord Chamberlain,
Lauderdale, Sir Robert Murray, and others, and do find it the most
delightfull place for prospect that ever was in the world, and even
ravishing me, and that is all, in short, I can say of it. Thence to
Islington to our old house and eat and drank, and so round by Kingsland
home, and there to the office a little and Sir W. Batten's, but no newes
at all from the fleete, and so home to bed.

27th. Up and to the office, where all the morning busy. At noon dined at
home and then to the office again, and there walking in the garden with
Captain Cocke till 5 o'clock. No newes yet of the fleete. His great
bargaine of Hempe with us by his unknown proposition is disliked by the
King, and so is quite off; of which he is glad, by this means being
rid of his obligation to my Lord Bruncker, which he was tired with, and
especially his mistresse, Mrs. Williams, and so will fall into another
way about it, wherein he will advise only with myself, which do not
displease me, and will be better for him and the King too. Much common
talke of publique business, the want of money, the uneasinesse that
Parliament will find in raising any, and the ill condition we shall be
in if they do not, and his confidence that the Swede is true to us, but
poor, but would be glad to do us all manner of service in the world.
He gone, I away by water from the Old Swan to White Hall. The waterman
tells me that newes is come that our ship Resolution is burnt, and that
we had sunke four or five of the enemy's ships. When I come to White
Hall I met with Creed, and he tells me the same news, and walking with
him to the Park I to Sir W. Coventry's lodging, and there he showed me
Captain Talbot's letter, wherein he says that the fight begun on the
25th; that our White squadron begun with one of the Dutch squadrons, and
then the Red with another so hot that we put them both to giving way,
and so they continued in pursuit all the day, and as long as he stayed
with them: that the Blue fell to the Zealand squadron; and after a long
dispute, he against two or three great ships, he received eight or
nine dangerous shots, and so come away; and says, he saw the Resolution
burned by one of their fire-ships, and four or five of the enemy's. But
says that two or three of our great ships were in danger of being fired
by our owne fire-ships, which Sir W. Coventry, nor I, cannot understand.
But upon the whole, he and I walked two or three turns in the Parke
under the great trees, and do doubt that this gallant is come away a
little too soon, having lost never a mast nor sayle. And then we did
begin to discourse of the young gentlemen captains, which he was very
free with me in speaking his mind of the unruliness of them; and what
a losse the King hath of his old men, and now of this Hannam, of the
Resolution, if he be dead, and that there is but few old sober men in
the fleete, and if these few of the Flags that are so should die, he
fears some other gentlemen captains will get in, and then what a council
we shall have, God knows. He told me how he is disturbed to hear
the commanders at sea called cowards here on shore, and that he was
yesterday concerned publiquely at a dinner to defend them, against
somebody that said that not above twenty of them fought as they should
do, and indeed it is derived from the Duke of Albemarle himself, who
wrote so to the King and Duke, and that he told them how they fought
four days, two of them with great disadvantage. The Count de Guiche,
who was on board De Ruyter, writing his narrative home in French of the
fight, do lay all the honour that may be upon the English courage above
the Dutch, and that he himself [Sir W. Coventry] was sent down from the
King and Duke of Yorke after the fight, to pray them to spare none that
they thought had not done their parts, and that they had removed but
four, whereof Du Tell is one, of whom he would say nothing; but, it
seems, the Duke of Yorke hath been much displeased at his removal, and
hath now taken him into his service, which is a plain affront to the
Duke of Albemarle; and two of the others, Sir W. Coventry did speake
very slenderly of their faults. Only the last, which was old Teddiman,
he says, is in fault, and hath little to excuse himself with; and
that, therefore, we should not be forward in condemning men of want
of courage, when the Generalls, who are both men of metal, and hate
cowards, and had the sense of our ill successe upon them (and by the way
must either let the world thinke it was the miscarriage of the Captains
or their owne conduct), have thought fit to remove no more of them, when
desired by the King and Duke of Yorke to do it, without respect to
any favour any of them can pretend to in either of them. At last we
concluded that we never can hope to beat the Dutch with such advantage
as now in number and force and a fleete in want of nothing, and he hath
often repeated now and at other times industriously that many of the
Captains have: declared that they want nothing, and again, that they did
lie ten days together at the Nore without demanding of any thing in
the world but men, and of them they afterward, when they went away, the
generalls themselves acknowledge that they have permitted several ships
to carry supernumeraries, but that if we do not speede well, we must
then play small games and spoile their trade in small parties. And so we
parted, and I, meeting Creed in the Parke again, did take him by coach
and to Islington, thinking to have met my Lady Pen and wife, but they
were gone, so we eat and drank and away back, setting him down in
Cheapside and I home, and there after a little while making of my tune
to "It is decreed," to bed.

28th. Up, and to the office, where no more newes of the fleete than was
yesterday. Here we sat and at noon to dinner to the Pope's Head, where
my Lord Bruncker and his mistresse dined and Commissioner Pett, Dr.
Charleton, and myself, entertained with a venison pasty by Sir W.
Warren. Here very pretty discourse of Dr. Charleton's, concerning
Nature's fashioning every creature's teeth according to the food she
intends them; and that men's, it is plain, was not for flesh, but for
fruit, and that he can at any time tell the food of a beast unknown
by the teeth. My Lord Bruncker made one or two objections to it that
creatures find their food proper for their teeth rather than that
the teeth were fitted for the food, but the Doctor, I think, did well
observe that creatures do naturally and from the first, before they have
had experience to try, do love such a food rather than another, and that
all children love fruit, and none brought to flesh, but against their
wills at first. Thence with my Lord Bruncker to White Hall, where no
news. So to St. James's to Sir W. Coventry, and there hear only of the
Bredah's being come in and gives the same small account that the other
did yesterday, so that we know not what is done by the body of the
fleete at all, but conceive great reason to hope well. Thence with my
Lord to his coach-house, and there put in his six horses into his coach,
and he and I alone to Highgate. All the way going and coming I learning
of him the principles of Optickes, and what it is that makes an object
seem less or bigger and how much distance do lessen an object, and
that it is not the eye at all, or any rule in optiques, that can tell
distance, but it is only an act of reason comparing of one mark with
another, which did both please and inform me mightily. Being come
thither we went to my Lord Lauderdale's house to speake with him, about
getting a man at Leith to joyne with one we employ to buy some prize
goods for the King; we find [him] and his lady and some Scotch people
at supper. Pretty odd company; though my Lord Bruncker tells me, my Lord
Lauderdale is a man of mighty good reason and judgement. But at supper
there played one of their servants upon the viallin some Scotch tunes
only; several, and the best of their country, as they seemed to esteem
them, by their praising and admiring them: but, Lord! the strangest ayre
that ever I heard in my life, and all of one cast. But strange to hear
my Lord Lauderdale say himself that he had rather hear a cat mew, than
the best musique in the world; and the better the musique, the more
sicke it makes him; and that of all instruments, he hates the lute most,
and next to that, the baggpipe. Thence back with my Lord to his house,
all the way good discourse, informing of myself about optiques still,
and there left him and by a hackney home, and after writing three or
four letters, home to supper and to bed.

29th (Lord's day). Up and all the morning in my chamber making up my
accounts in my book with my father and brother and stating them. Towards
noon before sermon was done at church comes newes by a letter to Sir W.
Batten, to my hand, of the late fight, which I sent to his house, he at
church. But, Lord! with what impatience I staid till sermon was done,
to know the issue of the fight, with a thousand hopes and fears and
thoughts about the consequences of either. At last sermon is done and he
come home, and the bells immediately rung soon as the church was done.
But coming; to Sir W. Batten to know the newes, his letter said nothing
of it; but all the towne is full of a victory. By and by a letter from
Sir W. Coventry tells me that we have the victory. Beat them into the
Weelings;

     [In a letter from Richard Browne to Williamson, dated Yarmouth, July
     30th, we read, "The Zealanders were engaged with the Blue squadron
     Wednesday and most of Thursday, but at length the Zealanders ran;
     the Dutch fleet escaped to the Weelings and Goree" ("Calendar of
     State Papers," 1665-66, p  591).]

had taken two of their great ships; but by the orders of the Generalls
they are burned. This being, methought, but a poor result after the
fighting of two so great fleetes, and four days having no tidings of
them, I was still impatient; but could know no more. So away home to
dinner, where Mr. Spong and Reeves dined with me by invitation. And
after dinner to our business of my microscope to be shown some of the
observables of that, and then down to my office to looke in a darke room
with my glasses and tube, and most excellently things appeared indeed
beyond imagination. This was our worke all the afternoon trying the
several glasses and several objects, among others, one of my plates,
where the lines appeared so very plain that it is not possible to thinke
how plain it was done. Thence satisfied exceedingly with all this we
home and to discourse many pretty things, and so staid out the afternoon
till it began to be dark, and then they away and I to Sir W. Batten,
where the Lieutenant of the Tower was, and Sir John Minnes, and the
newes I find is no more or less than what I had heard before; only that
our Blue squadron, it seems, was pursued the most of the time, having
more ships, a great many, than its number allotted to her share. Young
Seamour is killed, the only captain slain. The Resolution burned; but,
as they say, most of her [crew] and commander saved. This is all, only
we keep the sea, which denotes a victory, or at least that we are not
beaten; but no great matters to brag of, God knows. So home to supper
and to bed.

30th. Up, and did some business in my chamber, then by and by comes my
boy's Lute-Master, and I did direct him hereafter to begin to teach him
to play his part on the Theorbo, which he will do, and that in a little
time I believe. So to the office, and there with Sir W. Warren, with
whom I have spent no time a good while. We set right our business of the
Lighters, wherein I thinke I shall get L100. At noon home to dinner and
there did practise with Mercer one of my new tunes that I have got Dr.
Childe to set me a base to and it goes prettily. Thence abroad to pay
several debts at the end of the month, and so to Sir W. Coventry, at St.
James's, where I find him in his new closett, which is very fine, and
well supplied with handsome books. I find him speak very slightly of
the late victory: dislikes their staying with the fleete up their coast,
believing that the Dutch will come out in fourteen days, and then we
with our unready fleete, by reason of some of the ships being maymed,
shall be in bad condition to fight them upon their owne coast: is much
dissatisfied with the great number of men, and their fresh demands of
twenty-four victualling ships, they going out but the other day as full
as they could stow. I asked him whether he did never desire an account
of the number of supernumeraries, as I have done several ways, without
which we shall be in great errour about the victuals; he says he has
done it again and again, and if any mistake should happen they must
thanke themselves. He spoke slightly of the Duke of Albemarle, saying,
when De Ruyter come to give him a broadside--"Now," says he, chewing of
tobacco the while, "will this fellow come and give, me two broadsides,
and then he will run;" but it seems he held him to it two hours, till
the Duke himself was forced to retreat to refit, and was towed off, and
De Ruyter staid for him till he come back again to fight. One in the
ship saying to the Duke, "Sir, methinks De Ruyter hath given us more:
than two broadsides;"--"Well," says the Duke, "but you shall find him
run by and by," and so he did, says Sir W. Coventry; but after the Duke
himself had been first made to fall off. The Resolution had all brass
guns, being the same that Sir J. Lawson had in her in the Straights. It
is observed that the two fleetes were even in number to one ship. Thence
home; and to sing with my wife and Mercer in the garden; and coming in I
find my wife plainly dissatisfied with me, that I can spend so much time
with Mercer, teaching her to sing and could never take the pains with
her. Which I acknowledge; but it is because that the girl do take
musique mighty readily, and she do not, and musique is the thing of the
world that I love most, and all the pleasure almost that I can now take.
So to bed in some little discontent, but no words from me.

31st. Good friends in the morning and up to the office, where sitting
all the morning, and while at table we were mightily joyed with newes
brought by Sir J. Minnes and Sir W. Batten of the death of De Ruyter,
but when Sir W. Coventry come, he told us there was no such thing, which
quite dashed me again, though, God forgive me! I was a little sorry in
my heart before lest it might give occasion of too much glory to the
Duke of Albemarle. Great bandying this day between Sir W. Coventry and
my Lord Bruncker about Captain Cocke, which I am well pleased with,
while I keepe from any open relyance on either side, but rather on Sir
W. Coventry's. At noon had a haunch of venison boiled and a very good
dinner besides, there dining with me on a sudden invitation the two
mayden sisters, Bateliers, and their elder brother, a pretty man,
understanding and well discoursed, much pleased with his company.
Having dined myself I rose to go to a Committee of Tangier, and did
come thither time enough to meet Povy and Creed and none else. The Court
being empty, the King being gone to Tunbridge, and the Duke of Yorke
a-hunting. I had some discourse with Povy, who is mightily discontented,
I find, about his disappointments at Court; and says, of all places,
if there be hell, it is here. No faith, no truth, no love, nor any
agreement between man and wife, nor friends. He would have spoke
broader, but I put it off to another time; and so parted. Then with
Creed and read over with him the narrative of the late [fight], which he
makes a very poor thing of, as it is indeed, and speaks most
slightingly of the whole matter. Povy discoursed with me about my Lord
Peterborough's L50 which his man did give me from him, the last year's
salary I paid him, which he would have Povy pay him again; but I have
not taken it to myself yet, and therefore will most heartily return him,
and mark him out for a coxcomb. Povy went down to Mr. Williamson's, and
brought me up this extract out of the Flanders' letters to-day come:
That Admiral Everson, and the Admiral and Vice-Admiral of Freezeland,
with many captains and men, are slain; that De Ruyter is safe, but lost
250 men out of his own ship; but that he is in great disgrace, and Trump
in better favour; that Bankert's ship is burned, himself hardly escaping
with a few men on board De Haes; that fifteen captains are to be tried
the seventh of August; and that the hangman was sent from Flushing to
assist the Council of Warr. How much of this is true, time will shew.
Thence to Westminster Hall and walked an hour with Creed talking of the
late fight, and observing the ridiculous management thereof and success
of the Duke of Albemarle. Thence parted and to Mrs. Martin's lodgings,
and sat with her a while, and then by water home, all the way reading
the Narrative of the late fight in order, it may be, to the making some
marginal notes upon it. At the Old Swan found my Betty Michell at the
doore, where I staid talking with her a pretty while, it being dusky,
and kissed her and so away home and writ my letters, and then home to
supper, where the brother and Mary Batelier are still and Mercer's two
sisters. They have spent the time dancing this afternoon, and we were
very merry, and then after supper into the garden and there walked, and
then home with them and then back again, my wife and I and the girle,
and sang in the garden and then to bed. Colville was with me this
morning, and to my great joy I could now have all my money in, that I
have in the world. But the times being open again, I thinke it is best
to keepe some of it abroad. Mighty well, and end this month in content
of mind and body. The publique matters looking more safe for the present
than they did, and we having a victory over the Dutch just such as I
could have wished, and as the kingdom was fit to bear, enough to give us
the name of conquerors, and leave us masters of the sea, but without any
such great matters done as should give the Duke of Albemarle any honour
at all, or give him cause to rise to his former insolence.




AUGUST 1666

August 1st. Up betimes to the settling of my last month's accounts, and
I bless God I find them very clear, and that I am worth L5700, the most
that ever my book did yet make out. So prepared to attend the Duke of
Yorke as usual, but Sir W. Pen, just as I was going out, comes home from
Sheernesse, and held me in discourse about publique business, till I
come by coach too late to St. James's, and there find that every thing
stood still, and nothing done for want of me. Thence walked over the
Parke with Sir W. Coventry, who I clearly see is not thoroughly pleased
with the late management of the fight, nor with any thing that the
Generalls do; only is glad to hear that De Ruyter is out of favour, and
that this fight hath cost them 5,000 men, as they themselves do
report. And it is a strange thing, as he observes, how now and then the
slaughter runs on one hand; there being 5,000 killed on theirs, and not
above 400 or 500 killed and wounded on ours, and as many flag-officers
on theirs as ordinary captains in ours; there being Everson, and the
Admiral and Vice-Admiral of Freezeland on theirs, and Seamour, Martin,
and-----, on ours. I left him going to Chappell, it being the common
fast day, and the Duke of York at Chappell. And I to Mrs. Martin's, but
she abroad, so I sauntered to or again to the Abbey, and then to the
parish church, fearfull of being seen to do so, and so after the parish
church was ended, I to the Swan and there dined upon a rabbit, and after
dinner to Mrs. Martin's, and there find Mrs. Burroughs, and by and by
comes a pretty widow, one Mrs. Eastwood, and one Mrs. Fenton, a maid;
and here merry kissing and looking on their breasts, and all the
innocent pleasure in the world. But, Lord! to see the dissembling
of this widow, how upon the singing of a certain jigg by Doll, Mrs.
Martin's sister, she seemed to be sick and fainted and God knows what,
because the jigg, which her husband (who died this last sickness) loved.
But by and by I made her as merry as is possible, and towzed and tumbled
her as I pleased, and then carried her and her sober pretty kinswoman
Mrs. Fenton home to their lodgings in the new market of my Lord
Treasurer's, and there left them. Mightily pleased with this afternoon's
mirth, but in great pain to ride in a coach with them, for fear of being
seen. So home, and there much pleased with my wife's drawing today in
her pictures, and so to supper and to bed very pleasant.

2nd. [Up] and to the office, where we sat, and in discourse at the table
with Sir W. Batten, I was obliged to tell him it was an untruth, which
did displease him mightily, and parted at noon very angry with me. At
home find Lovett, who brought me some papers varnished, and showed me
my crucifix, which will be very fine when done. He dined with me and
Balty's wife, who is in great pain for her husband, not hearing of him
since the fight; but I understand he was not in it, going hence too
late, and I am glad of it. Thence to the office, and thither comes to
me Creed, and he and I walked a good while, and then to the victualling
office together, and there with Mr. Gawden I did much business, and
so away with Creed again, and by coach to see my Lord Bruncker, who it
seems was not well yesterday, but being come thither, I find his coach
ready to carry him abroad, but Tom, his footman, whatever the matter
was, was lothe to desire me to come in, but I walked a great while in
the Piatza till I was going away, but by and by my Lord himself comes
down and coldly received me. So I soon parted, having enough for my over
officious folly in troubling myself to visit him, and I am apt to think
that he was fearfull that my coming was out of design to see how he
spent his time [rather] than to enquire after his health. So parted, and
I with Creed down to the New Exchange Stairs, and there I took water,
and he parted, so home, and then down to Woolwich, reading and making an
end of the "Rival Ladys," and find it a very pretty play. At Woolwich,
it being now night, I find my wife and Mercer, and Mr. Batelier and Mary
there, and a supper getting ready. So I staid, in some pain, it being
late, and post night. So supped and merrily home, but it was twelve at
night first. However, sent away some letters, and home to bed.

3rd. Up and to the office, where Sir W. Batten and I sat to contract for
some fire-ships. I there close all the morning. At noon home to dinner,
and then abroad to Sir Philip Warwicke's at White Hall about Tangier one
quarter tallys, and there had some serious discourse touching money, and
the case of the Navy, wherein all I could get of him was that we had the
full understanding of the treasure as much as my Lord Treasurer himself,
and knew what he can do, and that whatever our case is, more money
cannot be got till the Parliament. So talked of getting an account
ready as soon as we could to give the Parliament, and so very melancholy
parted. So I back again, calling my wife at her sister's, from whose
husband we do now hear that he was safe this week, and going in a ship
to the fleete from the buoy of the Nore, where he has been all this
while, the fleete being gone before he got down. So home, and busy till
night, and then to Sir W. Pen, with my wife, to sit and chat, and a
small supper, and home to bed. The death of Everson, and the report of
our success, beyond expectation, in the killing of so great a number of
men, hath raised the estimation of the late victory considerably; but it
is only among fools: for all that was but accidental. But this morning,
getting Sir.W. Pen to read over the Narrative with me, he did sparingly,
yet plainly, say that we might have intercepted their Zealand squadron
coming home, if we had done our parts; and more, that we might have
spooned before the wind as well as they, and have overtaken their ships
in the pursuite, in all the while.

     [To spoom, or spoon, is to go right before the wind, without any
     sail.  Sea Dictionary.  Dryden uses the word

              "When virtue spooms before a prosperous gale,
               My heaving wishes help to fill the sail."
                                        Hind and Panther, iii. 96.]

4th. Up, and to the office, where all the morning, and, at noon
to dinner, and Mr. Cooke dined with us, who is lately come from
Hinchingbroke, [Lord Hinchingbrooke] who is also come to town: The
family all well. Then I to the office, where very busy to state to Mr.
Coventry the account of the victuals of the fleete, and late at it, and
then home to supper and to bed. This evening, Sir W. Pen come into the
garden, and walked with me, and told me that he had certain notice that
at Flushing they are in great distraction. De Ruyter dares not come on
shore for fear of the people; nor any body open their houses or shops
for fear of the tumult: which is a every good hearing.

5th. (Lord's day). Up, and down to the Old Swan, and there called Betty
Michell and her husband, and had two or three a long salutes from her
out of sight of 'su mari', which pleased me mightily, and so carried
them by water to West minster, and I to St. James's, and there had a
meeting before the Duke of Yorke, complaining of want of money, but
nothing done to any purpose, for want we shall, so that now our advices
to him signify nothing. Here Sir W. Coventry did acquaint the Duke of
Yorke how the world do discourse of the ill method of our books, and
that we would consider how to answer any enquiry which shall be made
after our practice therein, which will I think concern the Controller
most, but I shall make it a memento to myself. Thence walked to the
Parish Church to have one look upon Betty Michell, and so away homeward
by water, and landed to go to the church, where, I believe, Mrs.
Horsely goes, by Merchant-tailors' Hall, and there I find in the pulpit
Elborough, my old schoolfellow and a simple rogue, and yet I find him
preaching a very good sermon, and in as right a parson-like manner, and
in good manner too, as I have heard any body; and the church very full,
which is a surprising consideration; but I did not see her. So home, and
had a good dinner, and after dinner with my wife, and Mercer, and Jane
by water, all the afternoon up as high as Morclaeke with great pleasure,
and a fine day, reading over the second part of the "Siege of Rhodes,"
with great delight. We landed and walked at Barne-elmes, and then at the
Neat Houses I landed and bought a millon,--[melon]--and we did also
land and eat and drink at Wandsworth, and so to the Old Swan, and thence
walked home. It being a mighty fine cool evening, and there being come,
my wife and I spent an houre in the garden, talking of our living in
the country, when I shall be turned out of the office, as I fear the
Parliament may find faults enough with the office to remove us all, and
I am joyed to think in how good a condition I am to retire thither,
and have wherewith very well to subsist. Nan, at Sir W. Pen's, lately
married to one Markeham, a kinsman of Sir W. Pen's, a pretty wench she
is.

6th. Up, and to the office a while, and then by water to my Lady
Montagu's, at Westminster, and there visited my Lard Hinchingbroke,
newly come from Hinchingbroke, and find him a mighty sober gentleman,
to my great content. Thence to Sir Ph. Warwicke and my Lord Treasurer's,
but failed in my business; so home and in Fenchurch-streete met with Mr.
Battersby; says he, "Do you see Dan Rawlinson's door shut up?" (which I
did, and wondered). "Why," says he, "after all the sickness, and himself
spending all the last year in the country, one of his men is now dead
of the plague, and his wife and one of his mayds sicke, and himself shut
up;" which troubles me mightily. So home; and there do hear also from
Mrs. Sarah Daniel, that Greenwich is at this time much worse than ever
it was, and Deptford too: and she told us that they believed all
the towne would leave the towne and come to London; which is now the
receptacle of all the people from all infected places. God preserve us!
So by and by to dinner, and, after dinner in comes Mrs. Knipp, and I
being at the office went home to her, and there I sat and talked with
her, it being the first time of her being here since her being brought
to bed. I very pleasant with her; but perceive my wife hath no great
pleasure in her being here, she not being pleased with my kindnesse
to her. However, we talked and sang, and were very pleasant. By and by
comes Mr. Pierce and his wife, the first time she also hath been here
since her lying-in, both having been brought to bed of boys, and both
of them dead. And here we talked, and were pleasant, only my wife in
a chagrin humour, she not being pleased with my kindnesse to either of
them, and by and by she fell into some silly discourse wherein I checked
her, which made her mighty pettish, and discoursed mighty offensively to
Mrs. Pierce, which did displease me, but I would make no words, but put
the discourse by as much as I could (it being about a report that my
wife said was made of herself and meant by Mrs. Pierce, that she was
grown a gallant, when she had but so few suits of clothes these two or
three years, and a great deale of that silly discourse), and by and by
Mrs. Pierce did tell her that such discourses should not trouble her,
for there went as bad on other people, and particularly of herself at
this end of the towne, meaning my wife, that she was crooked, which was
quite false, which my wife had the wit not to acknowledge herself to be
the speaker of, though she has said it twenty times. But by this means
we had little pleasure in their visit; however, Knipp and I sang, and
then I offered them to carry them home, and to take my wife with me, but
she would not go: so I with them, leaving my wife in a very ill humour,
and very slighting to them, which vexed me. However, I would not be
removed from my civility to them, but sent for a coach, and went with
them; and, in our way, Knipp saying that she come out of doors without
a dinner to us, I took them to Old Fish Streete, to the very house and
woman where I kept my wedding dinner, where I never was since, and there
I did give them a joie of salmon, and what else was to be had. And here
we talked of the ill-humour of my wife, which I did excuse as much as
I could, and they seemed to admit of it, but did both confess they
wondered at it; but from thence to other discourse, and among others
to that of my Lord Bruncker and Mrs. Williams, who it seems do speake
mighty hardly of me for my not treating them, and not giving her
something to her closett, and do speake worse of my wife, and
dishonourably, but it is what she do of all the world, though she be a
whore herself; so I value it not. But they told me how poorly my Lord
carried himself the other day to his kinswoman, Mrs. Howard, and was
displeased because she called him uncle to a little gentlewoman that
is there with him, which he will not admit of; for no relation is to
be challenged from others to a lord, and did treat her thereupon very
rudely and ungenteely. Knipp tells me also that my Lord keeps another
woman besides Mrs. Williams; and that, when I was there the other day,
there was a great hubbub in the house, Mrs. Williams being fallen sicke,
because my Lord was gone to his other mistresse, making her wait for
him, till his return from the other mistresse; and a great deale of do
there was about it; and Mrs. Williams swounded at it, at the very time
when I was there and wondered at the reason of my being received so
negligently. I set them both at home, Knipp at her house, her husband
being at the doore; and glad she was to be found to have staid out so
long with me and Mrs. Pierce, and none else; and Mrs. Pierce at her
house, and am mightily pleased with the discretion of her during the
simplicity and offensiveness of my wife's discourse this afternoon. I
perceive by the new face at Mrs. Pierces door that our Mary is gone from
her. So I home, calling on W. Joyce in my coach, and staid and talked a
little with him, who is the same silly prating fellow that ever he
was, and so home, and there find my wife mightily out of order, and
reproaching of Mrs. Pierce and Knipp as wenches, and I know not what.
But I did give her no words to offend her, and quietly let all pass, and
so to bed without any good looke or words to or from my wife.

7th. Up, and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and home to
dinner, and then to the office again, being pretty good friends with my
wife again, no angry words passed; but she finding fault with Mercer,
suspecting that it was she that must have told Mary, that must have told
her mistresse of my wife's saying that she was crooked. But the truth
is, she is jealous of my kindnesse to her. After dinner, to the office,
and did a great deale of business. In the evening comes Mr. Reeves, with
a twelve-foote glasse, so I left the office and home, where I met Mr.
Batelier with my wife, in order to our going to-morrow, by agreement,
to Bow to see a dancing meeting. But, Lord! to see how soon I could
conceive evil fears and thoughts concerning them; so Reeves and I and
they up to the top of the house, and there we endeavoured to see the
moon, and Saturne and Jupiter; but the heavens proved cloudy, and so we
lost our labour, having taken pains to get things together, in order
to the managing of our long glasse. So down to supper and then to bed,
Reeves lying at my house, but good discourse I had from him: in his own
trade, concerning glasses, and so all of us late to bed. I receive fresh
intelligence that Deptford and Greenwich are now afresh exceedingly
afflicted with the sickness more than ever.

8th. Up, and with Reeves walk as far as the Temple, doing some business
in my way at my bookseller's and elsewhere, and there parted, and I took
coach, having first discoursed with Mr. Hooke a little, whom we met in
the streete, about the nature of sounds, and he did make me understand
the nature of musicall sounds made by strings, mighty prettily; and told
me that having come to a certain number of vibrations proper to make
any tone, he is able to tell how many strokes a fly makes with her wings
(those flies that hum in their flying) by the note that it answers to
in musique during their flying. That, I suppose, is a little too much
refined; but his discourse in general of sound was mighty fine. There
I left them, and myself by coach to St. James's, where we attended
with the rest of my fellows on the Duke, whom I found with two or three
patches upon his nose and about his right eye, which come from his being
struck with the bough of a tree the other day in his hunting; and it is
a wonder it did not strike out his eye. After we had done our business
with him, which is now but little, the want of money being such as
leaves us little to do but to answer complaints of the want thereof,
and nothing to offer to the Duke, the representing of our want of money
being now become uselesse, I into the Park, and there I met with Mrs.
Burroughs by appointment, and did agree (after discoursing of some
business of her's) for her to meet me at New Exchange, while I by coach
to my Lord Treasurer's, and then called at the New Exchange, and thence
carried her by water to Parliament stayres, and I to the Exchequer about
my Tangier quarter tallys, and that done I took coach and to the west
door of the Abby, where she come to me, and I with her by coach to
Lissen-greene where we were last, and staid an hour or two before dinner
could be got for us, I in the meantime having much pleasure with her,
but all honest. And by and by dinner come up, and then to my sport
again, but still honest; and then took coach and up and down in the
country toward Acton, and then toward Chelsy, and so to Westminster,
and there set her down where I took her up, with mighty pleasure in her
company, and so I by coach home, and thence to Bow, with all the haste
I could, to my Lady Pooly's, where my wife was with Mr. Batelier and
his sisters, and there I found a noble supper, and every thing exceeding
pleasant, and their mother, Mrs. Batelier, a fine woman, but mighty
passionate upon sudden news brought her of the loss of a dog borrowed of
the Duke of Albemarle's son to line a bitch of hers that is very pretty,
but the dog was by and by found, and so all well again, their company
mighty innocent and pleasant, we having never been here before. About
ten o'clock we rose from table, and sang a song, and so home in two
coaches (Mr. Batelier and his sister Mary and my wife and I in one, and
Mercer alone in the other); and after being examined at Allgate, whether
we were husbands and wives, home, and being there come, and sent away
Mr. Batelierand his sister, I find Reeves there, it being a mighty fine
bright night, and so upon my leads, though very sleepy, till one in the
morning, looking on the moon and Jupiter, with this twelve-foote glasse
and another of six foote, that he hath brought with him to-night, and
the sights mighty pleasant, and one of the glasses I will buy, it being
very usefull. So to bed mighty sleepy, but with much pleasure. Reeves
lying at my house again; and mighty proud I am (and ought to be
thankfull to God Almighty) that I am able to have a spare bed for my
friends.

9th. Up and to the office to prepare business for the Board, Reeves
being gone and I having lent him upon one of the glasses. Here we sat,
but to little purpose, nobody coming at us but to ask for money, not
to offer us any goods. At noon home to dinner, and then to the office
again, being mightily pleased with a Virgin's head that my wife is now
doing of. In the evening to Lumbard-streete about money, to enable me to
pay Sir G. Carteret's L3000, which he hath lodged in my hands, in behalf
of his son and my Lady Jemimah, toward their portion, which, I thank
God, I am able to do at a minute's warning. In my [way] I inquired, and
find Mrs. Rawlinson is dead of the sickness, and her mayde continues
mighty ill. He himself is got out of the house. I met also with Mr.
Evelyn in the streete, who tells me the sad condition at this very day
at Deptford for the plague, and more at Deale (within his precinct as
one of the Commissioners for sick and wounded seamen), that the towne
is almost quite depopulated. Thence back home again, and after some
business at my office, late, home to supper and to bed, I being sleepy
by my late want of rest, notwithstanding my endeavouring to get a nap of
an hour this afternoon after dinner. So home and to bed.

10th. Up and to my chamber; there did some business and then to my
office, and towards noon by water to the Exchequer about my Tangier
order, and thence back again and to the Exchange, where little newes but
what is in the book, and, among other things, of a man sent up for
by the King and Council for saying that Sir W. Coventry did give
intelligence to the Dutch of all our matters here. I met with Colvill,
and he and I did agree about his lending me L1000 upon a tally of L1000
for Tangier. Thence to Sympson, the joyner, and I am mightily pleased
with what I see of my presses for my books, which he is making for me.
So homeward, and hear in Fanchurch-streete, that now the mayde also is
dead at Mr. Rawlinson's; so that there are three dead in all, the wife,
a man-servant, and mayde-servant. Home to dinner, where sister Balty
dined with us, and met a letter come to me from him. He is well at
Harwich, going to the fleete. After dinner to the office, and anon with
my wife and sister abroad, left them in Paternoster Row, while Creed,
who was with me at the office, and I to Westminster; and leaving him in
the Strand, I to my Lord Chancellor's, and did very little business, and
so away home by water, with more and more pleasure, I every time reading
over my Lord Bacon's "Faber Fortunae." So home, and there did little
business, and then walked an hour talking of sundry things in the
garden, and find him a cunning knave, as I always observed him to be,
and so home to supper, and to bed. Pleased that this day I find, if I
please, I can have all my money in that I have out of my hands, but I am
at a loss whether to take it in or no, and pleased also to hear of Mrs.
Barbara Sheldon's good fortune, who is like to have Mr. Wood's son,
the mast-maker, a very rich man, and to be married speedily, she being
already mighty fine upon it.

11th. Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning. At noon home
to dinner, where mighty pleased at my wife's beginnings of a little
Virgin's head. To the office and did much business, and then to
Mr. Colvill's, and with him did come to an agreement about my L2600
assignment on the Exchequer, which I had of Sir W. Warren; and, to my
great joy, I think I shall get above L100 by it, but I must leave it to
be finished on Monday. Thence to the office, and there did the remainder
of my business, and so home to supper and to bed. This afternoon I hear
as if we had landed some men upon the Dutch coasts, but I believe it is
but a foolery either in the report or the attempt.

12th (Lord's day). Up and to my chamber, where busy all the morning, and
my thoughts very much upon the manner of my removal of my closett things
the next weeke into my present musique room, if I find I can spare or
get money to furnish it. By and by comes Reeves, by appointment, but
did not bring the glasses and things I expected for our discourse and my
information to-day, but we have agreed on it for next Sunday. By and
by, in comes Betty Michell and her husband, and so to dinner, I mightily
pleased with their company. We passed the whole day talking with them,
but without any pleasure, but only her being there. In the evening, all
parted, and I and my wife up to her closett to consider how to order
that the next summer, if we live to it; and then down to my chamber at
night to examine her kitchen accounts, and there I took occasion to fall
out with her for her buying a laced handkercher and pinner without my
leave. Though the thing is not much, yet I would not permit her begin
to do so, lest worse should follow. From this we began both to be angry,
and so continued till bed, and did not sleep friends.

13th. Up, without being friends with my wife, nor great enemies, being
both quiet and silent. So out to Colvill's, but he not being come to
town yet, I to Paul's Church-yarde, to treat with a bookbinder, to come
and gild the backs of all my books, to make them handsome, to stand in
my new presses, when they come. So back again to Colvill's, and there
did end our treaty, to my full content, about my Exchequer assignment
of L2600 of Sir W. Warren's, for which I give him L170 to stand to the
hazard of receiving it. So I shall get clear by it L230, which is a very
good jobb. God be praised for it! Having done with him, then he and I
took coach, and I carried him to Westminster, and there set him down,
in our way speaking of several things. I find him a bold man to say any
thing of any body, and finds fault with our great ministers of state
that nobody looks after any thing; and I thought it dangerous to be free
with him, for I do not think he can keep counsel, because he blabs to me
what hath passed between other people and him. Thence I to St. James's,
and there missed Sir W. Coventry; but taking up Mr. Robinson in my
coach, I towards London, and there in the way met Sir W. Coventry, and
followed him to White Hall, where a little discourse very kind, and so
I away with Robinson, and set him down at the 'Change, and thence I to
Stokes the goldsmith, and sent him to and again to get me L1000 in gold;
and so home to dinner, my wife and I friends, without any words almost
of last night. After dinner, I abroad to Stokes, and there did receive
L1000 worth in gold, paying 18 1/2d. and 19d. for others exchange. Home
with them, and there to my office to business, and anon home in the
evening, there to settle some of my accounts, and then to supper and to
bed.

14th. (Thanksgiving day.)

     [A proclamation ordering August 14th to be observed in London and
     Westminster, and August 23rd in other places, as a day of
     thanksgiving for the late victory at sea over the Dutch, was
     published on August 6th.]

Up, and comes Mr. Foley and his man, with a box of a great variety
of carpenter's and joyner's tooles, which I had bespoke, to me, which
please me mightily; but I will have more. Then I abroad down to the Old
Swan, and there I called and kissed Betty Michell, and would have got
her to go with me to Westminster, but I find her a little colder than
she used to be, methought, which did a little molest me. So I away not
pleased, and to White Hall, where I find them at Chappell, and met with
Povy, and he and I together, who tells me how mad my letter makes my
Lord Peterborough, and what a furious letter he hath writ to me in
answer, though it is not come yet. This did trouble me; for though there
be no reason, yet to have a nobleman's mouth open against a man may do a
man hurt; so I endeavoured to have found him out and spoke with him,
but could not. So to the chappell, and heard a piece of the Dean of
Westminster's sermon, and a special good anthemne before the king, after
a sermon, and then home by coach with Captain Cocke, who is in pain
about his hempe, of which he says he hath bought great quantities, and
would gladly be upon good terms with us for it, wherein I promise to
assist him. So we 'light at the 'Change, where, after a small turn or
two, taking no pleasure now-a-days to be there, because of answering
questions that would be asked there which I cannot answer; so home and
dined, and after dinner, with my wife and Mercer to the Beare-garden,

     [The Bear Garden was situated on Bankside, close to the precinct of
     the Clinke Liberty, and very near to the old palace of the bishops
     of Winchester.  Stow, to his "Survey," says: "There be two Bear
     Gardens, the old and new Places."  The name still exists in a street
     or lane at the foot of Southwark Bridge, and in Bear Garden Wharf.]

where I have not been, I think, of many years, and saw some good sport
of the bull's tossing of the dogs: one into the very boxes. But it is
a very rude and nasty pleasure. We had a great many hectors in the same
box with us (and one very fine went into the pit, and played his dog for
a wager, which was a strange sport for a gentleman), where they drank
wine, and drank Mercer's health first, which I pledged with my hat off;
and who should be in the house but Mr. Pierce the surgeon, who saw us
and spoke to us. Thence home, well enough satisfied, however, with the
variety of this afternoon's exercise; and so I to my chamber, till in
the evening our company come to supper. We had invited to a venison
pasty Mr. Batelier and his sister Mary, Mrs. Mercer, her daughter Anne,
Mr. Le Brun, and W. Hewer; and so we supped, and very merry. And then
about nine o'clock to Mrs. Mercer's gate, where the fire and boys
expected us, and her son had provided abundance of serpents and rockets;
and there mighty merry (my Lady Pen and Pegg going thither with us, and
Nan Wright), till about twelve at night, flinging our fireworks,
and burning one another and the people over the way. And at last our
businesses being most spent, we into Mrs. Mercer's, and there mighty
merry, smutting one another with candle grease and soot, till most of
us were like devils. And that being done, then we broke up, and to my
house; and there I made them drink, and upstairs we went, and then fell
into dancing (W. Batelier dancing well), and dressing, him and I and one
Mr. Banister (who with his wife come over also with us) like women; and
Mercer put on a suit of Tom's, like a boy, and mighty mirth we had, and
Mercer danced a jigg; and Nan Wright and my wife and Pegg Pen put on
perriwigs. Thus we spent till three or four in the morning, mighty
merry; and then parted, and to bed.

15th. Mighty sleepy; slept till past eight of the clock, and was called
up by a letter from Sir W. Coventry, which, among other things, tells me
how we have burned one hundred and sixty ships of the enemy within the
Fly.

     [On the 8th August the Duke of Albemarle reported to Lord Arlington
     that he had "sent 1000 good men under Sir R. Holmes and Sir William
     Jennings to destroy the islands of Vlie and Schelling."  On the 10th
     James Hayes wrote to Williamson: "On the 9th at noon smoke was seen
     rising from several places in the island of Vlie, and the 10th
     brought news that Sir Robert had burned in the enemy's harbour 160
     outward bound valuable merchant men and three men-of-war, and taken
     a little pleasure boat and eight guns in four hours.  The loss is
     computed at a million sterling, and will make great confusion when
     the people see themselves in the power of the English at their very
     doors.  Sir Robert then landed his forces, and is burning the houses
     in Vlie and Schelling as bonfires for his good success at sea"
     ("Calendar of State Papers," 1666-67, pp. 21,27).]

I up, and with all possible haste, and in pain for fear of coming late,
it being our day of attending the Duke of Yorke, to St. James's, where
they are full of the particulars; how they are generally good merchant
ships, some of them laden and supposed rich ships. We spent five
fire-ships upon them. We landed on the Schelling (Sir Philip Howard
with some men, and Holmes, I think; with others, about 1000 in all), and
burned a town; and so come away. By and by the Duke of Yorke with his
books showed us the very place and manner, and that it was not our
design or expectation to have done this, but only to have landed on the
Fly, and burned some of their store; but being come in, we spied those
ships, and with our long boats, one by one, fired them, our ships
running all aground, it being so shoal water. We were led to this by, it
seems, a renegado captain of the Hollanders, who found himself ill used
by De Ruyter for his good service, and so come over to us, and hath done
us good service; so that now we trust him, and he himself did go on this
expedition. The service is very great, and our joys as great for it. All
this will make the Duke of Albemarle in repute again, I doubt, though
there is nothing of his in this. But, Lord! to see what successe
do, whether with or without reason, and making a man seem wise,
notwithstanding never so late demonstration of the profoundest folly in
the world. Thence walked over the Parke with Sir W. Coventry, in our way
talking of the unhappy state of our office; and I took an opportunity to
let him know, that though the backwardnesses of all our matters of the
office may be well imputed to the known want of money, yet, perhaps,
there might be personal and particular failings; and that I did,
therefore, depend still upon his promise of telling me whenever he
finds any ground to believe any defect or neglect on my part, which he
promised me still to do; and that there was none he saw, nor, indeed,
says he, is there room now-a-days to find fault with any particular man,
while we are in this condition for money. This, methought, did not so
well please me; but, however, I am glad I have said this, thereby giving
myself good grounds to believe that at this time he did not want an
occasion to have said what he pleased to me, if he had had anything in
his mind, which by his late distance and silence I have feared. But then
again I am to consider he is grown a very great man, much greater than
he was, and so must keep more distance; and, next, that the condition of
our office will not afford me occasion of shewing myself so active
and deserving as heretofore; and, lastly, the muchness of his business
cannot suffer him to mind it, or give him leisure to reflect on
anything, or shew the freedom and kindnesse that he used to do. But I
think I have done something considerable to my satisfaction in doing
this; and that if I do but my duty remarkably from this time forward,
and not neglect it, as I have of late done, and minded my pleasures, I
may be as well as ever I was. Thence to the Exchequer, but did nothing,
they being all gone from their offices; and so to the Old Exchange,
where the towne full of the good newes, but I did not stay to tell or
hear any, but home, my head akeing and drowsy, and to dinner, and then
lay down upon the couch, thinking to get a little rest, but could not.
So down the river, reading "The Adventures of Five Houres," which the
more I read the more I admire. So down below Greenwich, but the wind
and tide being against us, I back again to Deptford, and did a little
business there, and thence walked to Redriffe; and so home, and to the
office a while. In the evening comes W. Batelier and his sister, and
my wife, and fair Mrs. Turner into the garden, and there we walked, and
then with my Lady Pen and Pegg in a-doors, and eat and were merry, and
so pretty late broke up, and to bed. The guns of the Tower going
off, and there being bonefires also in the street for this late good
successe.

16th. Up, having slept well, and after entering my journal, to the
office, where all the morning, but of late Sir W. Coventry hath not come
to us, he being discouraged from the little we have to do but to answer
the clamours of people for money. At noon home, and there dined with
me my Lady Pen only and W. Hewer at a haunch of venison boiled, where
pretty merry, only my wife vexed me a little about demanding money to go
with my Lady Pen to the Exchange to lay out. I to the office, where all
the afternoon and very busy and doing much business; but here I had a
most eminent experience of the evil of being behindhand in business. I
was the most backward to begin any thing, and would fain have framed to
myself an occasion of going abroad, and should, I doubt, have done it,
but some business coming in, one after another, kept me there, and I
fell to the ridding away of a great deale of business, and when my hand
was in it was so pleasing a sight to [see] my papers disposed of, and
letters answered, which troubled my book and table, that I could have
continued there with delight all night long, and did till called away
by my Lady Pen and Pegg and my wife to their house to eat with them;
and there I went, and exceeding merry, there being Nan Wright, now Mrs.
Markham, and sits at table with my Lady. So mighty merry, home and to
bed. This day Sir W. Batten did show us at the table a letter from Sir
T. Allen, which says that we have taken ten or twelve' ships (since
the late great expedition of burning their ships and towne), laden with
hempe, flax, tarr, deales, &c. This was good newes; but by and by comes
in Sir G. Carteret, and he asked us with full mouth what we would give
for good newes. Says Sir W. Batten, "I have better than you, for a
wager." They laid sixpence, and we that were by were to give sixpence
to him that told the best newes. So Sir W. Batten told his of the ten or
twelve ships Sir G. Carteret did then tell us that upon the newes of the
burning of the ships and towne the common people a Amsterdam did besiege
De Witt's house, and he was force to flee to the Prince of Orange, who
is gone to Cleve to the marriage of his sister. This we concluded all
the best newest and my Lord Bruncker and myself did give Sir G. Carteret
our sixpence a-piece, which he did give Mr. Smith to give the poor. Thus
we made ourselves mighty merry.

17th. Up and betimes with Captain Erwin down by water to Woolwich, I
walking alone from Greenwich thither, making an end of the "Adventures
of Five Hours," which when all is done is the best play that ever I read
in my life. Being come thither I did some business there and at the Rope
Yarde, and had a piece of bride-cake sent me by Mrs. Barbary into the
boate after me, she being here at her uncle's, with her husband, Mr.
Wood's son, the mast-maker, and mighty nobly married, they say, she
was, very fine, and he very rich, a strange fortune for so odd a looked
mayde, though her hands and body be good, and nature very good, I think.
Back with Captain Erwin, discoursing about the East Indys, where he
hath often been. And among other things he tells me how the King of Syam
seldom goes out without thirty or forty thousand people with him, and
not a word spoke, nor a hum or cough in the whole company to be heard.
He tells me the punishment frequently there for malefactors is cutting
off the crowne of their head, which they do very dexterously, leaving
their brains bare, which kills them presently. He told me what I
remember he hath once done heretofore: that every body is to lie flat
down at the coming by of the King, and nobody to look upon him upon pain
of death. And that he and his fellows, being strangers, were invited to
see the sport of taking of a wild elephant, and they did only kneel, and
look toward the King. Their druggerman did desire them to fall down,
for otherwise he should suffer for their contempt of the King. The
sport being ended, a messenger comes from the King, which the druggerman
thought had been to have taken away his life; but it was to enquire how
the strangers liked the sport. The druggerman answered that they did cry
it up to be the best that ever they saw, and that they never heard of
any Prince so great in every thing as this King. The messenger being
gone back, Erwin and his company asked their druggerman what he had
said, which he told them. "But why," say they, "would you say that
without our leave, it being not true?"--"It is no matter for that," says
he, "I must have said it, or have been hanged, for our King do not live
by meat, nor drink, but by having great lyes told him." In our way back
we come by a little vessel that come into the river this morning, and
says he left the fleete in Sole Bay, and that he hath not heard (he
belonging to Sir W. Jenings, in the fleete) of any such prizes taken as
the ten or twelve I inquired about, and said by Sir W. Batten yesterday
to be taken, so I fear it is not true. So to Westminster, and there, to
my great content, did receive my L2000 of Mr. Spicer's telling, which I
was to receive of Colvill, and brought it home with me [to] my house by
water, and there I find one of my new presses for my books brought home,
which pleases me mightily. As, also, do my wife's progresse upon her
head that she is making. So to dinner, and thence abroad with my wife,
leaving her at Unthanke's; I to White Hall, waiting at the Council door
till it rose, and there spoke with Sir W. Coventry, who and I do much
fear our Victuallers, they having missed the fleete in their going. But
Sir W. Coventry says it is not our fault, but theirs, if they have
not left ships to secure them. This he spoke in a chagrin sort of way,
methought. After a little more discourse of several businesses, I away
homeward, having in the gallery the good fortune to see Mrs. Stewart,
who is grown a little too tall, but is a woman of most excellent
features. The narrative of the late expedition in burning the ships is
in print, and makes it a great thing, and I hope it is so. So took up my
wife and home, there I to the office, and thence with Sympson the joyner
home to put together the press he hath brought me for my books this day,
which pleases me exceedingly. Then to Sir W. Batten's, where Sir Richard
Ford did very understandingly, methought, give us an account of the
originall of the Hollands Bank,

     [This bank at Amsterdam is referred to in a tract entitled "An
     Appeal to Caesar," 1660, p. 22.  In 1640 Charles I. seized the money
     in the mint in the Tower entrusted to the safe keeping of the Crown.
     It was the practice of the London goldsmiths at this time to allow
     interest at the rate of six or eight per cent. on money deposited
     with them (J. Biddulph Martin, "The Grasshopper in Lombard Street,"
     1892, p. 152).]

and the nature of it, and how they do never give any interest at all to
any person that brings in their money, though what is brought in
upon the public faith interest is given by the State for. The unsafe
condition of a Bank under a Monarch, and the little safety to a Monarch
to have any; or Corporation alone (as London in answer to Amsterdam) to
have so great a wealth or credit, it is, that makes it hard to have a
Bank here. And as to the former, he did tell us how it sticks in the
memory of most merchants how the late King (when by the war between
Holland and France and Spayne all the bullion of Spayne was brought
hither, one-third of it to be coyned; and indeed it was found
advantageous to the merchant to coyne most of it), was persuaded in
a strait by my Lord Cottington to seize upon the money in the Tower,
which, though in a few days the merchants concerned did prevail to get
it released, yet the thing will never be forgot. So home to supper
and to bed, understanding this evening, since I come home, that our
Victuallers are all come in to the fleete, which is good newes. Sir John
Minnes come home tonight not well, from Chatham, where he hath been at
a pay, holding it at Upnor Castle, because of the plague so much in the
towne of Chatham. He hath, they say, got an ague, being so much on the
water.

18th. All the morning at my office; then to the Exchange (with my Lord
Bruncker in his coach) at noon, but it was only to avoid Mr. Chr. Pett's
being invited by me to dinner. So home, calling at my little mercer's
in Lumbard Streete, who hath the pretty wench, like the old Queene, and
there cheapened some stuffs to hang my roome, that I intend to turn into
a closett. So home to dinner, and after dinner comes Creed to discourse
with me about several things of Tangier concernments and accounts, among
others starts the doubt, which I was formerly aware of, but did wink at
it, whether or no Lanyon and his partners be not paid for more than they
should be, which he presses, so that it did a little discompose me;
but, however, I do think no harm will arise thereby. He gone, I to the
office, and there very late, very busy, and so home to supper and to
bed.

19th (Lord's day). Up and to my chamber, and there began to draw out
fair and methodically my accounts of Tangier, in order to shew them to
the Lords. But by and by comes by agreement Mr. Reeves, and after him
Mr. Spong, and all day with them, both before and after dinner, till
ten o'clock at night, upon opticke enquiries, he bringing me a frame
he closes on, to see how the rays of light do cut one another, and in
a darke room with smoake, which is very pretty. He did also bring a
lanthorne with pictures in glasse, to make strange things appear on a
wall, very pretty. We did also at night see Jupiter and his girdle
and satellites, very fine, with my twelve-foote glasse, but could
not Saturne, he being very dark. Spong and I had also several fine
discourses upon the globes this afternoon, particularly why the fixed
stars do not rise and set at the same houre all the yeare long, which he
could not demonstrate, nor I neither, the reason of. So, it being late,
after supper they away home. But it vexed me to understand no more from
Reeves and his glasses touching the nature and reason of the several
refractions of the several figured glasses, he understanding the acting
part, but not one bit the theory, nor can make any body understand it,
which is a strange dullness, methinks. I did not hear anything yesterday
or at all to confirm either Sir Thos. Allen's news of the 10 or 12 ships
taken, nor of the disorder at Amsterdam upon the news of the burning of
the ships, that he [De Witt] should be fled to the Prince of Orange, it
being generally believed that he was gone to France before.

20th. Waked this morning, about six o'clock, with a violent knocking at
Sir J. Minnes's doore, to call up Mrs. Hammon, crying out that Sir J.
Minnes is a-dying. He come home ill of an ague on Friday night. I saw
him on Saturday, after his fit of the ague, and then was pretty lusty.
Which troubles me mightily, for he is a very good, harmless, honest
gentleman, though not fit for the business. But I much fear a worse
may come, that may be more uneasy to me. Up, and to Deptford by water,
reading "Othello, Moore of Venice," which I ever heretofore esteemed
a mighty good play, but having so lately read "The Adventures of Five
Houres," it seems a mean thing. Walked back, and so home, and then down
to the Old Swan and drank at Betty Michell's, and so to Westminster to
the Exchequer about my quarter tallies, and so to Lumbard Streete to
choose stuff to hang my new intended closet, and have chosen purple.
So home to dinner, and all the afternoon till almost midnight upon my
Tangier accounts, getting Tom Wilson to help me in writing as I read,
and at night W. Hewer, and find myself most happy in the keeping of all
my accounts, for that after all the changings and turnings necessary
in such an account, I find myself right to a farthing in an account of
L127,000. This afternoon I visited Sir J. Minnes, who, poor man, is much
impatient by these few days' sickness, and I fear indeed it will kill
him.

21st. Up, and to the office, where much business and Sir W. Coventry
there, who of late hath wholly left us, most of our business being about
money, to which we can give no answer, which makes him weary of coming
to us. He made an experiment to-day, by taking up a heape of petitions
that lay upon the table. They proved seventeen in number, and found them
thus: one for money for reparation for clothes, four desired to have
tickets made out to them, and the other twelve were for money. Dined at
home, and sister Balty with us. My wife snappish because I denied her
money to lay out this afternoon; however, good friends again, and by
coach set them down at the New Exchange, and I to the Exchequer, and
there find my business of my tallys in good forwardness. I passed down
into the Hall, and there hear that Mr. Bowles, the grocer, after 4 or 5
days' sickness, is dead, and this day buried. So away, and taking up my
wife, went homewards. I 'light and with Harman to my mercer's in Lumbard
Streete, and there agreed for, our purple serge for my closett, and so
I away home. So home and late at the office, and then home, and there
found Mr. Batelier and his sister Mary, and we sat chatting a great
while, talking of witches and spirits, and he told me of his own
knowledge, being with some others at Bourdeaux, making a bargain with
another man at a taverne for some clarets, they did hire a fellow to
thunder (which he had the art of doing upon a deale board) and to rain
and hail, that is, make the noise of, so as did give them a pretence of
undervaluing their merchants' wines, by saying this thunder would spoil
and turne them. Which was so reasonable to the merchant, that he did
abate two pistolls per ton for the wine in belief of that, whereas,
going out, there was no such thing. This Batelier did see and was the
cause of to his profit, as is above said. By and by broke up and to bed.

22nd. Up and by coach with L100 to the Exchequer to pay fees there.
There left it, and I to St. James's, and there with; the Duke of Yorke.
I had opportunity of much talk with Sir. W. Pen to-day (he being newly
come from the fleete); and he, do much undervalue the honour that is
given to the conduct of the late business of Holmes in burning the ships
and town

     [The town burned (see August 15th, ante) was Brandaris, a place of
     1000 houses, on the isle of Schelling; the ships lay between that
     island and the Fly (i.e. Vlieland), the adjoining island.  This
     attack probably provoked that by the Dutch on Chatham.]

saying it was a great thing indeed, and of great profit to us in being
of great losse to the enemy, but that it was wholly a business of
chance, and no conduct employed in it. I find Sir W. Pen do hold up his
head at this time higher than ever he did in his life. I perceive he do
look after Sir J. Minnes's place if he dies, and though I love him not
nor do desire to have him in, yet I do think [he] is the first man in
England for it. To the Exchequer, and there received my tallys, and paid
my fees in good order, and so home, and there find Mrs. Knipp and
my wife going to dinner. She tells me my song, of "Beauty Retire" is
mightily cried up, which I am not a little proud of; and do think I have
done "It is Decreed" better, but I have not finished it. My closett is
doing by upholsters, which I am pleased with, but fear my purple will be
too sad for that melancholy roome. After dinner and doing something at
the office, I with my wife, Knipp, and Mercer, by coach to Moorefields,
and there saw "Polichinello," which pleases me mightily, and here I saw
our Mary, our last chamber-maid, who is gone from Mrs. Pierces it seems.
Thence carried Knipp home, calling at the Cocke alehouse at the doore
and drank, and so home, and there find Reeves, and so up to look upon
the stars, and do like my glasse very well, and did even with him for it
and a little perspective and the Lanthorne that shows tricks, altogether
costing me L9 5s. 0d. So to bed, he lying at our house.

23rd. At the office all the morning, whither Sir W. Coventry sent me
word that the Dutch fleete is certainly abroad; and so we are to hasten
all we have to send to our fleete with all speed. But, Lord! to see how
my Lord Bruncker undertakes the despatch of the fire-ships, when he is
no more fit for it than a porter; and all the while Sir W. Pen, who is
the most fit, is unwilling to displease him, and do not look after it;
and so the King's work is like to be well done. At noon dined at home,
Lovett with us; but he do not please me in his business, for he
keeps things long in hand, and his paper do not hold so good as I
expected--the varnish wiping off in a little time--a very sponge; and
I doubt by his discourse he is an odde kind of fellow, and, in plain
terms, a very rogue. He gone, I to the office (having seen and liked the
upholsters' work in my roome--which they have almost done), and there
late, and in the evening find Mr. Batelier and his sister there and then
we talked and eat and were merry, and so parted late, and to bed.

24th. Up, and dispatched several businesses at home in the morning, and
then comes Sympson to set up my other new presses

     [These presses still exist, and, according to Pepys's wish, they are
     placed in the second court of Magdalene College in a room which they
     exactly fit, and the books are arranged in the presses just as they
     were when presented to the college.--M. B.]

for my books, and so he and I fell in to the furnishing of my new
closett, and taking out the things out of my old, and I kept him with
me all day, and he dined with me, and so all the afternoon till it was
quite darke hanging things, that is my maps and pictures and draughts,
and setting up my books, and as much as we could do, to my most
extraordinary satisfaction; so that I think it will be as noble a
closett as any man hath, and light enough--though, indeed, it would be
better to have had a little more light. He gone, my wife and I to talk,
and sup, and then to setting right my Tangier accounts and enter my
Journall, and then to bed with great content in my day's worke. This
afternoon comes Mrs. Barbary Sheldon, now Mrs. Wood, to see my wife. I
was so busy I would not see her. But she came, it seems, mighty rich in
rings and fine clothes, and like a lady, and says she is matched mighty
well, at which I am very glad, but wonder at her good fortune and the
folly of her husband, and vexed at myself for not paying her the respect
of seeing her, but I will come out of her debt another time.

25th. All the morning at the office. At noon dined at home, and after
dinner up to my new closett, which pleases me mightily, and there I
proceeded to put many things in order as far as I had time, and then set
it in washing, and stood by myself a great while to see it washed; and
then to the office, and then wrote my letters and other things, and then
in mighty good humour home to supper and to bed.

26th (Lord's day). Up betimes, and to the finishing the setting things
in order in my new closett out of my old, which I did thoroughly by the
time sermon was done at church, to my exceeding joy, only I was a little
disturbed with newes my Lord Bruncker brought me, that we are to attend
the King at White Hall this afternoon, and that it is about a complaint
from the Generalls against us. Sir W. Pen dined by invitation with me,
his Lady and daughter being gone into the country. We very merry. After
dinner we parted, and I to my office, whither I sent for Mr. Lewes and
instructed myself fully in the business of the Victualling, to enable
me to answer in the matter; and then Sir W. Pen and I by coach to White
Hall, and there staid till the King and Cabinet were met in the Green
Chamber, and then we were called in; and there the King begun with me,
to hear how the victualls of the fleete stood. I did in a long discourse
tell him and the rest (the Duke of Yorke, Lord Chancellor, Lord
Treasurer, both the Secretarys, Sir G. Carteret, and Sir W. Coventry,)
how it stood, wherein they seemed satisfied, but press mightily for more
supplies; and the letter of the Generalls, which was read, did lay their
not going or too soon returning from the Dutch coast, this next bout,
to the want of victuals. They then proceeded to the enquiry after the
fireships; and did all very superficially, and without any severity at
all. But, however, I was in pain, after we come out, to know how I had
done; and hear well enough. But, however, it shall be a caution to me to
prepare myself against a day of inquisition. Being come out, I met with
Mr. Moore, and he and I an houre together in the Gallery, telling me
how far they are gone in getting my Lord [Sandwich's] pardon, so as the
Chancellor is prepared in it; and Sir H. Bennet do promote it, and the
warrant for the King's signing is drawn. The business between my Lord
Hinchingbroke and Mrs. Mallett is quite broke off; he attending her at
Tunbridge, and she declaring her affections to be settled; and he not
being fully pleased with the vanity and liberty of her carriage. He told
me how my Lord has drawn a bill of exchange from Spayne of L1200, and
would have me supply him with L500 of it, but I avoyded it, being not
willing to embarke myself in money there, where I see things going to
ruine. Thence to discourse of the times; and he tells me he believes
both my Lord Arlington and Sir W. Coventry, as well as my Lord Sandwich
and Sir G. Carteret, have reason to fear, and are afeard of this
Parliament now coming on. He tells me that Bristoll's faction is getting
ground apace against my Lord Chancellor. He told me that my old Lord
Coventry was a cunning, crafty man, and did make as many bad decrees in
Chancery as any man; and that in one case, that occasioned many years'
dispute, at last when the King come in, it was hoped by the party
grieved, to get my Lord Chancellor to reverse a decree of his. Sir W.
Coventry took the opportunity of the business between the Duke of Yorke
and the Duchesse, and said to my Lord Chancellor, that he had rather be
drawn up Holborne to be hanged, than live to see his father pissed
upon (in these very terms) and any decree of his reversed. And so the
Chancellor did not think fit to do it, but it still stands, to the
undoing of one Norton, a printer, about his right to the printing of the
Bible, and Grammar, &c. Thence Sir W. Pen and I to Islington and there
drank at the Katherine Wheele, and so down the nearest way home, where
there was no kind of pleasure at all. Being come home, hear that Sir J.
Minnes has had a very bad fit all this day, and a hickup do take him,
which is a very bad sign, which troubles me truly. So home to supper a
little and then to bed.

27th. Up, and to my new closett, which pleases me mightily, and there
did a little business. Then to break open a window, to the leads' side
in my old closett, which will enlighten the room mightily, and make
it mighty pleasant. So to the office, and then home about one thing or
other, about my new closet, for my mind is full of nothing but that. So
at noon to dinner, mightily pleased with my wife's picture that she is
upon. Then to the office, and thither come and walked an hour with me
Sir G. Carteret, who tells me what is done about my Lord's pardon, and
is not for letting the Duke of Yorke know any thing of it beforehand,
but to carry it as speedily and quietly as we can. He seems to be very
apprehensive that the Parliament will be troublesome and inquisitive
into faults, but seems not to value them as to himself. He gone, I
to the Victualling Office, there with Lewes' and Willson setting the
business of the state of the fleete's victualling even and plain, and
that being done, and other good discourse about it over, Mr. Willson
and I by water down the River for discourse only, about business of the
office, and then back, and I home, and after a little at my office home
to my new closet, and there did much business on my Tangier account and
my Journall for three days. So to supper and to bed. We are not sure
that the Dutch fleete is out. I have another memento from Sir W.
Coventry of the want of provisions in the fleete, which troubles me,
though there is no reason for it; but will have the good effect of
making me more wary. So, full of thoughts, to bed.

28th. Up, and in my new closet a good while doing business. Then called
on Mrs. Martin and Burroughs of Westminster about business of the
former's husband. Which done, I to the office, where we sat all the
morning. At noon I, with my wife and Mercer, to Philpott Lane, a great
cook's shop, to the wedding of Mr. Longracke, our purveyor, a good,
sober, civil man, and hath married a sober, serious mayde. Here I met
much ordinary company, I going thither at his great request; but there
was Mr. Madden and his lady, a fine, noble, pretty lady, and he, and a
fine gentleman seems to be. We four were most together; but the whole
company was very simple and innocent. A good-dinner, and, what was best,
good musique. After dinner the young women went to dance; among others
Mr. Christopher Pett his daughter, who is a very pretty, modest girle,
I am mightily taken with her; and that being done about five o'clock,
home, very well pleased with the afternoon's work. And so we broke up
mightily civilly, the bride and bridegroom going to Greenwich (they
keeping their dinner here only for my sake) to lie, and we home, where I
to the office, and anon am on a sudden called to meet Sir W. Pen and Sir
W. Coventry at the Victualling Office, which did put me out of order to
be so surprised. But I went, and there Sir William Coventry did read me
a letter from the Generalls to the King,

     [The letter from Prince Rupert and the Duke of Albemarle to the king
     (dated August 27th, from the "Royal Charles," Sole Bay) is among the
     State Papers.  The generals complain of the want of supplies, in
     spite of repeated importunities.  The demands are answered by
     accounts from Mr. Pepys of what has been sent to the fleet, which
     will not satisfy the ships, unless the provisions could be found
     "...  Have not a month's provision of beer, yet Sir Wm. Coventry
     assures the ministers that they are supplied till Oct. 3; unless
     this is quickened they will have to return home too soon....
     Want provisions according to their own computation, not Sir Wm.
     Coventry's, to last to the end of October" ("Calendar," 1666-67, p.
     71).]

a most scurvy letter, reflecting most upon Sir W. Coventry, and then
upon me for my accounts (not that they are not true, but that we do not
consider the expence of the fleete), and then of the whole office, in
neglecting them and the King's service, and this in very plain and sharp
and menacing terms. I did give a good account of matters according to
our computation of the expence of the fleete. I find Sir W. Coventry
willing enough to accept of any thing to confront the Generalls. But a
great supply must be made, and shall be in grace of God! But, however,
our accounts here will be found the true ones. Having done here, and
much work set me, I with greater content home than I thought I should
have done, and so to the office a while, and then home, and a while in
my new closet, which delights me every day more and more, and so late to
bed.

29th. Up betimes, and there to fit some Tangier accounts, and then, by
appointment, to my Lord Bellasses, but about Paul's thought of the chant
paper I should carry with me, and so fain to come back again, and did,
and then met with Sir W. Pen, and with him to my Lord Bellasses, he
sitting in the coach the while, while I up to my Lord and there offered
him my account of the bills of exchange I had received and paid for him,
wherein we agree all but one L200 bill of Vernatty's drawing, wherein I
doubt he hath endeavoured to cheate my Lord; but that will soon appear.
Thence took leave, and found Sir W. Pen talking to Orange Moll, of the
King's house, who, to our great comfort, told us that they begun to act
on the 18th of this month. So on to St. James's, in the way Sir W. Pen
telling me that Mr. Norton, that married Sir J. Lawson's daughter, is
dead. She left L800 a year jointure, a son to inherit the whole estate.
She freed from her father-in-law's tyranny, and is in condition to helpe
her mother, who needs it; of which I am glad, the young lady being very
pretty. To St. James's, and there Sir W. Coventry took Sir W. Pen and
me apart, and read to us his answer to the Generalls' letter to the King
that he read last night; wherein he is very plain, and states the matter
in full defence of himself and of me with him, which he could not avoid;
which is a good comfort to me, that I happen to be involved with him in
the same cause. And then, speaking of the supplies which have been made
to this fleete, more than ever in all kinds to any, even that wherein
the Duke of Yorke himself was, "Well," says he, "if this will not do, I
will say, as Sir J. Falstaffe did to the Prince, 'Tell your father, that
if he do not like this let him kill the next Piercy himself,'"--["King
Henry IV.," Part I, act v., sc. 4.]--and so we broke up, and to the
Duke, and there did our usual business. So I to the Parke and there met
Creed, and he and I walked to Westminster to the Exchequer, and thence
to White Hall talking of Tangier matters and Vernatty's knavery, and so
parted, and then I homeward and met Mr. Povy in Cheapside, and stopped
and talked a good while upon the profits of the place which my Lord
Bellasses hath made this last year, and what share we are to have of
it, but of this all imperfect, and so parted, and I home, and there find
Mrs. Mary Batelier, and she dined with us; and thence I took them to
Islington, and there eat a custard; and so back to Moorfields, and
shewed Batelier, with my wife, "Polichinello," which I like the more I
see it; and so home with great content, she being a mighty good-natured,
pretty woman, and thence I to the Victualling office, and there with Mr.
Lewes and Willson upon our Victualling matters till ten at night, and so
I home and there late writing a letter to Sir W. Coventry, and so home
to supper and to bed. No newes where the Dutch are. We begin to think
they will steale through the Channel to meet Beaufort. We think our
fleete sayled yesterday, but we have no newes of it.

30th. Up and all the morning at the office, dined at home, and in the
afternoon, and at night till two in the morning, framing my great letter
to Mr. Hayes about the victualling of the fleete, about which there has
been so much ado and exceptions taken by the Generalls.

31st. To bed at 2 or 3 in the morning and up again at 6 to go by
appointment to my Lord Bellasses, but he out of town, which vexed me.
So back and got Mr. Poynter to enter into, my book while I read from my
last night's notes the letter, and that being done to writing it fair.
At noon home to dinner, and then the boy and I to the office, and there
he read while I writ it fair, which done I sent it to Sir W. Coventry
to peruse and send to the fleete by the first opportunity; and so pretty
betimes to bed. Much pleased to-day with thoughts of gilding the backs
of all my books alike in my new presses.




SEPTEMBER 1666

September 1st. Up and at the office all the morning, and then dined at
home. Got my new closet made mighty clean against to-morrow. Sir W. Pen
and my wife and Mercer and I to "Polichinelly," but were there horribly
frighted to see Young Killigrew come in with a great many more young
sparks; but we hid ourselves, so as we think they did not see us. By
and by, they went away, and then we were at rest again; and so, the play
being done, we to Islington, and there eat and drank and mighty merry;
and so home singing, and, after a letter or two at the office, to bed.

2nd (Lord's day). Some of our mayds sitting up late last night to get
things ready against our feast to-day, Jane called us up about three in
the morning, to tell us of a great fire they saw in the City. So I rose
and slipped on my nightgowne, and went to her window, and thought it to
be on the backside of Marke-lane at the farthest; but, being unused to
such fires as followed, I thought it far enough off; and so went to bed
again and to sleep. About seven rose again to dress myself, and there
looked out at the window, and saw the fire not so much as it was and
further off. So to my closett to set things to rights after yesterday's
cleaning. By and by Jane comes and tells me that she hears that above
300 houses have been burned down to-night by the fire we saw, and that
it is now burning down all Fish-street, by London Bridge. So I made
myself ready presently, and walked to the Tower, and there got up upon
one of the high places, Sir J. Robinson's little son going up with me;
and there I did see the houses at that end of the bridge all on fire,
and an infinite great fire on this and the other side the end of the
bridge; which, among other people, did trouble me for poor little
Michell and our Sarah on the bridge. So down, with my heart full of
trouble, to the Lieutenant of the Tower, who tells me that it begun this
morning in the King's baker's' house in Pudding-lane, and that it hath
burned St. Magnus's Church and most part of Fish-street already. So I
down to the water-side, and there got a boat and through bridge, and
there saw a lamentable fire. Poor Michell's house, as far as the Old
Swan, already burned that way, and the fire running further, that in
a very little time it got as far as the Steeleyard, while I was there.
Everybody endeavouring to remove their goods, and flinging into the
river or bringing them into lighters that layoff; poor people staying
in their houses as long as till the very fire touched them, and then
running into boats, or clambering from one pair of stairs by the
water-side to another. And among other things, the poor pigeons, I
perceive, were loth to leave their houses, but hovered about the windows
and balconys till they were, some of them burned, their wings, and fell
down. Having staid, and in an hour's time seen the fire: rage every way,
and nobody, to my sight, endeavouring to quench it, but to remove their
goods, and leave all to the fire, and having seen it get as far as the
Steele-yard, and the wind mighty high and driving it into the City; and
every thing, after so long a drought, proving combustible, even the very
stones of churches, and among other things the poor steeple by which
pretty Mrs.--------lives, and whereof my old school-fellow Elborough is
parson, taken fire in the very top, an there burned till it fell down:
I to White Hall (with a gentleman with me who desired to go off from the
Tower, to see the fire, in my boat); to White Hall, and there up to the
Kings closett in the Chappell, where people come about me, and did give
them an account dismayed them all, and word was carried in to the King.
So I was called for, and did tell the King and Duke of Yorke what I saw,
and that unless his Majesty did command houses to be pulled down nothing
could stop the fire. They seemed much troubled, and the King commanded
me to go to my Lord Mayor--[Sir Thomas Bludworth. See June 30th,
1666.]--from him, and command him to spare no houses, but to pull down
before the fire every way. The Duke of York bid me tell him that if
he would have any more soldiers he shall; and so did my Lord Arlington
afterwards, as a great secret.

     [Sir William Coventry wrote to Lord Arlington on the evening of this
     day, "The Duke of York fears the want of workmen and tools to-morrow
     morning, and wishes the deputy lieutenants and justices of peace to
     summon the workmen with tools to be there by break of day.  In some
     churches and chapels are great hooks for pulling down houses, which
     should be brought ready upon the place to-night against the morning"
     ("Calendar of State Papers," 1666-66, p. 95).]

Here meeting, with Captain Cocke, I in his coach, which he lent me, and
Creed with me to Paul's, and there walked along Watlingstreet, as well
as I could, every creature coming away loaden with goods to save, and
here and there sicke people carried away in beds. Extraordinary good
goods carried in carts and on backs. At last met my Lord Mayor in
Canningstreet, like a man spent, with a handkercher about his neck. To
the King's message he cried, like a fainting woman, "Lord! what can
I do? I am spent: people will not obey me. I have been pulling down
houses; but the fire overtakes us faster than we can do it." That he
needed no more soldiers; and that, for himself, he must go and refresh
himself, having been up all night. So he left me, and I him, and walked
home, seeing people all almost distracted, and no manner of means used
to quench the fire. The houses, too, so very thick thereabouts, and
full of matter for burning, as pitch and tarr, in Thames-street; and
warehouses of oyle, and wines, and brandy, and other things. Here I saw
Mr. Isaake Houblon, the handsome man, prettily dressed and dirty, at his
door at Dowgate, receiving some of his brothers' things, whose houses
were on fire; and, as he says, have been removed twice already; and he
doubts (as it soon proved) that they must be in a little time removed
from his house also, which was a sad consideration. And to see the
churches all filling with goods by people who themselves should have
been quietly there at this time. By this time it was about twelve
o'clock; and so home, and there find my guests, which was Mr. Wood and
his wife Barbary Sheldon, and also Mr. Moons: she mighty fine, and her
husband; for aught I see, a likely man. But Mr. Moone's design and mine,
which was to look over my closett and please him with the sight thereof,
which he hath long desired, was wholly disappointed; for we were in
great trouble and disturbance at this fire, not knowing what to think
of it. However, we had an extraordinary good dinner, and as merry, as
at this time we could be. While at dinner Mrs. Batelier come to enquire
after Mr. Woolfe and Stanes (who, it seems, are related to them), whose
houses in Fish-street are all burned; and they in a sad condition.
She would not stay in the fright. Soon as dined, I and Moone away, and
walked, through the City, the streets full of nothing but people and
horses and carts loaden with goods, ready to run over one another, and,
removing goods from one burned house to another. They now removing
out of Canning-streets (which received goods in the morning) into
Lumbard-streets, and further;

and among others I now saw my little goldsmith, Stokes, receiving some
friend's goods, whose house itself was burned the day after. We parted
at Paul's; he home, and I to Paul's Wharf, where I had appointed a boat
to attend me, and took in Mr. Carcasse and his brother, whom I met in
the streets and carried them below and above bridge to and again to
see the fire, which was now got further, both below and above and no
likelihood of stopping it. Met with the King and Duke of York in their
barge, and with them to Queenhith and there called Sir Richard Browne
to them. Their order was only to pull down houses apace, and so below
bridge the water-side; but little was or could be done, the fire coming
upon them so fast. Good hopes there was of stopping it at the Three
Cranes above, and at Buttolph's Wharf below bridge, if care be used; but
the wind carries it into the City so as we know not by the water-side
what it do there. River full of lighters and boats taking in goods, and
good goods swimming in the water, and only I observed that hardly one
lighter or boat in three that had the goods of a house in, but there was
a pair of Virginalls

     [The virginal differed from the spinet in being square instead of
     triangular in form.  The word pair was used in the obsolete sense of
     a set, as we read also of a pair of organs.  The instrument is
     supposed to have obtained its name from young women, playing upon
     it.]

in it. Having seen as much as I could now, I away to White Hall by
appointment, and there walked to St. James's Parks, and there met my
wife and Creed and Wood and his wife, and walked to my boat; and there
upon the water again, and to the fire up and down, it still encreasing,
and the wind great. So near the fire as we could for smoke; and all over
the Thames, with one's face in the wind, you were almost burned with
a shower of firedrops. This is very true; so as houses were burned by
these drops and flakes of fire, three or four, nay, five or six houses,
one from another. When we could endure no more upon the water; we to a
little ale-house on the Bankside, over against the 'Three Cranes, and
there staid till it was dark almost, and saw the fire grow; and, as it
grew darker, appeared more and more, and in corners and upon steeples,
and between churches and houses, as far as we could see up the hill of
the City, in a most horrid malicious bloody flame, not like the fine
flame of an ordinary fire. Barbary and her husband away before us. We
staid till, it being darkish, we saw the fire as only one entire arch
of fire from this to the other side the bridge, and in a bow up the
hill for an arch of above a mile long: it made me weep to see it. The
churches, houses, and all on fire and flaming at once; and a horrid
noise the flames made, and the cracking of houses at their ruins.
So home with a sad heart, and there find every body discoursing and
lamenting the fire; and poor Tom Hater come with some few of his goods
saved out of his house, which is burned upon Fish-streets Hall. I
invited him to lie at my house, and did receive his goods, but was
deceived in his lying there, the newes coming every moment of the growth
of the fire; so as we were forced to begin to pack up our owne goods;
and prepare for their removal; and did by moonshine (it being brave
dry, and moon: shine, and warm weather) carry much of my goods into the
garden, and Mr. Hater and I did remove my money and iron chests into my
cellar, as thinking that the safest place. And got my bags of gold into
my office, ready to carry away, and my chief papers of accounts also
there, and my tallys into a box by themselves. So great was our fear, as
Sir W. Batten hath carts come out of the country to fetch away his goods
this night. We did put Mr. Hater, poor man, to bed a little; but he got
but very little rest, so much noise being in my house, taking down of
goods.

3rd. About four o'clock in the morning, my Lady Batten sent me a cart to
carry away all my money, and plate, and best things, to Sir W. Rider's
at Bednall-greene. Which I did riding myself in my night-gowne in the
cart; and, Lord! to see how the streets and the highways are crowded
with people running and riding, and getting of carts at any rate to
fetch away things. I find Sir W. Rider tired with being called up all
night, and receiving things from several friends. His house full of
goods, and much of Sir W. Batten's and Sir W. Pen's I am eased at my
heart to have my treasure so well secured. Then home, with much ado to
find a way, nor any sleep all this night to me nor my poor wife. But
then and all this day she and I, and all my people labouring to get away
the rest of our things, and did get Mr. Tooker to get me a lighter to
take them in, and we did carry them (myself some) over Tower Hill, which
was by this time full of people's goods, bringing their goods thither;
and down to the lighter, which lay at next quay, above the Tower Docke.
And here was my neighbour's wife, Mrs.-------,with her pretty child, and
some few of her things, which I did willingly give way to be saved with
mine; but there was no passing with any thing through the postern, the
crowd was so great. The Duke of Yorke of this day by the office, and
spoke to us, and did ride with his guard up and down the City, to keep
all quiet (he being now Generall, and having the care of all). This day,
Mercer being not at home, but against her mistress's order gone to her
mother's, and my wife going thither to speak with W. Hewer, met her
there, and was angry; and her mother saying that she was not a 'prentice
girl, to ask leave every time she goes abroad, my wife with good reason
was angry, and, when she came home, bid her be gone again. And so she
went away, which troubled me, but yet less than it would, because of the
condition we are in, fear of coming into in a little time of being less
able to keepe one in her quality. At night lay down a little upon a
quilt of W. Hewer's in the office, all my owne things being packed up
or gone; and after me my poor wife did the like, we having fed upon
the remains of yesterday's dinner, having no fire nor dishes, nor any
opportunity of dressing any thing.

4th. Up by break of day to get away the remainder of my things; which I
did by a lighter at the Iron gate and my hands so few, that it was
the afternoon before we could get them all away. Sir W. Pen and I to
Tower-streete, and there met the fire burning three or four doors beyond
Mr. Howell's, whose goods, poor man, his trayes, and dishes, shovells,
&c., were flung all along Tower-street in the kennels, and people
working therewith from one end to the other; the fire coming on in that
narrow streete, on both sides, with infinite fury. Sir W. Batten not
knowing how to remove his wine, did dig a pit in the garden, and laid
it in there; and I took the opportunity of laying all the papers of my
office that I could not otherwise dispose of. And in the evening Sir
W. Pen and I did dig another, and put our wine in it; and I my Parmazan
cheese, as well as my wine and some other things. The Duke of Yorke
was at the office this day, at Sir W. Pen's; but I happened not to
be within. This afternoon, sitting melancholy with Sir W. Pen in our
garden, and thinking of the certain burning of this office, without
extraordinary means, I did propose for the sending up of all our workmen
from Woolwich and Deptford yards (none whereof yet appeared), and to
write to Sir W. Coventry to have the Duke of Yorke's permission to pull
down houses, rather than lose this office, which would, much hinder, the
King's business. So Sir W. Pen he went down this night, in order to the
sending them up to-morrow morning; and I wrote to Sir W. Coventry about
the business, but received no answer. This night Mrs. Turner (who, poor
woman, was removing her goods all this day, good goods into the garden,
and knows not how to dispose of them), and her husband supped with my
wife and I at night, in the office; upon a shoulder of mutton from
the cook's, without any napkin or any thing, in a sad manner, but were
merry. Only now and then walking into the garden, and saw how horridly
the sky looks, all on a fire in the night, was enough to put us out of
our wits; and, indeed, it was extremely dreadful, for it looks just as
if it was at us; and the whole heaven on fire. I after supper walked in
the darke down to Tower-streete, and there saw it all on fire, at the
Trinity House on that side, and the Dolphin Taverne on this side, which
was very near us; and the fire with extraordinary vehemence. Now begins
the practice of blowing up of houses in Tower-streete, those next the
Tower, which at first did frighten people more than anything, but it
stopped the fire where it was done, it bringing down the

     [A copy of this letter, preserved among the Pepys MSS. in the
     author's own handwriting, is subjoined:

     "SIR, The fire is now very neere us as well on Tower Streete as
     Fanchurch Street side, and we little hope of our escape but by this
     remedy, to ye want whereof we doe certainly owe ye loss of ye City
     namely, ye pulling down of houses, in ye way of ye fire.  This way
     Sir W. Pen and myself have so far concluded upon ye practising, that
     he is gone to Woolwich and Deptford to supply himself with men and
     necessarys in order to the doeing thereof, in case at his returne
     our condition be not bettered and that he meets with his R. Hs.
     approbation, which I had thus undertaken to learn of you.  Pray
     please to let me have this night (at whatever hour it is) what his
     R. Hs. directions are in this particular; Sir J. Minnes and Sir W.
     Batten having left us, we cannot add, though we are well assured of
     their, as well as all ye neighbourhood's concurrence.

                              "Yr. obedient servnt.
                                                  "S. P.

     "Sir W. Coventry,
     "Septr.  4, 1666."]

houses to the ground in the same places they stood, and then it was easy
to quench what little fire was in it, though it kindled nothing almost.
W. Newer this day went to see how his mother did, and comes late home,
telling us how he hath been forced to remove her to Islington, her house
in Pye-corner being burned; so that the fire is got so far that way, and
all the Old Bayly, and was running down to Fleete-streete; and Paul's
is burned, and all Cheapside. I wrote to my father this night, but the
post-house being burned, the letter could not go.

     [J. Hickes wrote to Williamson on September 3rd from the "Golden
     Lyon," Red Cross Street Posthouse.  Sir Philip [Frowde] and his lady
     fled from the [letter] office at midnight for: safety; stayed
     himself till 1 am. till his wife and childrens' patience could stay,
     no longer, fearing lest they should be quite stopped up; the passage
     was so tedious they had much ado to get where they are.  The Chester
     and Irish, mails have come-in; sends him his letters, knows not how
     to dispose of the business ("Calendar of State Papers," 1666-67,
     p. 95).]

5th. I lay down in the office again upon W. Hewer's, quilt, being mighty
weary, and sore in my feet with going till I was hardly able to stand.
About two in the morning my wife calls me up and tells me of new cryes
of fire, it being come to Barkeing Church, which is the bottom of our
lane. I up, and finding it so, resolved presently to take her away, and
did, and took my gold, which was about L2350, W. Newer, and Jane, down
by Proundy's boat to Woolwich; but, Lord! what sad sight it was by
moone-light to see, the whole City almost on fire, that you might see it
plain at Woolwich, as if you were by it. There, when I come, I find
the gates shut, but no guard kept at all, which troubled me, because of
discourse now begun, that there is plot in it, and that the French had
done it. I got the gates open, and to Mr. Shelden's, where I locked
up my gold, and charged, my wife and W. Newer never to leave the room
without one of them in it, night, or day. So back again, by the way
seeing my goods well in the lighters at Deptford, and watched well by
people. Home; and whereas I expected to have seen our house on fire, it
being now about seven o'clock, it was not. But to the fyre, and there
find greater hopes than I expected; for my confidence of finding our
Office on fire was such, that I durst not ask any body how it was with
us, till I come and saw it not burned. But going to the fire, I find by
the blowing up of houses, and the great helpe given by the workmen out
of the King's yards, sent up by Sir W. Pen, there is a good stop given
to it, as well as at Marke-lane end as ours; it having only burned the
dyall of Barking Church, and part of the porch, and was there quenched.
I up to the top of Barking steeple, and there saw the saddest sight of
desolation that I ever saw; every where great fires, oyle-cellars, and
brimstone, and other things burning. I became afeard to stay there long,
and therefore down again as fast as I could, the fire being spread as
far as I could see it; and to Sir W. Pen's, and there eat a piece
of cold meat, having eaten nothing since Sunday, but the remains of
Sunday's dinner. Here I met with Mr. Young and Whistler; and having
removed all my things, and received good hopes that the fire at our end;
is stopped, they and I walked into the town, and find Fanchurch-streete,
Gracious-streete; and Lumbard-streete all in dust. The Exchange a sad
sight, nothing standing there, of all the statues or pillars, but Sir
Thomas Gresham's picture in the corner. Walked into Moorefields (our
feet ready to burn, walking through the towne among the hot coles), and
find that full of people, and poor wretches carrying their good there,
and every body keeping his goods together by themselves (and a great
blessing it is to them that it is fair weathe for them to keep abroad
night and day); drank there, and paid two-pence for a plain penny loaf.
Thence homeward, having passed through Cheapside and Newgate Market,
all burned, and seen Anthony Joyce's House in fire. And took up (which I
keep by me) a piece of glasse of Mercers' Chappell in the streete, where
much more was, so melted and buckled with the heat of the fire like
parchment. I also did see a poor cat taken out of a hole in the chimney,
joyning to the wall of the Exchange; with, the hair all burned off the
body, and yet alive. So home at night, and find there good hopes of
saving our office; but great endeavours of watching all night, and
having men ready; and so we lodged them in the office, and had drink and
bread and cheese for them. And I lay down and slept a good night about
midnight, though when I rose I heard that there had been a great alarme
of French and Dutch being risen, which proved, nothing. But it is a
strange thing to see how long this time did look since Sunday, having
been always full of variety of actions, and little sleep, that it looked
like a week or more, and I had forgot, almost the day of the week.

6th. Up about five o'clock, and where met Mr. Gawden at the gate of the
office (I intending to go out, as I used, every now and then to-day, to
see how the fire is) to call our men to Bishop's-gate, where no fire
had yet been near, and there is now one broke out which did give great
grounds to people, and to me too, to think that there is some kind of
plot

     [The terrible disaster which overtook London was borne by the
     inhabitants of the city with great fortitude, but foreigners and
     Roman Catholics had a bad dime.  As no cause for the outbreak of the
     fire could be traced, a general cry was raised that it owed its
     origin to a plot.  In a letter from Thomas Waade to Williamson
     (dated "Whitby, Sept. 14th") we read, "The destruction of London by
     fire is reported to be a hellish contrivance of the French,
     Hollanders, and fanatic party" ("Calendar of State Papers," 1666-67,
     p. 124).]

in this (on which many by this time have been taken, and, it hath been
dangerous for any stranger to walk in the streets), but I went with
the men, and we did put it out in a little time; so that that was well
again. It was pretty to see how hard the women did work in the cannells,
sweeping of water; but then they would scold for drink, and be as drunk
as devils. I saw good butts of sugar broke open in the street, and
people go and take handsfull out, and put into beer, and drink it. And
now all being pretty well, I took boat, and over to Southwarke, and took
boat on the other side the bridge, and so to Westminster, thinking to
shift myself, being all in dirt from top to bottom; but could not there
find any place to buy a shirt or pair of gloves, Westminster Hall being
full of people's goods, those in Westminster having removed all their
goods, and the Exchequer money put into vessels to carry to Nonsuch;
but to the Swan, and there was trimmed; and then to White Hall, but saw
nobody; and so home. A sad sight to see how the River looks: no houses
nor church near it, to the Temple, where it stopped. At home, did go
with Sir W. Batten, and our neighbour, Knightly (who, with one more, was
the only man of any fashion left in all the neighbourhood thereabouts,
they all removing their goods and leaving their houses to the mercy of
the fire), to Sir R. Ford's, and there dined in an earthen platter--a
fried breast of mutton; a great many of us, but very merry, and indeed
as good a meal, though as ugly a one, as ever I had in my life. Thence
down to Deptford, and there with great satisfaction landed all my goods
at Sir G. Carteret's safe, and nothing missed I could see, or hurt.
This being done to my great content, I home, and to Sir W. Batten's, and
there with Sir R. Ford, Mr. Knightly, and one Withers, a professed lying
rogue, supped well, and mighty merry, and our fears over. From them
to the office, and there slept with the office full of labourers, who
talked, and slept, and walked all night long there. But strange it was
to see Cloathworkers' Hall on fire these three days and nights in one
body of flame, it being the cellar full of oyle.

7th. Up by five o'clock; and, blessed be God! find all well, and by
water to Paul's Wharfe. Walked thence, and saw, all the towne burned,
and a miserable sight of Paul's church; with all the roofs fallen,
and the body of the quire fallen into St. Fayth's; Paul's school also,
Ludgate, and Fleet-street, my father's house, and the church, and a
good part of the Temple the like. So to Creed's lodging, near the
New Exchange, and there find him laid down upon a bed; the house all
unfurnished, there being fears of the fire's coming to them. There
borrowed a shirt of him, and washed. To Sir W. Coventry, at St. James's,
who lay without curtains, having removed all his goods; as the King at
White Hall, and every body had done, and was doing. He hopes we shall
have no publique distractions upon this fire, which is what every body
fears, because of the talke of the French having a hand in it. And it is
a proper time for discontents; but all men's minds are full of care to
protect themselves, and save their goods: the militia is in armes every
where. Our fleetes, he tells me, have been in sight one of another, and
most unhappily by fowle weather were parted, to our great losse, as in
reason they do conclude; the Dutch being come out only to make a
shew, and please their people; but in very bad condition as to stores;
victuals, and men. They are at Bullen; and our fleete come to St.
Ellen's. We have got nothing, but have lost one ship, but he knows not
what. Thence to the Swan, and there drank: and so home, and find all
well. My Lord Bruncker, at Sir W. Batten's, and tells us the Generall
is sent for up, to come to advise with the King about business at this
juncture, and to keep all quiet; which is great honour to him, but I am
sure is but a piece of dissimulation. So home, and did give orders for
my house to be made clean; and then down to Woolwich, and there find all
well: Dined, and Mrs. Markham come to see my wife. So I up again, and
calling at Deptford for some things of W. Hewer's, he being with me, and
then home and spent the evening with Sir R. Ford, Mr. Knightly, and Sir
W. Pen at Sir W. Batten's: This day our Merchants first met at Gresham
College, which, by proclamation, is to be their Exchange. Strange to
hear what is bid for houses all up and down here; a friend of Sir W.
Rider's: having L150 for what he used to let for L40 per annum. Much
dispute where the Custome-house shall be thereby the growth of the City
again to be foreseen. My Lord Treasurer, they say, and others; would
have it at the other end of the towne. I home late to Sir W. Pen's, who
did give me a bed; but without curtains or hangings, all being down. So
here I went the first time into a naked bed, only my drawers on; and did
sleep pretty well: but still hath sleeping and waking had a fear of fire
in my heart, that I took little rest. People do all the world over
cry out of the simplicity of my Lord Mayor in generall; and more
particularly in this business of the fire, laying it all upon' him. A
proclamation

     [On September 5th proclamation was made "ordering that for supply of
     the distressed people left destitute by the late dreadful and dismal
     fire....  great proportions of bread be brought daily, not
     only to the former markets, but to those lately ordained; that all
     churches, chapels, schools, and public buildings are to be open to
     receive the goods of those who know not how to dispose of them." On
     September 6th, proclamation ordered "that as the markets are burned
     down, markets be held in Bishopsgate Street, Tower Hill, Smithfield,
     and Leadenhall Street" ("Calendar of State Papers," 1666-67, pp.
     100, 104).]

is come out for markets to be kept at Leadenhall and Mileendgreene, and
several other places about the towne; and Tower-hill, and all churches
to be set open to receive poor people.

8th. Up and with Sir W. Batten and Sir W. Pen by water to White Hall and
they to St. James's. I stopped with Sir G. Carteret to desire him to go
with us, and to enquire after money. But the first he cannot do, and the
other as little, or says, "when we can get any, or what shall we do for
it?" He, it seems, is employed in the correspondence between the City
and the King every day, in settling of things. I find him full of
trouble, to think how things will go. I left him, and to St. James's,
where we met first at Sir W. Coventry's chamber, and there did what
business we can, without any books. Our discourse, as every thing else,
was confused. The fleete is at Portsmouth, there staying a wind to carry
them to the Downes, or towards Bullen, where they say the Dutch fleete
is gone, and stays. We concluded upon private meetings for a while, not
having any money to satisfy any people that may come to us. I bought two
eeles upon the Thames, cost me six shillings. Thence with Sir W. Batten
to the Cock-pit, whither the Duke of Albemarle is come. It seems the
King holds him so necessary at this time, that he hath sent for him, and
will keep him here. Indeed, his interest in the City, being acquainted,
and his care in keeping things quiet, is reckoned that wherein he will
be very serviceable. We to him; he is courted in appearance by every
body. He very kind to us; I perceive he lays by all business of the
fleete at present, and minds the City, and is now hastening to Gresham
College, to discourse with the Aldermen. Sir W. Batten and I home (where
met by my brother John, come to town to see how things are with us), and
then presently he with me to Gresham College; where infinity of people,
partly through novelty to see the new place, and partly to find out and
hear what is become one man of another. I met with many people undone,
and more that have extraordinary great losses. People speaking their
thoughts variously about the beginning of the fire, and the rebuilding;
of the City. Then to Sir W. Batten's, and took my brothet with me, and
there dined with a great company of neighbours; and much good discourse;
among others, of the low spirits of some rich men in the City, in
sparing any encouragement to the poor people that wrought for the
saving their houses. Among others, Alderman Starling, a very rich man,
without; children, the fire at next door to him in our lane, after our
men had saved his house, did give 2s. 6d. among thirty of them, and did
quarrel with some that would remove the rubbish out of the way of the
fire, saying that they come to steal. Sir W. Coventry told me of another
this morning, in Holborne, which he shewed the King that when it was
offered to stop the fire near his house for such a reward that came but
to 2s. 6d. a man among the neighbours he would, give but 18d. Thence to
Bednall Green by coach, my brother with me, and saw all well there, and
fetched away my journall book to enter for five days past, and then back
to the office where I find Bagwell's wife, and her husband come home.
Agreed to come to their house to-morrow, I sending him away to his
ship to-day. To the office and late writing letters, and then to Sir
W. Pen's, my brother lying with me, and Sir W. Pen gone down to rest
himself at Woolwich. But I was much frighted and kept awake in my bed,
by some noise I heard a great while below stairs; and the boys not
coming up to me when I knocked. It was by their discovery of people
stealing of some neighbours' wine that lay in vessels in the streets. So
to sleep; and all well all night.

9th (Sunday). Up and was trimmed, and sent my brother to Woolwich to my
wife, to dine with her. I to church, where our parson made a melancholy
but good sermon; and many and most in the church cried, specially the
women. The church mighty full; but few of fashion, and most strangers.
I walked to Bednall Green, and there dined well, but a bad venison pasty
at Sir W. Rider's. Good people they are, and good discourse; and his
daughter, Middleton, a fine woman, discreet. Thence home, and to church
again, and there preached Dean Harding; but, methinks, a bad, poor
sermon, though proper for the time; nor eloquent, in saying at this time
that the City is reduced from a large folio to a decimotertio. So to my
office, there to write down my journall, and take leave of my brother,
whom I sent back this afternoon, though rainy; which it hath not done a
good while before. But I had no room or convenience for him here till
my house is fitted; but I was very kind to him, and do take very well
of him his journey. I did give him 40s. for his pocket, and so, he being
gone, and, it presently rayning, I was troubled for him, though it is
good for the fyre. Anon to Sir W. Pen's to bed, and made my boy Tom to
read me asleep.

10th. All the morning clearing our cellars, and breaking in pieces all
my old lumber, to make room, and to prevent fire. And then to Sir W.
Batten's, and dined; and there hear that Sir W. Rider says that the
towne is full of the report of the wealth that is in his house, and
would be glad that his friends would provide for the safety of their
goods there. This made me get a cart; and thither, and there brought
my money all away. Took a hackney-coach myself (the hackney-coaches now
standing at Allgate). Much wealth indeed there is at his house. Blessed
be God, I got all mine well thence, and lodged it in my office; but
vexed to have all the world see it. And with Sir W. Batten, who would
have taken away my hands before they were stowed. But by and by comes
brother Balty from sea, which I was glad of; and so got him, and Mr.
Tooker, and the boy, to watch with them all in the office all night,
while I upon Jane's coming went down to my wife, calling at Deptford,
intending to see Bagwell, but did not 'ouvrir la porte comme je' did
expect. So down late to Woolwich, and there find my wife out of humour
and indifferent, as she uses upon her having much liberty abroad.

11th. Lay there, and up betimes, and by water with my gold, and laid it
with the rest in my office, where I find all well and safe. So with Sir
W. Batten to the New Exchange by water and to my Lord Bruncker's house,
where Sir W. Coventry and Sir G. Carteret met. Little business before us
but want of money. Broke up, and I home by coach round the town. Dined
at home, Balty and myself putting up my papers in m closet in the
office. He away, I down to Deptford and there spoke with Bagwell and
agreed upon to-morrow, and come home in the rain by water. In the
evening at Sir W. Pen's; with my wife, at supper, he in a mad,
ridiculous, drunken humour; and it seems there have been some late
distances between his lady and him, as my [wife] tells me. After supper,
I home, and with Mr. Hater, Gibson, and Tom alone, got all my chests and
money into the further cellar with much pains, but great content to me
when done. So very late and weary, to bed.

12th. Up, and with Sir W. Batten and Sir W. Pen to St. James's by water,
and there did our usual business with the Duke of Yorke. Thence I to
Westminster, and there, spoke with Michell and Howlett, who tell me how
their poor young ones are going to Shadwell's. The latter told me of the
unkindness of the young man to his wife, which is now over, and I have
promised to appear a counsellor to him. I am glad she is like to be so
near us again. Thence to Martin, and there did 'tout ce que je voudrais
avec' her, and drank, and away by water home and to dinner, Balty and
his wife there. After dinner I took him down with me to Deptford, and
there by the Bezan loaded above half my goods and sent them away. So
we back home, and then I found occasion to return in the dark and to
Bagwell, and there... did do all that I desired, but though I did intend
'pour avoir demeurais con elle' to-day last night, yet when I had
done 'ce que je voudrais I did hate both elle and la cose', and taking
occasion from the occasion of 'su marido's return... did me lever',
and so away home late to Sir W. Pen's (Batty and his wife lying at my
house), and there in the same simple humour I found Sir W. Pen, and so
late to bed.

13th. Up, and down to Tower Wharfe; and there, with Batty and labourers
from Deptford, did get my goods housed well at home. So down to Deptford
again to fetch the rest, and there eat a bit of dinner at the Globe,
with the master of the Bezan with me, while the labourers went to
dinner. Here I hear that this poor towne do bury still of the plague
seven or eight in a day. So to Sir G. Carteret's to work, and there did
to my content ship off into the Bezan all the rest of my goods, saving
my pictures and fine things, that I will bring home in wherrys when the
house is fit to receive them: and so home, and unload them by carts and
hands before night, to my exceeding satisfaction: and so after supper to
bed in my house, the first time I have lain there; and lay with my wife
in my old closett upon the ground, and Batty and his wife in the best
chamber, upon the ground also.

14th. Up, and to work, having carpenters come to helpe in setting
up bedsteads and hangings; and at that trade my people and I all the
morning, till pressed by publique business to leave them against my will
in the afternoon: and yet I was troubled in being at home, to see all my
goods lie up and down the house in a bad condition, and strange workmen
going to and fro might take what they would almost. All the afternoon
busy; and Sir W. Coventry come to me, and found me, as God would have
it, in my office, and people about me setting my papers to rights; and
there discoursed about getting an account ready against the Parliament,
and thereby did create me infinite of business, and to be done on a
sudden; which troubled me: but, however, he being gone, I about it late,
and to good purpose. And so home, having this day also got my wine out
of the ground again, and set in my cellar; but with great pain to keep
the porters that carried it in from observing the money-chests there. So
to bed as last night, only my wife and I upon a bedstead with curtains
in that which was Mercer's chamber, and Balty and his wife (who are here
and do us good service), where we lay last night. This day, poor Tom
Pepys, the turner, was with me, and Kate, Joyce, to bespeake places; one
for himself, the other for her husband. She tells me he hath lost L140
per annum, but have seven houses left.

15th. All the morning at the office, Harman being come to my great
satisfaction to put up my beds and hangings, so I am at rest, and
followed my business all day. Dined with Sir W. Batten, mighty busy
about this account, and while my people were busy, wrote near thirty
letters and orders with my owne hand. At it till eleven at night; and it
is strange to see how clear my head was, being eased of all the matter
of all these letters; whereas one would think that I should have been
dazed. I never did observe so much of myself in my life. In the evening
there comes to me Captain Cocke, and walked a good while in the garden.
He says he hath computed that the rents of houses lost by this fire
in the City comes to L600,000 per annum; that this will make the
Parliament, more quiet than otherwise they would have been, and give
the King a more ready supply; that the supply must be by excise, as it
is in Holland; that the Parliament will see it necessary to carry on
the warr; that the late storm hindered our beating the Dutch fleete, who
were gone out only to satisfy the people, having no business to do but
to avoid us; that the French, as late in the yeare as it is, are coming;
that the Dutch are really in bad condition, but that this unhappinesse
of ours do give them heart; that there was a late difference between
my Lord Arlington and Sir W. Coventry about neglect in the last to send
away an express of the other's in time; that it come before the King,
and the Duke of Yorke concerned himself in it; but this fire hath
stopped it. The Dutch fleete is not gone home, but rather to the North,
and so dangerous to our Gottenburgh fleete. That the Parliament is
likely to fall foul upon some persons; and, among others, on the
Vice-chamberlaine, though we both believe with little ground. That
certainly never so great a loss as this was borne so well by citizens
in the world; he believing that not one merchant upon the 'Change will
break upon it. That he do not apprehend there will be any disturbances
in State upon it; for that all men are busy in looking after their owne
business to save themselves. He gone, I to finish my letters, and home
to bed; and find to my infinite joy many rooms clean; and myself and
wife lie in our own chamber again. But much terrified in the nights
now-a-days with dreams of fire, and falling down of houses.

16th (Lord's day). Lay with much pleasure in bed talking with my wife
about Mr. Hater's lying here and W. Hewer also, if Mrs. Mercer leaves
her house. To the office, whither also all my people about this account,
and there busy all the morning. At noon, with my wife, against her
will, all undressed and dirty, dined at Sir W. Pen's, where was all the
company of our families in towne; but, Lord! so sorry a dinner: venison
baked in pans, that the dinner I have had for his lady alone hath
been worth four of it. Thence, after dinner, displeased with our
entertainment, to my office again, and there till almost midnight and
my people with me, and then home, my head mightily akeing about our
accounts.

17th. Up betimes, and shaved myself after a week's growth, but, Lord!
how ugly I was yesterday and how fine to-day! By water, seeing the City
all the way, a sad sight indeed, much fire being still in. To Sir W.
Coventry, and there read over my yesterday's work: being a collection
of the particulars of the excess of charge created by a war, with good
content. Sir W. Coventry was in great pain lest the French fleete should
be passed by our fleete, who had notice of them on Saturday, and were
preparing to go meet them; but their minds altered, and judged them
merchant-men, when the same day the Success, Captain Ball, made their
whole fleete, and come to Brighthelmstone, and thence at five o'clock
afternoon, Saturday, wrote Sir W. Coventry newes thereof; so that we do
much fear our missing them. Here come in and talked with him Sir Thomas
Clifford, who appears a very fine gentleman, and much set by at Court
for his activity in going to sea, and stoutness everywhere, and stirring
up and down. Thence by coach over the ruines, down Fleete Streete and
Cheapside to Broad Streete to Sir G. Carteret, where Sir W. Batten (and
Sir J. Minnes, whom I had not seen a long time before, being his first
coming abroad) and Lord Bruncker passing his accounts. Thence home a
little to look after my people at work and back to Sir G. Carteret's
to dinner; and thence, after some discourse; with him upon our publique
accounts, I back home, and all the day with Harman and his people
finishing the hangings and beds in my house, and the hangings will be as
good as ever, and particularly in my new closet. They gone and I weary,
my wife and I, and Balty and his wife, who come hither to-day to helpe
us, to a barrel of oysters I sent from the river today, and so to bed.

18th. Strange with what freedom and quantity I pissed this night, which
I know not what to impute to but my oysters, unless the coldness of the
night should cause it, for it was a sad rainy and tempestuous night.
Soon as up I begun to have some pain in my bladder and belly, as usual,
which made me go to dinner betimes, to fill my belly, and that did ease
me, so as I did my business in the afternoon, in forwarding the settling
of my house, very well. Betimes to bed, my wife also being all this day
ill in the same manner. Troubled at my wife's haire coming off so much.
This day the Parliament met, and adjourned till Friday, when the King
will be with them.

19th. Up, and with Sir W. Pen by coach to St. James's, and there did
our usual business before the Duke of Yorke; which signified little, our
business being only complaints of lack of money. Here I saw a bastard
of the late King of Sweden's come to kiss his hands; a mighty modish
French-like gentleman. Thence to White Hall, with Sir W. Batten and Sir
W. Pen, to Wilkes's; and there did hear the many profane stories of
Sir Henry Wood damning the parsons for so much spending the wine at the
sacrament, cursing that ever they took the cup to themselves, and then
another story that he valued not all the world's curses, for two pence
he shall get at any time the prayers of some poor body that is worth
a 1000 of all their curses; Lord Norwich drawing a tooth at a health.
Another time, he and Pinchbacke and Dr. Goffe, now a religious man,
Pinchbacke did begin a frolick to drink out of a glass with a toad in it
that he had taken up going out to shit, he did it without harm. Goffe,
who knew sacke would kill the toad, called for sacke; and when he saw it
dead, says he, "I will have a quick toad, and will not drink from a dead
toad."

     ["They swallow their own contradictions as easily as a hector can
     drink a frog in a glass of wine."--Benlivoglio and Urania, book v.,
     p. 92, 3rd edit.--B.]

By that means, no other being to be found, he escaped the health.
Thence home, and dined, and to Deptford and got all my pictures put into
wherries, and my other fine things, and landed them all very well, and
brought them home, and got Sympson to set them all up to-night; and he
gone, I and the boy to finish and set up my books, and everything else
in my house, till two o'clock; in the morning, and then to bed; but
mightily troubled, and even in my sleep, at my missing four or five
of my biggest books. Speed's Chronicle and Maps, and the two parts of
Waggoner, and a book of cards, which I suppose I have put up with too
much care, that I have forgot where they are; for sure they are not
stole. Two little pictures of sea and ships and a little gilt frame
belonging to my plate of the River, I want; but my books do heartily
trouble me. Most of my gilt frames are hurt, which also troubles me, but
most my books. This day I put on two shirts, the first time this year,
and do grow well upon it; so that my disease is nothing but wind.

20th. Up, much troubled about my books, but cannot, imagine where they
should be. Up, to the setting my closet to rights, and Sir W. Coventry
takes me at it, which did not displease me. He and I to discourse about
our accounts, and the bringing them to the Parliament, and with much
content to see him rely so well on my part. He and I together to Broad
Streete to the Vice-Chamberlain, and there discoursed a while and
parted. My Lady Carteret come to town, but I did not see her. He tells
me how the fleete is come into the Downes. Nothing done, nor French
fleete seen: we drove all from our anchors. But he says newes is come
that De Ruyter is dead, or very near it, of a hurt in his mouth, upon
the discharge of one of his own guns; which put him into a fever, and he
likely to die, if not already dead. We parted, and I home to dinner,
and after dinner to the setting things in order, and all my people busy
about the same work. In the afternoon, out by coach, my wife with me,
which we have not done several weeks now, through all the ruines, to
shew her them, which frets her much, and is a sad sight indeed. Set her
down at her brother's, and thence I to Westminster Hall, and there staid
a little while, and called her home. She did give me an account of great
differences between her mother and Balty's wife. The old woman charges
her with going abroad and staying out late, and painting in the absence
of her husband, and I know not what; and they grow proud, both he and
she, and do not help their father and mother out of what I help them to,
which I do not like, nor my wife. So home, and to the office, to even my
journall, and then home, and very late up with Jane setting my books in
perfect order in my closet, but am mightily troubled for my great books
that I miss, and I am troubled the more for fear there should be more
missing than what I find, though by the room they take on the shelves I
do not find any reason to think it. So to bed.

21st. Up, and mightily pleased with the setting of my books the last
night in order, and that which did please me most of all is that W.
Hewer tells me that upon enquiry he do find that Sir W. Pen hath a
hamper more than his own, which he took for a hamper of bottles of wine,
and are books in it. I was impatient to see it, but they were carried
into a wine-cellar, and the boy is abroad with him at the House, where
the Parliament met to-day, and the King to be with them. At noon after
dinner I sent for Harry, and he tells me it is so, and brought me by and
by my hamper of books to my great joy, with the same books I missed, and
three more great ones, and no more. I did give him 5s. for his pains,
And so home with great joy, and to the setting of some off them right,
but could not finish it, but away by coach to the other end of the town,
leaving my wife at the 'Change, but neither come time enough to the
Council to speak with the Duke of Yorke, nor with Sir G. Carteret, and
so called my wife, and paid for some things she bought, and so home, and
there after a little doing at the office about our accounts, which now
draw near the time they should be ready, the House having ordered Sir G.
Carteret, upon his offering them, to bring them in on Saturday next,
I home, and there, with great pleasure, very late new setting all
my books; and now I am in as good condition as I desire to be in all
worldly respects. The Lord of Heaven make me thankfull, and continue me
therein! So to bed. This day I had new stairs of main timber put t my
cellar going into the yard.

22nd. To my closet, and had it new washed, and now my house is so clean
as I never saw it, or any other house in my life, and every thing in as
good condition as ever before the fire; but with, I believe, about L20
cost one way or other besides about L20 charge in removing my goods, and
do not find that I have lost any thing but two little pictures of ship
and sea, and a little gold frame for one of my sea-cards. My glazier,
indeed, is so full of worke that I cannot get him to come to perfect
my house. To the office, and there busy now for good and all about my
accounts. My Lord Brunck come thither, thinking to find an office, but
we have not yet met. He do now give me a watch, a plain one, in the
roome of my former watch with many motions which I did give him. If it
goes well, I care not for the difference in worth, though believe there
is above L5. He and I to Sir G. Carteret to discourse about his account,
but Mr. Waith not being there nothing could be done, and therefore I
home again, and busy all day. In the afternoon comes Anthony Joyce to
see me, and with tears told me his losse, but yet that he had something
left that he can live well upon, and I doubt it not. But he would
buy some place that he could have and yet keepe his trade where he is
settled in St. Jones's. He gone, I to the office again, and then to Sir
G. Carteret, and there found Mr. Wayth, but, Lord! how fretfully Sir G.
Carteret do discourse with Mr. Wayth about his accounts, like a man that
understands them not one word. I held my tongue and let him go on like
a passionate foole. In the afternoon I paid for the two lighters that
carried my goods to Deptford, and they cost me L8. Till past midnight at
our accounts, and have brought them to a good issue, so as to be ready
to meet Sir G. Carteret and Sir W. Coventry to-morrow, but must work
to-morrow, which Mr. T. Hater had no mind to, it being the Lord's day,
but, being told the necessity, submitted, poor man! This night writ for
brother John to come to towne. Among other reasons, my estate lying
in money, I am afeard of any sudden miscarriage. So to bed mightily
contented in dispatching so much business, and find my house in the best
condition that ever I knew it. Home to bed.

23rd (Lord's day). Up, and after being trimmed, all the morning at the
office with my people about me till about one o'clock, and then home,
and my people with me, and Mr. Wayth and I eat a bit of victuals in my
old closet, now my little dining-room, which makes a pretty room, and
my house being so clean makes me mightily pleased, but only I do lacke
Mercer or somebody in the house to sing with. Soon as eat a bit Mr.
Wayth and I by water to White Hall, and there at Sir G. Carteret's
lodgings Sir W. Coventry met, and we did debate the whole business of
our accounts to the Parliament; where it appears to us that the charge
of the war from September 1st, 1664, to this Michaelmas, will have been
but L3,200,000, and we have paid in that time somewhat about L2,200,000;
so that we owe above L900,000: but our method of accounting, though
it cannot, I believe, be far wide from the mark, yet will not abide
a strict examination if the Parliament should be troublesome. Here
happened a pretty question of Sir W. Coventry, whether this account
of ours will not put my Lord Treasurer to a difficulty to tell what is
become of all the money the Parliament have 'give' in this time for the
war, which hath amounted to about L4,000,000, which nobody there could
answer; but I perceive they did doubt what his answer could be. Having
done, and taken from Sir W. Coventry the minutes of a letter to my Lord
Treasurer, Wayth and I back again to the office, and thence back down to
the water with my wife and landed him in Southwarke, and my wife and I
for pleasure to Fox-hall, and there eat and drank, and so back home, and
I to the office till midnight drawing the letter we are to send with our
accounts to my Lord Treasurer, and that being done to my mind, I home to
bed.

24th. Up, and with Sir W. Batten and Sir W. Pen to St. James's, and
there with Sir W. Coventry read and all approved of my letter, and then
home, and after dinner, Mr. Hater and Gibson dining with me, to the
office, and there very late new moulding my accounts and writing fair my
letter, which I did against the evening, and then by coach left my wife
at her brother's, and I to St. James's, and up and down to look [for]
Sir W. Coventry; and at last found him and Sir G. Carteret with the Lord
Treasurer at White Hall, consulting how to make up my Lord Treasurer's
general account, as well as that of the Navy particularly. Here brought
the letter, but found that Sir G. Carteret had altered his account since
he did give me the abstract of it: so all my letter must be writ over
again, to put in his last abstract. So to Sir G. Carteret's lodgings,
to speak a little about the alteration; and there looking over the
book that Sir G. Carteret intends to deliver to the Parliament of his
payments since September 1st, 1664, and there I find my name the very
second for flags, which I had bought for the Navy, of calico; once,
about 500 and odd pounds, which vexed me mightily. At last, I concluded
of scraping out my name and putting in Mr. Tooker's, which eased me;
though the price was such as I should have had glory by. Here I saw my
Lady Carteret lately come to towne, who, good lady! is mighty kind, and
I must make much of her, for she is a most excellent woman. So took up
my wife and away home, and there to bed, and

25th. Up betimes, with all my people to get the letter writ over, and
other things done, which I did, and by coach to Lord Bruncker's, and got
his hand to it; and then to the Parliament House and got it signed
by the rest, and then delivered it at the House-door to Sir Philip
Warwicke; Sir G. Carteret being gone into the House with his book of
accounts under his arme, to present to the House. I had brought my wife
to White Hall, and leaving her with Mrs. Michell, where she sat in her
shop and had burnt wine sent for her, I walked in the Hall, and among
others with Ned Picketing, who continues still a lying, bragging
coxcombe, telling me that my Lord Sandwich may thank himself for all his
misfortune; for not suffering him and two or three good honest fellows
more to take them by the throats that spoke ill of him, and told me how
basely Lionell Walden hath carried himself towards my Lord; by speaking
slightly of him, which I shall remember. Thence took my wife home to
dinner, and then to the office, where Mr. Hater all the day putting in
order and entering in a book all the measures that this account of the
Navy hath been made up by, and late at night to Mrs. Turner's, where she
had got my wife and Lady Pen and Pegg, and supped, and after, supper and
the rest of the company by design gone, Mrs. Turner and her husband did
lay their case to me about their lodgings, Sir J. Minnes being now gone
wholly to his owne, and now, they being empty, they doubt Sir T. Harvy
or Lord Bruncker may look after the lodgings. I did give them the best
advice, poor people, that I could, and would do them any kindnesse,
though it is strange that now they should have ne'er a friend of Sir W.
Batten or Sir W. Pen to trust to but me, that they have disobliged. So
home to bed, and all night still mightily troubled in my sleepe, with
fire and houses pulling down.

26th. Up, and with Sir J. Minnes to St. James's, where every body going
to the House, I away by coach to White Hall, and after a few turns, and
hearing that our accounts come into the House but to-day, being hindered
yesterday by other business, I away by coach home, taking up my wife and
calling at Bennet's, our late mercer, who is come into Covent Garden
to a fine house looking down upon the Exchange; and I perceive many
Londoners every day come; and Mr. Pierce hath let his wife's closett,
and the little blind bed chamber, and a garret to a silke man for L50
fine, and L30 per annum, and L40 per annum more for dieting the master
and two prentices. So home, not agreeing for silk for a petticoat for
her which she desired, but home to dinner and then back to White Hall,
leaving my wife by the way to buy her petticoat of Bennet, and I to
White Hall waiting all day on the Duke of Yorke to move the King for
getting Lanyon some money at Plymouth out of some oyle prizes brought
in thither, but could get nothing done, but here Mr. Dugdale I hear the
great loss of books in St. Paul's Church-yarde, and at their Hall also,
which they value about L150,000; some booksellers being wholly undone,
among others, they say, my poor Kirton. And Mr. Crumlu all his books and
household stuff burned; they trusting St. Fayth's, and the roof of the
church falling, broke the arch down into the lower church, and so all
the goods burned. A very great loss. His father hath lost above L1000 in
books; one book newly printed, a Discourse, it seems, of Courts. Here
I had the hap to see my Lady Denham: and at night went into the
dining-room and saw several fine ladies; among others, Castlemayne, but
chiefly Denham again; and the Duke of Yorke taking her aside and talking
to her in the sight of all the world, all alone; which was strange, and
what also I did not like. Here I met with good Mr. Evelyn, who cries
out against it, and calls it bitchering,--[This word was apparently of
Evelyn's own making.]--for the Duke of Yorke talks a little to her,
and then she goes away, and then he follows her again like a dog. He
observes that none of the nobility come out of the country at all to
help the King, or comfort him, or prevent commotions at this fire; but
do as if the King were nobody; nor ne'er a priest comes to give the King
and Court good council, or to comfort the poor people that suffer; but
all is dead, nothing of good in any of their minds: he bemoans it, and
says he fears more ruin hangs over our heads. Thence away by coach, and
called away my wife at Unthanke's, where she tells me she hath bought a
gowne of 15s. per yard; the same, before her face, my Lady Castlemayne
this day bought also, which I seemed vexed for, though I do not grudge
it her, but to incline her to have Mercer again, which I believe I shall
do, but the girle, I hear, has no mind to come to us again, which vexes
me. Being come home, I to Sir W. Batten, and there hear our business was
tendered to the House to-day, and a Committee of the whole House chosen
to examine our accounts, and a great many Hotspurs enquiring into it,
and likely to give us much trouble and blame, and perhaps (which I am
afeard of) will find faults enow to demand better officers. This I truly
fear. Away with Sir W. Pen, who was there, and he and I walked in
the garden by moonlight, and he proposes his and my looking out into
Scotland about timber, and to use Pett there; for timber will be a good
commodity this time of building the City; and I like the motion, and
doubt not that we may do good in it. We did also discourse about our
Privateer, and hope well of that also, without much hazard, as, if God
blesses us, I hope we shall do pretty well toward getting a penny. I was
mightily pleased with our discourse, and so parted, and to the office to
finish my journall for three or four days, and so home to supper, and to
bed. Our fleete abroad, and the Dutch too, for all we know; the weather
very bad; and under the command of an unlucky man, I fear. God bless
him, and the fleete under him!

27th. A very furious blowing night all the night; and my mind still
mightily perplexed with dreams, and burning the rest of the town, and
waking in much pain for the fleete. Up, and with my wife by coach as far
as the Temple, and there she to the mercer's again, and I to look out
Penny, my tailor, to speak for a cloak and cassock for my brother, who
is coming to town; and I will have him in a canonical dress, that he may
be the fitter to go abroad with me. I then to the Exchequer, and there,
among other things, spoke to Mr. Falconbridge about his girle I heard
sing at Nonsuch, and took him and some other 'Chequer men to the Sun
Taverne, and there spent 2s. 6d. upon them, and he sent for the girle,
and she hath a pretty way of singing, but hath almost forgot for want of
practice. She is poor in clothes, and not bred to any carriage, but will
be soon taught all, and if Mercer do not come again, I think we may have
her upon better terms, and breed her to what we please. Thence to Sir W.
Coventry's, and there dined with him and Sir W. Batten, the Lieutenant
of the Tower, and Mr. Thin, a pretty gentleman, going to Gottenburgh.
Having dined, Sir W. Coventry, Sir W. Batten, and I walked into his
closet to consider of some things more to be done in a list to be given
to the Parliament of all our ships, and time of entry and discharge. Sir
W. Coventry seems to think they will soon be weary of the business, and
fall quietly into the giving the King what is fit. This he hopes. Thence
I by coach home to the office, and there intending a meeting, but nobody
being there but myself and Sir J. Minnes, who is worse than nothing,
I did not answer any body, but kept to my business in the office till
night, and then Sir W. Batten and Sir W. Pen to me, and thence to Sir W.
Batten's, and eat a barrel of oysters I did give them, and so home, and
to bed. I have this evening discoursed with W. Hewer about Mercer, I
having a mind to have her again; and I am vexed to hear him say that
she hath no mind to come again, though her mother hath. No newes of
the fleete yet, but that they went by Dover on the 25th towards the
Gunfleete, but whether the Dutch be yet abroad, or no, we hear not. De
Ruyter is not dead, but like to do well. Most think that the gross of
the French fleete are gone home again.

28th. Lay long in bed, and am come to agreement with my wife to have
Mercer again, on condition she may learn this winter two months to
dance, and she promises me she will endeavour to learn to sing, and all
this I am willing enough to. So up, and by and by the glazier comes to
finish the windows of my house, which pleases me, and the bookbinder
to gild the backs of my books. I got the glass of my book-presses to be
done presently, which did mightily content me, and to setting my study
in a little better order; and so to my office to my people, busy about
our Parliament accounts; and so to dinner, and then at them again close.
At night comes Sir W. Pen, and he and I a turn in the garden, and he
broke to me a proposition of his and my joining in a design of fetching
timber and deals from Scotland, by the help of Mr. Pett upon the place;
which, while London is building, will yield good money. I approve it. We
judged a third man, that is knowing, is necessary, and concluded on Sir
W. Warren, and sent for him to come to us to-morrow morning. I full of
this all night, and the project of our man of war; but he and, I both
dissatisfied with Sir W. Batten's proposing his son to be Lieutenant,
which we, neither of us, like. He gone, I discoursed with W. Hewer about
Mercer, having a great mind she should come to us again, and instructed
him what to say to her mother about it. And so home, to supper, and to
bed.

29th. A little meeting at the office by Sir W. Batten, Sir W. Pen, and
myself, being the first since the fire. We rose soon, and comes Sir W.
Warren, by our desire, and with Sir W. Pen and I talked of our Scotch
motion, which Sir W. Warren did seem to be stumbled at, and did give
no ready answer, but proposed some thing previous to it, which he knows
would find us work, or writing to Mr. Pett to be informed how matters
go there as to cost and ways of providing sawyers or saw-mills. We were
parted without coming to any good resolution in it, I discerning plainly
that Sir W. Warren had no mind to it, but that he was surprised at our
motion. He gone, I to some office business, and then home to dinner, and
then to office again, and then got done by night the lists that are to
be presented to the Parliament Committee of the ships, number of men,
and time employed since the war, and then I with it (leaving my wife at
Unthanke's) to St. James's, where Sir W. Coventry staid for me, and I
perused our lists, and find to our great joy that wages, victuals, wear
and tear, cast by the medium of the men, will come to above 3,000,000;
and that the extraordinaries, which all the world will allow us, will
arise to more than will justify the expence we have declared to have
been at since the war, viz., L320,000, he and I being both mightily
satisfied, he saying to me, that if God send us over this rub we must
take another course for a better Comptroller. So parted, and I to my
wife [at Unthanke's], who staid for the finishing her new best gowne
(the best that ever I made her coloured tabby, flowered, and so took it
and her home; and then I to my people, and having cut them out a little
more work than they expected, viz., the writing over the lists in new
method, I home to bed, being in good humour, and glad of the end we have
brought this matter to.

30th (Lord's day). Up, and to church, where I have not been a good
while: and there the church infinitely thronged with strangers since the
fire come into our parish; but not one handsome face in all of them, as
if, indeed, there was a curse, as Bishop Fuller heretofore said, upon
our parish. Here I saw Mercer come into the church, which I had a mind
to, but she avoided looking up, which vexed me. A pretty good sermon,
and then home, and comes Balty and dined with us. A good dinner; and
then to have my haire cut against winter close to my head, and then to
church again. A sorry sermon, and away home. [Sir] W. Pen and I to walk
to talk about several businesses, and then home; and my wife and I to
read in Fuller's Church History, and so to supper and to bed. This month
ends with my mind full of business and concernment how this office
will speed with the Parliament, which begins to be mighty severe in the
examining our accounts, and the expence of the Navy this war.




OCTOBER 1666

October 1st, 1666. Up, and all the morning at the office, getting
the list of all the ships and vessels employed since the war, for the
Committee of Parliament. At noon with it to Sir W. Coventry's chamber,
and there dined with him and [Sir] W. Batten, and [Sir] W. Pen, and
after dinner examined it and find it will do us much right in the number
of men rising to near the expense we delivered to the Parliament.
[Sir] W. Coventry and I (the others going before the Committee) to Lord
Bruncker's for his hand, and find him simply mighty busy in a council of
the Queen's. He come out and took in the papers to sign, and sent them
mighty wisely out again. Sir W. Coventry away to the Committee, and I to
the Mercer's, and there took a bill of what I owe of late, which comes
to about L17. Thence to White Hall, and there did hear Betty Michell
was at this end of the towne, and so without breach of vowe did stay to
endeavour to meet with her and carry her home; but she did not come, so
I lost my whole afternoon. But pretty! how I took another pretty woman
for her, taking her a clap on the breech, thinking verily it had been
her. Staid till [Sir] W. Batten and [Sir] W. Pen come out, and so away
home by water with them, and to the office to do some business, and then
home, and my wife do tell me that W. Hewer tells her that Mercer hath
no mind to come. So I was angry at it, and resolved with her to have
Falconbridge's girle, and I think it will be better for us, and will
please me better with singing. With this resolution, to supper and to
bed.

2nd. Up, and am sent for to Sir G. Carteret, and to him, and there he
tells me how our lists are referred to a Sub-committee to consider and
examine, and that I am ordered to be there this afternoon. So I away
thence to my new bookbinder to see my books gilding in the backs, and
then to White Hall to the House, and spoke to Sir W. Coventry, where he
told me I must attend the Committee in the afternoon, and received some
hints of more work to do. So I away to the 'Chequer, and thence to an
alehouse, and found Mr. Falconbridge, and agreed for his kinswoman to
come to me. He says she can dress my wife, and will do anything we would
have her to do, and is of a good spirit and mighty cheerful. He is much
pleased therewith, and so we shall be. So agreed for her coming the next
week. So away home, and eat a short dinner, and then with Sir W. Pen to
White Hall, and do give his boy my book of papers to hold while he went
into the Committee Chamber in the Inner Court of Wards, and I walked
without with Mr. Slingsby, of the Tower, who was there, and who did in
walking inform me mightily in several things; among others, that the
heightening or lowering of money is only a cheat, and do good to some
particular men, which, if I can but remember how, I am now by him fully
convinced of. Anon Sir W. Pen went away, telling me that Sir W. Coventry
that was within had told him that the fleete is all come into the buoy
of the Nore, and that he must hasten down to them, and so went away, and
I into the Committee Chamber before the Committee sat, and there heard
Birch discourse highly and understandingly about the Navy business and
a proposal made heretofore to farm the Navy; but Sir W. Coventry did
abundantly answer him, and is a most excellent person. By and by the
Committee met, and I walked out, and anon they rose and called me in,
and appointed me to attend a Committee of them to-morrow at the office
to examine our lists. This put me into a mighty fear and trouble; they
doing it in a very ill humour, methought. So I away and called on my
Lord Bruncker to desire him to be there to-morrow, and so home, having
taken up my wife at Unthanke's, full of trouble in mind to think what
I shall be obliged to answer, that am neither fully fit, nor in any
measure concerned to take the shame and trouble of this office upon me,
but only from the inability and folly of the Comptroller that occasions
it. When come home I to Sir W. Pen's, to his boy, for my book, and
there find he hath it not, but delivered it to the doorekeeper of the
Committee for me. This, added to my former disquiet, made me stark mad,
considering all the nakedness of the office lay open in papers within
those covers. I could not tell in the world what to do, but was mad on
all sides, and that which made me worse Captain Cocke was there, and he
did so swear and curse at the boy that told me. So Cocke, Griffin, and
the boy with me, they to find the housekeeper of the Parliament, Hughes,
while I to Sir W. Coventry, but could hear nothing of it there. But
coming to our rendezvous at the Swan Taverne, in Ding Streete, I find
they have found the housekeeper, and the book simply locked up in the
Court. So I staid and drank, and rewarded the doore-keeper, and away
home, my heart lighter by all this, but to bed very sad notwithstanding,
in fear of what will happen to-morrow upon their coming.

3rd. Waked betimes, mightily troubled in mind, and in the most true
trouble that I ever was in my life, saving in the business last year
of the East India prizes. So up, and with Mr. Hater and W. Hewer and
Griffin to consider of our business, and books and papers necessary
for this examination; and by and by, by eight o'clock, comes Birch, the
first, with the lists and books of accounts delivered in. He calls me to
work, and there he and I begun, when, by and by, comes Garraway,

     [William Garway, elected M.P. for Chichester, March 26th, 1661, and
     in 1674 he was appointed by the House to confer with Lord
     Shaftesbury respecting the charge against Pepys being popishly
     affected.  See note to the Life, vol. i., p, xxxii, and for his
     character, October 6th, 1666]

the first time I ever saw him, and Sir W. Thompson and Mr. Boscawen.
They to it, and I did make shift to answer them better than I expected.
Sir W. Batten, Lord Bruncker, [Sir] W. Pen, come in, but presently went
out; and [Sir] J. Minnes come in, and said two or three words from the
purpose, but to do hurt; and so away he went also, and left me all the
morning with them alone to stand or fall. At noon Sir W. Batten comes
to them to invite them (though fast day) to dinner, which they did,
and good company they were, but especially Garraway. Here I have news
brought me of my father's coming to town, and I presently to him, glad
to see him, poor man, he being come to town unexpectedly to see us and
the city. I could not stay with him, but after dinner to work again,
only the Committee and I, till dark night, and by that time they cast
up all the lists, and found out what the medium of men was borne all
the war, of all sorts, and ended with good peace, and much seeming
satisfaction; but I find them wise and reserved, and instructed to hit
all our blots, as among others, that we reckon the ships full manned
from the beginning. They gone, and my heart eased of a great deale of
fear and pain, and reckoning myself to come off with victory, because
not overcome in anything or much foiled, I away to Sir W. Coventry's
chamber, but he not within, then to White Hall, and there among the
ladies, and saw my Lady Castlemaine never looked so ill, nor Mrs.
Stewart neither, as in this plain, natural dress. I was not pleased with
either of them. Away, not finding [Sir] W. Coventry, and so home, and
there find my father and my brother come to towne--my father without my
expectation; but glad I am to see him. And so to supper with him, and to
work again at the office; then home, to set up all my folio books, which
are come home gilt on the backs, very handsome to the eye, and then at
midnight to bed. This night [Sir] W. Pen told me [Sir] W. Batten swears
he will have nothing to do with the Privateer if his son do not go
Lieutenant, which angers me and him; but we will be even with him, one
way or other.

4th. Up, and mighty betimes, to [Sir] W. Coventry, to give him an
account of yesterday's work, which do give him good content. He did then
tell me his speech lately to the House in his owne vindication about the
report of his selling of places, he having a small occasion offered him
by chance, which he did desire, and took, and did it to his content,
and, he says, to the House's seeming to approve of it by their hum. He
confessed how long he had done it, and how he desired to have something
else; and, since then, he had taken nothing, and challenged all the
world. I was glad of this also. Thence up to the Duke of York, by
appointment, with fellow officers, to complaine, but to no purpose, of
want of money, and so away. I to Sir G. Carteret, to his lodging, and
here discoursed much of the want of money and our being designed for
destruction. How the King hath lost his power, by submitting himself to
this way of examining his accounts, and is become but as a private man.
He says the King is troubled at it, but they talk an entry shall be
made, that it is not to be brought into example; that the King must,
if they do not agree presently, make them a courageous speech, which he
says he may do, the City of London being now burned, and himself master
of an army, better than any prince before him, and so I believe. Thence
home, about noon, to dinner. After dinner the book binder come, and I
sent by him some more books to gild. I to the office all day, and spent
most of it with Sir W. Warren, whom I have had no discourse with a great
while, and when all is done I do find him a mighty wise man as any I
know, and his counsel as much to be followed. Late with Mr. Hater upon
comparing the charge and husbandry of the last Dutch war with ours now,
and do find good roome to think we have done little worse than they,
whereof good use may and will be made. So home to supper, and to bed.

5th. Up, and with my father talking awhile, then to the office, and
there troubled with a message from Lord Peterborough about money; but
I did give as kind answer as I could, though I hate him. Then to Sir G.
Carteret to discourse about paying of part of the great ships come
in, and so home again to compare the comparison of the two Dutch wars'
charges for [Sir] W. Coventry, and then by water (and saw old Mr.
Michell digging like a painfull father for his son) to him, and find him
at dinner. After dinner to look over my papers, and comparing them with
some notes of his and brought me, the sight of some good Navy notes of
his which I shall get. Then examined and liked well my notes, and away
together to White Hall, in the way discoursing the inconvenience of the
King's being thus subject to an account, but it will be remedied for
the time to come, he thinks, if we can get this over, and I find he will
have the Comptroller's business better done, swearing he will never
be for a wit to be employed on business again. Thence I home, and back
again to White Hall, and meeting Sir H. Cholmly to White Hall; there
walked till night that the Committee come down, and there Sir W.
Coventry tells me that the Subcommittee have made their report to the
Grand Committee, and in pretty kind terms, and have agreed upon allowing
us L4 per head, which I am sure will do the business, but he had
endeavoured to have got more, but this do well, and he and I are both
mighty glad it is come to this, and the heat of the present business
seems almost over. But I have more worke cut out for me, to prepare a
list of the extraordinaries, not to be included within the L4, against
Monday. So I away from him, and met with the Vice-Chamberlain, and
I told him when I had this evening in coming hither met with Captain
Cocke, and he told me of a wild motion made in the House of Lords by the
Duke of Buckingham for all men that had cheated the King to be declared
traitors and felons, and that my Lord Sandwich was named. This put me
into a great pain, so the Vice-Chamberlain, who had heard nothing of it,
having been all day in the City, away with me to White Hall; and there
come to me and told me that, upon Lord Ashly's asking their direction
whether, being a peere, he should bring in his accounts to the Commons,
which they did give way to, the Duke of Buckingham did move that, for
the time to come, what I have written above might be declared by some
fuller law than heretofore. Lord Ashly answered, that it was not the
fault of the present laws, but want of proof; and so said the Lord
Chancellor. He answered, that a better law, he thought, might be made
so the House laughing, did refer it to him to bring in a Bill to that
purpose, and this was all. So I away with joyful heart home, calling on
Cocke and telling him the same. So I away home to the office to clear my
Journall for five days, and so home to supper and to bed, my father who
had staid out late and troubled me thereat being come home well and
gone to bed, which pleases me also. This day, coming home, Mr. Kirton's
kinsman, my bookseller, come in my way; and so I am told by him that Mr.
Kirton is utterly undone, and made 2 or L3000 worse than nothing, from
being worth 7 or L8,000. That the goods laid in the Churchyarde fired
through the windows those in St. Fayth's church; and those coming to the
warehouses' doors fired them, and burned all the books and the pillars
of the church, so as the roof falling down, broke quite down, which it
did not do in the other places of the church, which is alike pillared
(which I knew not before); but being not burned, they stand still. He
do believe there is above; L50,000 of books burned; all the great
booksellers almost undone: not only these, but their warehouses at their
Hall, and under Christchurch, and elsewhere being all burned. A great
want thereof there will be of books, specially Latin books and foreign
books; and, among others, the Polyglottes and new Bible, which he
believes will be presently worth L40 a-piece.

6th. Up, and having seen my brother in his cassocke, which I am not the
most satisfied in, being doubtfull at this time what course to have
him profess too soon. To the office and there busy about a list of the
extraordinaries of the charge of the fleete this war; and was led to
go to the office of the ordnance to be satisfied in something, and find
their accounts and books kept in mighty good order, but that they can
give no light, nor will the nature of their affairs permit it to tell
what the charge of the ordnance comes to a man a month. So home again
and to dinner, there coming Creed to me; but what with business and my
hatred to the man, I did not spend any time with him, but after dinner
[my] wife and he and I took coach and to Westminster, but he 'light
about Paul's, and set her at her tailor's, and myself to St. James's,
but there missing [Sir] W. Coventry, returned and took up my wife, and
calling at the Exchange home, whither Sir H. Cholmly come to visit me,
but my business suffered me not to stay with him. So he gone I by water
to Westminster Hall and thence to St. James's, and there found [Sir] W.
Coventry waiting for me, and I did give him a good account to his mind
of the business he expected about extraordinaries and then fell to
other talke, among others, our sad condition contracted by want of a
Comptroller;

     [As Sir John Minnes performed the duties inefficiently, it was
     considered necessary to take the office from him: See January 21st.]

and it was his words, that he believes, besides all the shame and
trouble he hath brought on the office, the King had better have given
L100,000 than ever have had him there. He did discourse about some of
these discontented Parliament-men, and says that Birch is a false rogue,
but that Garraway is a man that hath not been well used by the Court,
though very stout to death, and hath suffered all that is possible for
the King from the beginning. But discontented as he is, yet he never
knew a Session of Parliament but he hath done some good deed for the
King before it rose. I told him the passage Cocke told me of his having
begged a brace of bucks of the Lord Arlington for him, and when it come
to him, he sent it back again. Sir W. Coventry told me, it is much to
be pitied that the King should lose the service of a man so able and
faithfull; and that he ought to be brought over, but that it is always
observed, that by bringing over one discontented man, you raise up
three in his room; which is a State lesson I never knew before. But when
others discover your fear, and that discontent procures favour, they
will be discontented too, and impose on you. Thence to White Hall and
got a coach and home, and there did business late, and so home and set
up my little books of one of my presses come home gilt, which pleases
me mightily, and then to bed. This morning my wife told me of a fine
gentlewoman my Lady Pen tells her of, for L20 per annum, that sings,
dances, plays on four or five instruments and many other fine things,
which pleases me mightily: and she sent to have her see her, which she
did this afternoon; but sings basely, and is a tawdry wench that would
take L8, but [neither] my wife nor I think her fit to come.

7th (Lord's day). Up, and after visiting my father in his chamber, to
church, and then home to dinner. Little Michell and his wife come to
dine with us, which they did, and then presently after dinner I with Sir
J. Minnes to White Hall, where met by Sir W. Batten and Lord Bruncker,
to attend the King and Duke of York at the Cabinet; but nobody had
determined what to speak of, but only in general to ask for money. So
I was forced immediately to prepare in my mind a method of discoursing.
And anon we were called in to the Green Room, where the King, Duke of
York, Prince Rupert, Lord Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, Duke of Albemarle,
[Sirs] G. Carteret, W. Coventry, Morrice. Nobody beginning, I did, and
made a current, and I thought a good speech, laying open the ill state
of the Navy: by the greatness of the debt; greatness of work to do
against next yeare; the time and materials it would take; and our
incapacity, through a total want of money. I had no sooner done, but
Prince Rupert rose up and told the King in a heat, that whatever
the gentleman had said, he had brought home his fleete in as good a
condition as ever any fleete was brought home; that twenty boats would
be as many as the fleete would want: and all the anchors and cables left
in the storm might be taken up again. This arose from my saying, among
other things we had to do, that the fleete was come in--the greatest
fleete that ever his Majesty had yet together, and that in as bad
condition as the enemy or weather could put it; and to use Sir W. Pen's
words, who is upon the place taking a survey, he dreads the reports he
is to receive from the Surveyors of its defects. I therefore did only
answer, that I was sorry for his Highness's offence, but that what I
said was but the report we received from those entrusted in the fleete
to inform us. He muttered and repeated what he had said; and so, after a
long silence on all hands, nobody, not so much as the Duke of Albemarle,
seconding the Prince, nor taking notice of what he said, we withdrew.
I was not a little troubled at this passage, and the more when speaking
with Jacke Fenn about it, he told me that the Prince will be asking now
who this Pepys is, and find him to be a creature of my Lord Sandwich's,
and therefore this was done only to disparage him. Anon they broke, up,
and Sir W. Coventry come out; so I asked his advice. He told me he
had said something to salve it, which was, that his Highnesse had, he
believed, rightly informed the King that the fleete is come in good
condition to have staid out yet longer, and have fought the enemy,
but yet that Mr. Pepys his meaning might be, that, though in so good
condition, if they should come in and lie all the winter, we shall be
very loth to send them to sea for another year's service with[out] great
repairs. He said it would be no hurt if I went to him, and showed him
the report himself brought up from the fleete, where every ship, by the
Commander's report, do need more or less, and not to mention more of
Sir W. Pen for doing him a mischief. So I said I would, but do not think
that all this will redound to my hurt, because the truth of what I said
will soon appear. Thence, having been informed that, after all this
pains, the King hath found out how to supply us with 5 or L6000, when
L100,000 were at this time but absolutely necessary, and we mentioned
L50,000. This is every day a greater and greater omen of ruine. God fit
us for it! Sir J. Minnes and I home (it raining) by coach, calling only
on Sir G. Cartefet at his lodging (who is I find troubled at my Lord
Treasurer and Sir Ph. Warwicke bungling in his accounts), and come home
to supper with my father, and then all to bed. I made my brother in his
cassocke to say grace this day, but I like his voice so ill that I begin
to be sorry he hath taken this order upon him.

8th. Up and to my office, called up by Commissioner Middleton, newly
come to town, but staid not with me; so I to my office busy all the
morning. Towards noon, by water to Westminster Hall, and there by
several hear that the Parliament do resolve to do something to retrench
Sir G. Carteret's great salary; but cannot hear of any thing bad they
can lay to his charge. The House did this day order to be engrossed the
Bill against importing Irish cattle; a thing, it seems, carried on by
the Western Parliament-men, wholly against the sense of most of the rest
of the House; who think if you do this, you give the Irish again cause
to rebel. Thus plenty on both sides makes us mad. The Committee of the
Canary Company of both factions come to me for my Cozen Roger that is
of the Committee. Thence with [Sir] W. Coventry when the House rose and
[Sir] W. Batten to St. James's, and there agreed of and signed our paper
of extraordinaries, and there left them, and I to Unthanke's, where
Mr. Falconbridge's girle is, and by and by comes my wife, who likes her
well, though I confess I cannot (though she be of my finding out and
sings pretty well), because she will be raised from so mean a condition
to so high all of a sudden; but she will be much to our profit, more
than Mercer, less expense. Here we bespoke anew gowne for her, and to
come to us on Friday. She being gone, my wife and I home by coach, and
then I presently by water with Mr. Pierce to Westminster Hall, he in the
way telling me how the Duke of York and Duke of Albemarle do not agree.
The Duke of York is wholly given up to this bitch of Denham. The Duke of
Albemarle and Prince Rupert do less agree. So that we are all in
pieces, and nobody knows what will be done the next year. The King hath
yesterday in Council declared his resolution of setting a fashion for
clothes, which he will never alter.

     [There are several references to this new fashion of dress
     introduced by the king, Pepys saw the Duke of York put on the vest
     on the 13th, and he says Charles II. himself put it on on the 15th.
     On November 4th Pepys dressed himself in the new vest and coat.  See
     notes, October 15th and November 22nd.]

It will be a vest, I know not well how; but it is to teach the nobility
thrift, and will do good. By and by comes down from the Committee [Sir]
W. Coventry, and I find him troubled at several things happened this
afternoon, which vexes me also; our business looking worse and worse,
and our worke growing on our hands. Time spending, and no money to set
anything in hand with; the end thereof must be speedy ruine. The Dutch
insult and have taken off Bruant's head,

     [Captain Du Buat, a Frenchman in the Dutch service, plotted with two
     magistrates of Rotterdam to obtain a peace with England as the
     readiest means of pressing the elevation of the Prince of Orange to
     the office of Captain-General.  He was brought before the Supreme
     Court of Holland, condemned, and executed.  He had been one of the
     household of the Prince of Orange who were dismissed by De Witt.]

which they have not dared to do (though found guilty of the fault he did
die for, of something of the Prince of Orange's faction) till just now,
which speaks more confidence in our being worse than before. Alderman
Maynell, I hear, is dead. Thence returned in the darke by coach all
alone, full of thoughts of the consequences of this ill complexion of
affairs, and how to save myself and the little I have, which if I can
do, I have cause to bless God that I am so well, and shall be well
contented to retreat to Brampton, and spend the rest of my days there.
So to my office, and did some business, and finished my Journall with
resolutions, if God bless me, to apply myself soberly to settle all
matters for myself, and expect the event of all with comfort. So home to
supper and to bed.

9th. Up and to the office, where we sat the first day since the fire,
I think. At noon home, and my uncle Thomas was there, and dined with my
brother and I (my father and I were gone abroad), and then to the office
again in the afternoon, and there close all day long, and did much
business. At night to Sir W. Batten, where Sir R. Ford did occasion some
discourse of sending a convoy to the Maderas; and this did put us
upon some new thoughts of sending our privateer thither on merchants'
accounts, which I have more mind to, the profit being certain and
occasion honest withall. So home, and to supper with my father, and then
to set my remainder of my books gilt in order with much pleasure, and so
late to bed.

10th (Fast-day for the fire). Up with Sir W. Batten by water to White
Hall, and anon had a meeting before the Duke of York, where pretty to
see how Sir W. Batten, that carried the surveys of all the fleete with
him, to shew their ill condition to the Duke of York, when he found
the Prince there, did not speak one word, though the meeting was of his
asking--for nothing else. And when I asked him, he told me he knew the
Prince too well to anger him, so that he was afeard to do it. Thence
with him to Westminster, to the parish church, where the Parliament-men,
and Stillingfleete in the pulpit. So full, no standing there; so he
and I to eat herrings at the Dog Taverne. And then to church again, and
there was Mr. Frampton in the pulpit, they cry up so much, a young man,
and of a mighty ready tongue. I heard a little of his sermon, and liked
it; but the crowd so great, I could not stay. So to the Swan, and 'baise
la fille', and drank, and then home by coach, and took father, wife,
brother, and W. Hewer to Islington, where I find mine host dead. Here
eat and drank, and merry; and so home, and to the office a while, and
then to Sir W. Batten to talk a while, and with Captain Cocke into the
office to hear his newes, who is mighty conversant with Garraway and
those people, who tells me what they object as to the maladministration
of things as to money. But that they mean well, and will do well; but
their reckonings are very good, and show great faults, as I will insert
here. They say the king hath had towards this war expressly thus much

     Royal Ayde.................................... L2,450,000
     More..........................................  1,250,000
     Three months' tax given the King by a power of
          raising a month's tax of L70,000 every
          year for three years.....................  0,210,000
     Customes, out of which the King did promise
          to pay L240,000, which for two years
          comes to.................................. 0,480,000
     Prizes, which they moderately reckon at........ 0,300,000
     A debt declared by the Navy, by us............. 0,900,000
                                                    ----------
                                                     5,590,000

     The whole charge of the Navy, as we state it
          for two years and a month, hath been but.. 3,200,000

          So what is become of all this sum?........ 2,390,000

He and I did bemoan our public condition. He tells me the Duke of
Albemarle is under a cloud, and they have a mind at Court to lay him
aside. This I know not; but all things are not right with him, and I am
glad of it, but sorry for the time. So home to supper, and to bed, it
being my wedding night,

     [See Life, vol. i., p. xxi., where the register of St. Margaret's
     parish, Westminster, is quoted to the effect that Pepys was married
     December 1st, 1655.  It seems incomprehensible that both husband and
     wife should have been wrong as to the date of their wedding day, but
     Mrs. Pepys was unquestionably wrong as to the number of years, for
     they had been married nearly eleven.]

but how many years I cannot tell; but my wife says ten.

11th. Up, and discoursed with my father of my sending some money for
safety into the country, for I am in pain what to do with what I have. I
did give him money, poor man, and he overjoyed. So left him, and to the
office, where nothing but sad evidences of ruine coming on us for want
of money. So home to dinner, which was a very good dinner, my father,
brother, wife and I, and then to the office again, where I was all the
afternoon till very late, busy, and then home to supper and to bed.

     Memorandum.  I had taken my Journall during the fire and the
     disorders following in loose papers until this very day, and could
     not get time to enter them in my book till January 18, in the
     morning, having made my eyes sore by frequent attempts this winter
     to do it.  But now it is done, for which I thank God, and pray never
     the like occasion may happen.

12th. Up, and after taking leave of my poor father, who is setting out
this day for Brampton by the Cambridge coach, he having taken a journey
to see the city burned, and to bring my brother to towne, I out by
water; and so coach to St. James's, the weather being foul; and there,
from Sir W. Coventry, do hear how the House have cut us off L150,000 of
our wear and tear, for that which was saved by the King while the fleete
lay in harbour in winter. However, he seems pleased, and so am I, that
they have abated no more, and do intend to allow of 28,000 men for the
next year; and this day have appointed to declare the sum they will give
the King,

     [The parliament voted this day a supply of L1,800,000 sterling.
     See below.]

and to propose the way of raising it; so that this is likely to be the
great day. This done in his chamber, I with him to Westminster Hall, and
there took a few turns, the Hall mighty full of people, and the House
likely to be very full to-day about the money business. Here I met with
several people, and do find that people have a mighty mind to have a
fling at the Vice-Chamberlain, if they could lay hold of anything,
his place being, indeed, too much for such, they think, or any single
subject of no greater parts and quality than he, to enjoy. But I hope he
may weather all, though it will not be by any dexterity of his, I dare
say, if he do stand, but by his fate only, and people's being taken off
by other things. Thence home by coach, mighty dirty weather, and then to
the Treasurer's office and got a ticket paid for my little Michell, and
so again by coach to Westminster, and come presently after the House
rose. So to the Swan, and there sent for a piece of meat and dined alone
and played with Sarah, and so to the Hall a while, and thence to Mrs.
Martin's lodging and did what I would with her. She is very big,
and resolves I must be godfather. Thence away by water with Cropp to
Deptford. It was almost night before I got thither. So I did only
give directions concerning a press that I have making there to hold my
turning and joyner's tooles that were lately given me, which will be
very handsome, and so away back again, it being now dark, and so home,
and there find my wife come home, and hath brought her new girle I have
helped her to, of Mr. Falconbridge's. She is wretched poor; and but
ordinary favoured; and we fain to lay out seven or eight pounds worth of
clothes upon her back, which, methinks, do go against my heart; and I
do not think I can ever esteem her as I could have done another that had
come fine and handsome; and which is more, her voice, for want of use,
is so furred, that it do not at present please me; but her manner of
singing is such, that I shall, I think, take great pleasure in it. Well,
she is come, and I wish us good fortune in her. Here I met with notice
of a meeting of the Commissioners for Tangier tomorrow, and so I must
have my accounts ready for them, which caused me to confine myself to
my chamber presently and set to the making up my accounts, which I find
very clear, but with much difficulty by reason of my not doing them
sooner, things being out of my mind.

13th. It cost me till four o'clock in the morning, and, which was pretty
to think, I was above an hour, after I had made all right, in casting
up of about twenty sums, being dozed with much work, and had for forty
times together forgot to carry the 60 which I had in my mind, in one
denomination which exceeded 60; and this did confound me for above an
hour together. At last all even and done, and so to bed. Up at seven,
and so to the office, after looking over my last night's work. We sat
all the morning. At noon by coach with my Lord Bruncker and 'light at
the Temple, and so alone I to dinner at a cooke's, and thence to my
Lord Bellasses, whom I find kind; but he had drawn some new proposal
to deliver to the Lords Commissioners to-day, wherein one was, that the
garrison would not be well paid without some goldsmith's undertaking
the paying of the bills of exchange for Tallys. He professing so
much kindness to me, and saying that he would not be concerned in the
garrison without me; and that if he continued in the employment, no man
should have to do with the money but myself. I did ask his Lordship's
meaning of the proposition in his paper. He told me he had not much
considered it, but that he meant no harm to me. I told him I thought it
would render me useless; whereupon he did very frankly, after my seeming
denials for a good while, cause it to be writ over again, and that
clause left out, which did satisfy me abundantly. It being done, he and
I together to White Hall, and there the Duke of York (who is gone over
to all his pleasures again, and leaves off care of business, what with
his woman, my Lady Denham, and his hunting three times a week) was just
come in from hunting. So I stood and saw him dress himself, and try on
his vest, which is the King's new fashion, and will be in it for good
and all on Monday next, and the whole Court: it is a fashion, the King
says; he will never change. He being ready, he and my Lord Chancellor,
and Duke of Albemarle, and Prince Rupert, Lord Bellasses, Sir H.
Cholmly, Povy, and myself, met at a Committee for Tangier. My Lord
Bellasses's propositions were read and discoursed of, about reducing
the garrison to less charge; and indeed I am mad in love with my Lord
Chancellor, for he do comprehend and speak out well, and with the
greatest easinesse and authority that ever I saw man in my life. I
did never observe how much easier a man do speak when he knows all
the company to be below him, than in him; for though he spoke, indeed,
excellent welt, yet his manner and freedom of doing it, as if he played
with it, and was informing only all the rest of the company, was mighty
pretty. He did call again and again upon Mr. Povy for his accounts. I
did think fit to make the solemn tender of my accounts that I intended.
I said something that was liked, touching the want of money, and the bad
credit of our tallys. My Lord Chancellor moved, that without any trouble
to any of the rest of the Lords, I might alone attend the King, when he
was with his private Council; and open the state of the garrison's want
of credit; and all that could be done, should. Most things moved were
referred to Committees, and so we broke up. And at the end Sir W.
Coventry come; so I away with him, and he discoursed with me something
of the Parliament's business. They have voted giving the [King] for next
year L1,800,000; which, were it not for his debts, were a great sum.
He says, he thinks the House may say no more to us for the present, but
that we must mend our manners against the next tryall, and mend them
we will. But he thinks it not a fit time to be found making of trouble
among ourselves, meaning about Sir J. Minnes, who most certainly must be
removed, or made a Commissioner, and somebody else Comptroller. But he
tells me that the House has a great envy at Sir G. Carteret, and that
had he ever thought fit in all his discourse to have touched upon the
point of our want of money and badness of payment, it would have been
laid hold on to Sir G. Carteret's hurt; but he hath avoided it, though
without much reason for it, most studiously, and in short did end thus,
that he has never shewn so much of the pigeon in all his life as in his
innocence to Sir G. Carteret at this time; which I believe, and will
desire Sir G. Carteret to thank him for it. So we broke up and I by
coach home, calling for a new pair of shoes, and so, little being to do
at the office, did go home, and after spending a little in righting some
of my books, which stood out of order, I to bed.

14th (Lord's day). Lay long in bed, among other things, talking of my
wife's renewing her acquaintance with Mrs. Pierce, which, by my wife's
ill using her when she was here last, hath been interrupted. Herein we
were a little angry together, but presently friends again; and so up,
and I to church, which was mighty full, and my beauties, Mrs. Lethulier
and fair Batelier, both there. A very foul morning, and rained; and sent
for my cloake to go out of the church with. So dined, and after dinner
(a good discourse thereat to my brother) he and I by water to White
Hall, and he to Westminster Abbey. Here I met with Sir Stephen Fox, who
told me how much right I had done myself, and how well it is represented
by the Committee to the House, my readinesse to give them satisfaction
in everything when they were at the office. I was glad of this. He
did further discourse of Sir W. Coventry's, great abilities, and how
necessary it were that I were of the House to assist him. I did not owne
it, but do myself think it were not unnecessary if either he should die,
or be removed to the Lords, or any thing to hinder his doing the like
service the next trial, which makes me think that it were not a thing
very unfit; but I will not move in it. He and I parted, I to Mrs.
Martin's, thinking to have met Mrs. Burrows, but she was not there, so
away and took my brother out of the Abbey and home, and there to set
some accounts right, and to the office to even my Journall, and so home
to supper and to bed.

15th. Called up, though a very rainy morning, by Sir H. Cholmley, and he
and I most of the morning together evening of accounts, which I was very
glad of. Then he and I out to Sir Robt. Viner's, at the African house
(where I had not been since he come thither); but he was not there; but
I did some business with his people, and then to Colvill's, who, I find,
lives now in Lyme Streete, and with the same credit as ever, this fire
having not done them any wrong that I hear of at all. Thence he and I
together to Westminster Hall, in our way talking of matters and passages
of state, the viciousness of the Court; the contempt the King brings
himself into thereby; his minding nothing, but doing all things just as
his people about him will have it; the Duke of York becoming a slave to
this whore Denham, and wholly minds her; that there really was amours
between the Duchesse and Sidney; a that there is reason to fear that, as
soon as the Parliament have raised this money, the King will see that
he hath got all that he can get, and then make up a peace. He tells me,
what I wonder at, but that I find it confirmed by Mr. Pierce, whom I met
by-and-by in the Hall, that Sir W. Coventry is of the caball with the
Duke of York, and Bruncker, with this Denham; which is a shame, and I
am sorry for it, and that Sir W. Coventry do make her visits; but yet I
hope it is not so. Pierce tells me, that as little agreement as there is
between the Prince--[Rupert]--and Duke of Albemarle, yet they are likely
to go to sea again; for the first will not be trusted alone, and nobody
will go with him but this Duke of Albemarle. He tells me much how all
the commanders of the fleete and officers that are sober men do cry
out upon their bad discipline, and the ruine that must follow it if it
continue. But that which I wonder most at, it seems their secretaries
have been the most exorbitant in their fees to all sorts of the people,
that it is not to be believed that they durst do it, so as it is
believed they have got L800 apiece by the very vacancies in the fleete.
He tells me that Lady Castlemayne is concluded to be with child again;
and that all the people about the King do make no scruple of saying
that the King do lie with Mrs. Stewart, who, he says, is a most
excellent-natured lady. This day the King begins to put on his vest, and
I did see several persons of the House of Lords and Commons too, great
courtiers, who are in it; being a long cassocke close to the body, of
black cloth, and pinked with white silke under it, and a coat over it,
and the legs ruffled with black riband like a pigeon's leg; and, upon
the whole, I wish the King may keep it, for it is a very fine and
handsome garment.

     [Evelyn describes the new fashion as "a comely dress after ye
     Persian mode" (see "Diary," October 18th, 1666).  He adds that he
     had described the "comelinesse and usefulnesse" of the Persian
     clothing in his pamphlet entitled "Tyrannus, or the Mode."  "I do
     not impute to this discourse the change which soone happen'd, but
     it was an identity I could not but take notice of."  Rugge, in his
     "Diurnal," thus describes the new Court costume "1666, Oct. 11.  In
     this month His Majestie and whole Court changed the fashion of their
     clothes-viz. a close coat of cloth, pinkt with a white taffety under
     the cutts.  This in length reached the calf of the leg, and upon
     that a sercoat cutt at the breast, which hung loose and shorter than
     the vest six inches.  The breeches the Spanish cut, and buskins some
     of cloth, some of leather, but of the same colour as the vest or
     garment; of never the like fashion since William the Conqueror."  It
     is represented in a portrait of Lord Arlington, by Sir P. Lely,
     formerly belonging to Lord de Clifford, and engraved in Lodge's
     "Portraits."  Louis XIV. ordered his servants to wear the dress.
     See November 22.]

Walking with Pierce in the Court of Wards out comes Sir W. Coventry, and
he and I talked of business. Among others I proposed the making Sir J.
Minnes a Commissioner, and make somebody else Comptroller. He tells me
it is the thing he hath been thinking of, and hath spoke to the Duke of
York of it. He believes it will be done; but that which I fear is that
Pen will be Comptroller, which I shall grudge a little. The Duke of
Buckingham called him aside and spoke a good while with him. I did
presently fear it might be to discourse something of his design to
blemish my Lord of Sandwich, in pursuance of the wild motion he made the
other day in the House. Sir W. Coventry, when he come to me again, told
me that he had wrought a miracle, which was, the convincing the Duke of
Buckingham that something--he did not name what--that he had intended
to do was not fit to be done, and that the Duke is gone away of that
opinion. This makes me verily believe it was something like what I
feared. By and by the House rose, and then we parted, and I with Sir G.
Carteret, and walked in the Exchequer Court, discoursing of businesses.
Among others, I observing to him how friendly Sir W. Coventry had
carried himself to him in these late inquiries, when, if he had borne
him any spleen, he could have had what occasion he pleased offered him,
he did confess he found the same thing, and would thanke him for it. I
did give him some other advices, and so away with him to his lodgings at
White Hall to dinner, where my Lady Carteret is, and mighty kind,
both of them, to me. Their son and my Lady Jemimah will be here very
speedily. She tells me the ladies are to go into a new fashion shortly,
and that is, to wear short coats, above their ancles; which she and I do
not like, but conclude this long trayne to be mighty graceful. But she
cries out of the vices of the Court, and how they are going to set up
plays already; and how, the next day after the late great fast, the
Duchesse of York did give the King and Queene a play. Nay, she told me
that they have heretofore had plays at Court the very nights before
the fast for the death of the late King: She do much cry out upon these
things, and that which she believes will undo the whole nation; and I
fear so too. After dinner away home, Mr. Brisband along with me as
far as the Temple, and there looked upon a new booke, set out by one
Rycault, secretary to my Lord Winchelsea, of the policy and customs of
the Turks, which is, it seems, much cried up. But I could not stay,
but home, where I find Balty come back, and with him some muster-books,
which I am glad of, and hope he will do me credit in his employment.
By and by took coach again and carried him home, and my wife to her
tailor's, while I to White Hall to have found out Povy, but miss him and
so call in my wife and home again, where at Sir W. Batten's I met Sir
W. Pen, lately come from the fleete at the Nore; and here were many good
fellows, among others Sir R. Holmes, who is exceeding kind to me, more
than usual, which makes me afeard of him, though I do much wish his
friendship. Thereupon, after a little stay, I withdrew, and to the
office and awhile, and then home to supper and to my chamber to settle
a few papers, and then to bed. This day the great debate was in
Parliament, the manner of raising the L1,800,000 they voted [the
King] on Friday; and at last, after many proposals, one moved that the
Chimney-money might be taken from the King, and an equal revenue of
something else might be found for the King, and people be enjoyned to
buy off this tax of Chimney-money for ever at eight years' purchase,
which will raise present money, as they think, L1,600,000, and the State
be eased of an ill burthen and the King be supplied of something as food
or better for his use. The House seems to like this, and put off the
debate to to-morrow.

16th. Up, and to the office, where sat to do little business but hear
clamours for money. At noon home to dinner, and to the office again,
after hearing my brother play a little upon the Lyra viall, which he do
so as to show that he hath a love to musique and a spirit for it, which
I am well pleased with. All the afternoon at the office, and at night
with Sir W. Batten, Sir W. Pen, [and Sir] J. Minnes, at [Sir] W. Pen's
lodgings, advising about business and orders fit presently to make about
discharging of ships come into the river, and which to pay first, and
many things in order thereto. But it vexed me that, it being now past
seven o'clock, and the businesses of great weight, and I had done them
by eight o'clock, and sending them to be signed, they were all gone to
bed, and Sir W. Pen, though awake, would not, being in bed, have them
brought to him to sign; this made me quite angry. Late at work at the
office, and then home to supper and to bed. Not come to any resolution
at the Parliament to-day about the manner of raising this L1,800,000.

17th. Up, and busy about public and private business all the morning at
the office. At noon home to dinner, alone with my brother, with whom I
had now the first private talke I have had, and find he hath
preached but twice in his life. I did give him some advice to study
pronunciation; but I do fear he will never make a good speaker, nor, I
fear, any general good scholar, for I do not see that he minds optickes
or mathematiques of any sort, nor anything else that I can find. I know
not what he may be at divinity and ordinary school-learning. However, he
seems sober, and that pleases me. After dinner took him and my wife and
Barker (for so is our new woman called, and is yet but a sorry girle),
and set them down at Unthanke's, and so to White Hall, and there find
some of my brethren with the Duke of York, but so few I put off the
meeting. So staid and heard the Duke discourse, which he did mighty
scurrilously, of the French, and with reason, that they should give
Beaufort orders when he was to bring, and did bring, his fleete hither,
that his rendezvous for his fleete, and for all sluggs to come to,
should be between Calais and Dover; which did prove the taking of La
Roche[lle], who, among other sluggs behind, did, by their instructions,
make for that place, to rendezvous with the fleete; and Beaufort, seeing
them as he was returning, took them for the English fleete, and wrote
word to the King of France that he had passed by the English fleete, and
the English fleete durst not meddle with him. The Court is all full of
vests, only my Lord St. Albans not pinked but plain black; and they
say the King says the pinking upon white makes them look too much like
magpyes, and therefore hath bespoke one of plain velvet. Thence to
St. James's by coach, and spoke, at four o'clock or five, with Sir W.
Coventry, newly come from the House, where they have sat all this day
and not come to an end of the debate how the money shall be raised.
He tells me that what I proposed to him the other day was what he had
himself thought on and determined, and that he believes it will speedily
be done--the making Sir J. Minnes a Commissioner, and bringing somebody
else to be Comptroller, and that (which do not please me, I confess, for
my own particulars, so well as Sir J. Minnes) will, I fear, be Sir W.
Pen, for he is the only fit man for it. Away from him and took up my
wife, and left her at Temple Bar to buy some lace for a petticoat, and I
took coach and away to Sir R. Viner's about a little business, and then
home, and by and by to my chamber, and there late upon making up an
account for the Board to pass to-morrow, if I can get them, for the
clearing all my imprest bills, which if I can do, will be to my very
good satisfaction. Having done this, then to supper and to bed.

18th. Up, and to the office, where we sat all the morning. The waters so
high in the roads, by the late rains, that our letters come not in till
to-day, and now I understand that my father is got well home, but had a
painful journey of it. At noon with Lord Bruncker to St. Ellen's, where
the master of the late Pope's Head Taverne is now set up again, and
there dined at Sir W. Warren's cost, a very good dinner. Here my
Lord Bruncker proffered to carry me and my wife into a play at Court
to-night, and to lend me his coach home, which tempted me much; but
I shall not do it. Thence rose from table before dinner ended, and
homewards met my wife, and so away by coach towards Lovett's (in the way
wondering at what a good pretty wench our Barker makes, being now put
into good clothes, and fashionable, at my charge; but it becomes her,
so that I do not now think much of it, and is an example of the power
of good clothes and dress), where I stood godfather. But it was pretty,
that, being a Protestant, a man stood by and was my Proxy to answer for
me. A priest christened it, and the boy's name is Samuel. The ceremonies
many, and some foolish. The priest in a gentleman's dress, more than my
owne; but is a Capuchin, one of the Queene-mother's priests. He did give
my proxy and the woman proxy (my Lady Bills, absent, had a proxy also)
good advice to bring up the child, and, at the end, that he ought never
to marry the child nor the godmother, nor the godmother the child or the
godfather: but, which is strange, they say that the mother of the
child and the godfather may marry. By and by the Lady Bills come in, a
well-bred but crooked woman. The poor people of the house had good wine,
and a good cake; and she a pretty woman in her lying-in dress. It cost
me near 40s. the whole christening: to midwife 20s., nurse 10s., mayde
2s. 6d., and the coach 5s. I was very well satisfied with what I have
done, and so home and to the office, and thence to Sir W. Batten's, and
there hear how the business of buying off the Chimney-money is passed in
the House; and so the King to be satisfied some other way, and the King
supplied with the money raised by this purchasing off of the chimnies.
So home, mightily pleased in mind that I have got my bills of imprest
cleared by bills signed this day, to my good satisfaction. To supper,
and to bed.

19th. Up, and by coach to my Lord Ashly's, and thence (he being gone
out), to the Exchequer chamber, and there find him and my Lord Bellasses
about my Lord Bellasses' accounts, which was the business I went upon.
This was soon ended, and then I with Creed back home to my house, and
there he and I did even accounts for salary, and by that time dinner was
ready, and merry at dinner, and then abroad to Povy's, who continues as
much confounded in all his business as ever he was; and would have
had me paid money, as like a fool as himself, which I troubled him in
refusing; but I did persist in it. After a little more discourse, I left
them, and to White Hall, where I met with Sir Robert Viner, who told
me a little of what, in going home, I had seen; also a little of the
disorder and mutiny among the seamen at the Treasurer's office, which
did trouble me then and all day since, considering how many more seamen
will come to towne every day, and no money for them. A Parliament
sitting, and the Exchange close by, and an enemy to hear of, and laugh
at it.

     [The King of Denmark was induced to conclude a treaty with the
     United Provinces, a secret article of which bound him to declare war
     against England.  The order in council for the printing and
     publishing a declaration of war against Denmark is dated "Whitehall,
     Sept.  19, 1666;" annexed is "A True Declaration of all
     transactions between his Majesty of Great Britain and the King of
     Denmark, with a declaration of war against the said king, and the
     motives that obliged his Majesty thereunto" ("Calendar of State
     Papers," 1666-67, p. 140).]

Viner too, and Backewell, were sent for this afternoon; and was before
the King and his Cabinet about money; they declaring they would advance
no more, it being discoursed of in the House of Parliament for the King
to issue out his privy-seals to them to command them to trust him, which
gives them reason to decline trusting. But more money they are persuaded
to lend, but so little that (with horrour I speake it), coming after the
Council was up, with Sir G. Carteret, Sir W. Coventry, Lord Bruncker,
and myself, I did lay the state of our condition before the Duke of
York, that the fleete could not go out without several things it wanted,
and we could not have without money, particularly rum and bread, which
we have promised the man Swan to helpe him to L200 of his debt, and
a few other small sums of L200 a piece to some others, and that I do
foresee the Duke of York would call us to an account why the fleete is
not abroad, and we cannot answer otherwise than our want of money; and
that indeed we do not do the King any service now, but do rather abuse
and betray his service by being there, and seeming to do something,
while we do not. Sir G. Carteret asked me (just in these words, for
in this and all the rest I set down the very words for memory sake, if
there should be occasion) whether L50 or L60 would do us any good; and
when I told him the very rum man must have L200, he held up his eyes as
if we had asked a million. Sir W. Coventry told the Duke of York plainly
he did rather desire to have his commission called in than serve in so
ill a place, where he cannot do the King service, and I did concur
in saying the same. This was all very plain, and the Duke of York did
confess that he did not see how we could do anything without a present
supply of L20,000, and that he would speak to the King next Council day,
and I promised to wait on him to put him in mind of it. This I set down
for my future justification, if need be, and so we broke up, and all
parted, Sir W. Coventry being not very well, but I believe made much
worse by this night's sad discourse. So I home by coach, considering
what the consequence of all this must be in a little time. Nothing but
distraction and confusion; which makes me wish with all my heart that I
were well and quietly settled with what little I have got at Brampton,
where I might live peaceably, and study, and pray for the good of the
King and my country. Home, and to Sir W. Batten's, where I saw my Lady,
who is now come down stairs after a great sickness. Sir W. Batten was
at the pay to-day, and tells me how rude the men were, but did go away
quietly, being promised pay on Wednesday next. God send us money for
it! So to the office, and then to supper and to bed. Among other things
proposed in the House to-day, to give the King in lieu of chimneys,
there was the bringing up of sealed paper, such as Sir J. Minnes shewed
me to-night, at Sir W. Batten's, is used in Spayne, and brings the King
a great revenue; but it shows what shifts we are put to too much.

20th. Up, and all the morning at the office, where none met but myself.
So I walked a good while with Mr. Gawden in the garden, who is lately
come from the fleete at the buoy of the Nore, and he do tell me how all
the sober commanders, and even Sir Thomas Allen himself, do complain of
the ill government of the fleete. How Holmes and Jennings have commanded
all the fleete this yeare, that nothing is done upon deliberation, but
if a sober man give his opinion otherwise than the Prince would have it
the Prince would cry, "Damn him, do you follow your orders, and that
is enough for you." He tells me he hears of nothing but of swearing and
drinking and whoring, and all manner of profaneness, quite through the
whole fleete. He being gone, there comes to me Commissioner Middleton,
whom I took on purpose to walk in the garden with me, and to learn what
he observed when the fleete was at Portsmouth. He says that the fleete
was in such a condition, as to discipline, as if the Devil had commanded
it; so much wickedness of all sorts. Enquiring how it come to pass that
so many ships miscarried this year, he tells me that he enquired; and
the pilots do say, that they dare not do nor go but as the Captains will
have them; and if they offer to do otherwise, the Captains swear they
will run them through. He says that he heard Captain Digby (my Lord of
Bristoll's son, a young fellow that never was but one year, if that, in
the fleete) say that he did hope he should not see a tarpaulin have the
command of a ship within this twelve months. He observed while he was on
board the Admirall, when the fleete was at Portsmouth, that there was a
faction there. Holmes commanded all on the Prince's side, and Sir Jeremy
Smith on the Duke's, and every body that come did apply themselves to
one side or other; and when the Duke of Albemarle was gone away to
come hither, then Sir Jeremy Smith did hang his head, and walked in the
Generall's ship but like a private commander. He says he was on board
The Prince, when the newes come of the burning of London; and all the
Prince said was, that now Shipton's prophecy was out; and he heard a
young commander presently swear, that now a citizen's wife that would
not take under half a piece before, would be occupied for half-a-crowne:
and made mighty sport of it. He says that Hubberd that commanded this
year the Admiral's ship is a proud conceited fellow (though I thought
otherwise of him), and fit to command a single ship but not a fleete,
and he do wonder that there hath not been more mischief this year than
there hath. He says the fleete come to anchor between the Horse and
the Island, so that when they came to weigh many of the ships could not
turn, but run foul of the Horse, and there stuck, but that the weather
was good. He says that nothing can do the King more disservice, nor
please the standing officers of the ship better than these silly
commanders that now we have, for they sign to anything that their
officers desire of them, nor have judgment to contradict them if they
would. He told me other good things, which made me bless God that we
have received no greater disasters this year than we have, though they
have been the greatest that ever was known in England before, put
all their losses of the King's ships by want of skill and seamanship
together from the beginning. He being gone, comes Sir G. Carteret, and
he and I walked together awhile, discoursing upon the sad condition of
the times, what need we have, and how impossible it is to get money. He
told me my Lord Chancellor the other day did ask him how it come to pass
that his friend Pepys do so much magnify all things to worst, as I did
on Sunday last, in the bad condition of the fleete. Sir G. Carteret
tells me that he answered him, that I was but the mouth of the rest, and
spoke what they have dictated to me; which did, as he says, presently
take off his displeasure. So that I am well at present with him, but I
must have a care not to be over busy in the office again, and burn my
fingers. He tells me he wishes he had sold his place at some good rate
to somebody or other at the beginning of the warr, and that he would do
it now, but no body will deale with him for it. He tells me the Duke
of Albemarle is very much discontented, and the Duke of York do not, it
seems, please him. He tells me that our case as to money is not to
be made good at present, and therefore wishes a good and speedy peace
before it be too late, and from his discourse methinks I find that there
is something moving towards it. Many people at the office, but having no
more of the office I did put it off till the next meeting. Thence, with
Sir G. Carteret, home to dinner, with him, my Lady and Mr. Ashburnham,
the Cofferer. Here they talk that the Queene hath a great mind to alter
her fashion, and to have the feet seen, which she loves mightily; and
they do believe that it [will] come into it in a little time. Here I
met with the King's declaration about his proceedings with the King of
Denmarke, and particularly the business of Bergen; but it is so well
writ, that, if it be true, the King of Denmarke is one of the most
absolute wickednesse in the world for a person of his quality. After
dinner home, and there met Mr. Povy by appointment, and there he and I
all the afternoon, till late at night, evening of all accounts between
us, which we did to both our satisfaction; but that which troubles me
most is, that I am to refund to the ignoble Lord Peterborough what he
had given us six months ago, because we did not supply him with money;
but it is no great matter. He gone I to the office, and there did some
business; and so home, my mind in good ease by having done with Povy
in order to the adjusting of all my accounts in a few days. So home to
supper and to bed.

21st (Lord's day). Up, and with my wife to church, and her new woman
Barker with her the first time. The girle will, I think, do very well.
Here a lazy sermon, and so home to dinner, and took in my Lady Pen and
Peg (Sir William being below with the fleete), and mighty merry we were,
and then after dinner presently (it being a mighty cool day) I by coach
to White Hall, and there attended the Cabinet, and was called in before
the King and them to give an account of our want of money for Tangier,
which troubles me that it should be my place so often and so soon after
one another to come to speak there of their wants--the thing of the
world that they love least to hear of, and that which is no welcome
thing to be the solicitor for--and to see how like an image the King
sat and could not speak one word when I had delivered myself was very
strange; only my Lord Chancellor did ask me, whether I thought it was in
nature at this time to help us to anything. So I was referred to another
meeting of the Lords Commissioners for Tangier and my Lord Treasurer,
and so went away, and by coach home, where I spent the evening in
reading Stillingfleet's defence of the Archbishopp, the part about
Purgatory, a point I had never considered before, what was said for it
or against it, and though I do believe we are in the right, yet I do
not see any great matter in this book. So to supper; and my people being
gone, most of them, to bed, my boy and Jane and I did get two of my
iron chests out of the cellar into my closett, and the money to my great
satisfaction to see it there again, and the rather because the damp
cellar spoils all my chests. This being done, and I weary, to bed. This
afternoon walking with Sir H. Cholmly long in the gallery, he told
me, among many other things, how Harry Killigrew is banished the Court
lately, for saying that my Lady Castlemayne was a little lecherous girle
when she was young.... This she complained to the King of, and he sent
to the Duke of York, whose servant he is, to turn him away. The Duke
of York hath done it, but takes it ill of my Lady that he was not
complained to first. She attended him to excute it, but ill blood is
made by it. He told me how Mr. Williamson stood in a little place to
have come into the House of Commons, and they would not choose him;
they said, "No courtier." And which is worse, Bab May went down in great
state to Winchelsea with the Duke of York's letters, not doubting to be
chosen; and there the people chose a private gentleman in spite of him,
and cried out they would have no Court pimp to be their burgesse; which
are things that bode very ill. This afternoon I went to see and sat a
good while with Mrs. Martin, and there was her sister Doll, with whom,
contrary to all expectation, I did what I would, and might have done
anything else.

22nd. Up, and by coach to Westminster Hall, there thinking to have met
Betty Michell, who I heard yesterday staid all night at her father's,
but she was gone. So I staid a little and then down to the bridge by
water, and there overtook her and her father. So saluted her and walked
over London Bridge with them and there parted, the weather being very
foul, and so to the Tower by water, and so heme, where I find Mr. Caesar
playing the treble to my boy upon the Theorbo, the first time I heard
him, which pleases me mightily. After dinner I carried him and my wife
towards Westminster, by coach, myself 'lighting at the Temple, and
there, being a little too soon, walked in the Temple Church, looking
with pleasure on the monuments and epitaphs, and then to my Lord
Belasses, where Creed and Povy by appointment met to discourse of some
of their Tangier accounts between my Lord and Vernatty, who will prove a
very knave. That being done I away with Povy to White Hall, and thence
I to Unthanke's, and there take up my wife, and so home, it being very
foule and darke. Being there come, I to the settling of some of my money
matters in my chests, and evening some accounts, which I was at late, to
my extraordinary content, and especially to see all things hit so
even and right and with an apparent profit and advantage since my last
accounting, but how much I cannot particularly yet come to adjudge.

23rd. Up, and to the office all the morning. At noon Sir W. Batten
told me Sir Richard Ford would accept of one-third of my profit of our
private man-of-war, and bear one-third of the charge, and be bound in
the Admiralty, so I shall be excused being bound, which I like mightily
of, and did draw up a writing, as well as I could, to that purpose and
signed and sealed it, and so he and Sir R. Ford are to go to enter into
bond this afternoon. Home to dinner, and after dinner, it being late,
I down by water to Shadwell, to see Betty Michell, the first time I was
ever at their new dwelling since the fire, and there find her in the
house all alone. I find her mighty modest. But had her lips as much as
I would, and indeed she is mighty pretty, that I love her exceedingly. I
paid her L10 1s. that I received upon a ticket for her husband, which
is a great kindness I have done them, and having kissed her as much as
I would, I away, poor wretch, and down to Deptford to see Sir J. Minnes
ordering of the pay of some ships there, which he do most miserably, and
so home. Bagwell's wife, seeing me come the fields way, did get over her
pales to come after and talk with me, which she did for a good way, and
so parted, and I home, and to the office, very busy, and so to supper
and to bed.

24th. Up, and down to the Old Swan, and there find little Michell come
to his new shop that he hath built there in the room of his house that
was burned. I hope he will do good here. I drank and bade him joy, for
I love him and his wife well, him for his care, and her for her person,
and so to White Hall, where we attended the Duke; and to all our
complaints for want of money, which now we are tired out with making,
the Duke only tells us that he is sorry for it, and hath spoke to the
King of it, and money we shall have as soon as it can be found; and
though all the issue of the war lies upon it, yet that is all the
answer we can get, and that is as bad or worse than nothing. Thence to
Westminster Hall, where the term is begun, and I did take a turn or two,
and so away by coach to Sir R. Viner's, and there received some money,
and then home and to dinner. After dinner to little business, and
then abroad with my wife, she to see her brother, who is sick, and she
believes is from some discontent his wife hath given him by her loose
carriage, which he is told, and he hath found has been very suspicious
in his absence, which I am sorry for. I to the Hall and there walked
long, among others talking with Mr. Hayes, Prince Rupert's Secretary,
a very ingenious man, and one, I think, fit to contract some friendship
with. Here I staid late, walking to and again, hearing how the
Parliament proceeds, which is mighty slowly in the settling of the money
business, and great factions growing every day among them. I am told
also how Holmes did last Sunday deliver in his articles to the King and
Cabinet against [Sir Jeremy] Smith, and that Smith hath given in his
answer, and lays his not accompanying the fleete to his pilot, who would
not undertake to carry the ship further; which the pilot acknowledges.
The thing is not accommodated, but only taken up, and both sides
commanded to be quiet; but no peace like to be. The Duke of Albemarle is
Smith's friend, and hath publiquely swore that he would never go to sea
again unless Holmes's commission were taken from him.

     [In the instructions given to Sir Thomas Clifford (August 5th, 1666)
     to be communicated to Prince Rupert and the Duke of Albemarle, we
     read: "to tell them that the complaint of Sir Jeremy Smith's
     misbehaviour in the late engagement being so universal, unless he
     have fully satisfied the generals he should be brought to trial by
     court-martial, and there purged or condemned."  The Duke of
     Albemarle answered the king (August 14th?): "Wishes to clear a
     gallant man falsely accused, Sir Jeremiah Smith, who had more men
     killed and hurt, and his ship received more shot than any in the
     fleet.  There is not a more spirited man serves in the fleet" On
     October 27th H. Muddiman wrote to Sir Edward Stradling: "Sir Jeremy
     Smith has got as much credit by his late examination as his enemies
     wished him disgrace, the King and Duke of York being fully satisfied
     of his valour in the engagement.  It appears that he had 147 men
     killed and wounded, while the most eminent of his accusers had but
     two or three."  With regard to Sir Jeremy's counter-charges, we
     read: "Nov. 3.  The King having maturely considered the charges
     brought against Sir Rob. Holmes by Sir Jeremy Smith, finds no cause
     to suspect Sir Robert of cowardice in the fight with the Dutch of
     June 25 and 26, but thinks that on the night of the 26th he yielded
     too easily to the opinion of his pilot, without consulting those of
     the other ships, muzzled his ship, and thus obliged the squadron to
     do the same, and so the enemy, which might have been driven into the
     body of the king's fleet, then returning from the pursuit, was
     allowed to escape" ("Calendar of State Papers," 1666-67, pp.  14,
     40, 222, 236).]

I find by Hayes that they did expect great glory in coming home in so
good condition as they did with the fleete, and therefore I the less
wonder that the Prince was distasted with my discourse the other day
about the bad state of the fleete. But it pleases me to hear that he did
expect great thanks, and lays the fault of the want of it upon the fire,
which deadened everything, and the glory of his services. About seven at
night home, and called my wife, and, it being moonshine, took her into
the garden, and there layed open our condition as to our estate, and the
danger of my having it [his money] all in the house at once, in case of
any disorder or troubles in the State, and therefore resolved to remove
part of it to Brampton, and part some whither else, and part in my owne
house, which is very necessary, and will tend to our safety, though I
shall not think it safe out of my owne sight. So to the office, and then
to supper and to bed.

25th. Up betimes and by water to White Hall, and there with Sir G.
Carteret to Sir W. Coventry, who is come to his winter lodgings at White
Hall, and there agreed upon a method of paying of tickets; and so I
back again home and to the office, where we sate all the morning, but
to little purpose but to receive clamours for money. At noon home to
dinner, where the two Mrs. Daniels come to see us, and dined with us.
After dinner I out with my wife to Mrs. Pierces, where she hath not been
a great while, from some little unkindness of my wife's to her when she
was last here, but she received us with mighty respect and discretion,
and was making herself mighty fine to go to a great ball to-night at
Court, being the Queene's birthday; so the ladies for this one day do
wear laces, but to put them off again to-morrow. Thence I to my Lord
Bruncker's, and with him to Mrs. Williams's where we met Knipp. I was
glad to see the jade. Made her sing; and she told us they begin at both
houses to act on Monday next. But I fear, after all this sorrow, their
gains will be but little. Mrs. Williams says, the Duke's house will now
be much the better of the two, because of their women; which I am glad
to hear. Thence with Lord Bruncker to White Hall and there spoke with
Sir W. Coventry about some office business, and then I away to Mrs.
Pierces, and there saw her new closet, which is mighty rich and fine.
Her daughter Betty grows mighty pretty. Thence with my wife home and to
do business at the office. Then to Sir W. Batten's, who tells me that
the House of Parliament makes mighty little haste in settling the money,
and that he knows not when it will be done; but they fall into faction,
and libells have been found in the House. Among others, one yesterday,
wherein they reckon up divers great sums to be given away by the King,
among others, L10,000 to Sir W. Coventry, for weare and teare (the point
he stood upon to advance that sum by, for them to give the King); Sir G.
Carteret L50,000 for something else, I think supernumerarys; and so to
Matt. Wren L5000 for passing the Canary Company's patent; and so a great
many other sums to other persons. So home to supper and to bed.

26th. Up, and all the morning and most of the afternoon within doors,
beginning to set my accounts in order from before this fire, I being
behindhand with them ever since; and this day I got most of my tradesmen
to bring in their bills and paid them. Dined at home, and busy again
after dinner, and then abroad by water to Westminster Hall, where I
walked till the evening, and then out, the first time I ever was abroad
with Doll Lane, to the Dog tavern, and there drank with her, a bad face,
but good bodied girle. Did nothing but salute and play with her and
talk, and thence away by coach, home, and so to do a little more in my
accounts, and then to supper and to bed. Nothing done in the House yet
as to the finishing of the bill for money, which is a mighty sad thing,
all lying at stake for it.

27th. Up, and there comes to see me my Lord Belasses, which was a great
honour. He tells me great newes, yet but what I suspected, that Vernatty
is fled, and so hath cheated him and twenty more, but most of all, I
doubt, Mr. Povy. Thence to talk about publique business; he tells me how
the two Houses begin to be troublesome; the Lords to have quarrels
one with another. My Lord Duke of Buckingham having said to the Lord
Chancellor (who is against the passing of the Bill for prohibiting the
bringing over of Irish cattle), that whoever was against the Bill, was
there led to it by an Irish interest, or an Irish understanding,
which is as much as to say he is a Poole; this bred heat from my Lord
Chancellor, and something he [Buckingham] said did offend my Lord of
Ossory (my Lord Duke' of Ormond's son), and they two had hard words,
upon which the latter sends a challenge to the former; of which the
former complains to the House, and so the business is to be heard on
Monday next. Then as to the Commons; some ugly knives, like poignards,
to stab people with, about two or three hundred of them were brought
in yesterday to the House, found in one of the house's rubbish that
was burned, and said to be the house of a Catholique. This and several
letters out of the country, saying how high the Catholiques are
everywhere and bold in the owning their religion, have made the Commons
mad, and they presently voted that the King be desired to put all
Catholiques out of employment, and other high things; while the business
of money hangs in the hedge. So that upon the whole, God knows we are in
a sad condition like to be, there being the very beginnings of the late
troubles. He gone, I at the office all the morning. At noon home to
dinner, where Mrs. Pierce and her boy and Knipp, who sings as well, and
is the best company in the world, dined with us, and infinite merry. The
playhouses begin to play next week. Towards evening I took them out to
the New Exchange, and there my wife bought things, and I did give each
of them a pair of Jesimy

     [Jessemin (Jasminum), the flowers of which are of a delicate sweet
     smell, and often used to perfume gloves.  Edmund Howes, Stows
     continuator, informs us that sweet or perfumed gloves were first
     brought into England by the Earl of Oxford on his return from Italy,
     in the fifteenth year of Queen Elizabeth, during whose reign, and
     long afterwards, they were very fashionable.  They are frequently
     mentioned by Shakespeare.  Autolyctis, in the "Winter's Tale," has
     among his wares--"Gloves as sweet as damask roses."--B.]

plain gloves, and another of white. Here Knipp and I walked up and down
to see handsome faces, and did see several. Then carried each of them
home, and with great pleasure and content, home myself, where, having
writ several letters, I home, and there, upon some serious discourse
between my wife and I upon the business, I called to us my brother, and
there broke to him our design to send him into the country with some
part of our money, and so did seriously discourse the whole thing,
and then away to supper and to bed. I pray God give a blessing to our
resolution, for I do much fear we shall meet with speedy distractions
for want of money.

28th (Lord's day). Up, and to church with my wife, and then home, and
there is come little Michell and his wife, I sent for them, and also
tomes Captain Guy to dine with me, and he and I much talk together. He
cries out of the discipline of the fleete, and confesses really that the
true English valour we talk of is almost spent and worn out; few of
the commanders doing what they should do, and he much fears we shall
therefore be beaten the next year. He assures me we were beaten home the
last June fight, and that the whole fleete was ashamed to hear of our
bonefires. He commends Smith, and cries out of Holmes for an idle,
proud, conceited, though stout fellow. He tells me we are to owe the
losse of so many ships on the sands, not to any fault of the pilots,
but to the weather; but in this I have good authority to fear there was
something more. He says the Dutch do fight in very good order, and we in
none at all. He says that in the July fight, both the Prince and Holmes
had their belly-fulls, and were fain to go aside; though, if the wind
had continued, we had utterly beaten them. He do confess the whole to
be governed by a company of fools, and fears our ruine. After dinner
he gone, I with my brother to White Hall and he to Westminster Abbey. I
presently to Mrs. Martin's, and there met widow Burroughes and Doll, and
did tumble them all the afternoon as I pleased, and having given them a
bottle of wine I parted and home by boat (my brother going by land), and
thence with my wife to sit and sup with my uncle and aunt Wight, and
see Woolly's wife, who is a pretty woman, and after supper, being
very merry, in abusing my aunt with Dr. Venner, we home, and I to
do something in my accounts, and so to bed. The Revenge having her
forecastle blown up with powder to the killing of some men in the River,
and the Dyamond's being overset in the careening at Sheernesse, are
further marks of the method all the King's work is now done in. The
Foresight also and another come to disasters in the same place this week
in the cleaning; which is strange.

29th. Up, and to the office to do business, and thither comes to me
Sir Thomas Teddiman, and he and I walked a good while in the garden
together, discoursing of the disorder and discipline of the fleete,
wherein he told me how bad every thing is; but was very wary in speaking
any thing to the dishonour of the Prince or Duke of Albemarle, but do
magnify my Lord Sandwich much before them both, for ability to serve the
King, and do heartily wish for him here. For he fears that we shall be
undone the next year, but that he will, however, see an end of it. To
prevent the necessity of his dining with me I was forced to pretend
occasion of going to Westminster, so away I went, and Mr. Barber, the
clerk, having a request to make to me to get him into employment, did
walk along with me, and by water to Westminster with me, he professing
great love to me, and an able clerk he is. When I come thither I find
the new Lord Mayor Bolton a-swearing at the Exchequer, with some of the
Aldermen and Livery; but, Lord! to see how meanely they now look, who
upon this day used to be all little lords, is a sad sight and worthy
consideration. And every body did reflect with pity upon the poor City,
to which they are now coming to choose and swear their Lord Mayor,
compared with what it heretofore was. Thence by coach (having in the
Hall bought me a velvet riding cap, cost me 20s.) to my taylor's, and
there bespoke a plain vest, and so to my goldsmith to bid him look out
for some gold for me; and he tells me that ginnys, which I bought 2,000
of not long ago, and cost me but 18 1/2d. change, will now cost me 22d.;
and but very few to be had at any price. However, some more I will have,
for they are very convenient, and of easy disposal. So home to dinner
and to discourse with my brother upon his translation of my Lord
Bacon's "Faber Fortunae," which I gave him to do and he has done it, but
meanely; I am not pleased with it at all, having done it only literally,
but without any life at all. About five o'clock I took my wife (who is
mighty fine, and with a new fair pair of locks, which vex me, though
like a foole I helped her the other night to buy them), and to Mrs.
Pierces, and there staying a little I away before to White Hall, and
into the new playhouse there, the first time I ever was there, and the
first play I have seen since before the great plague. By and by Mr.
Pierce comes, bringing my wife and his, and Knipp. By and by the King
and Queene, Duke and Duchesse, and all the great ladies of the Court;
which, indeed, was a fine sight. But the play being "Love in a Tub,"
a silly play, and though done by the Duke's people, yet having neither
Betterton nor his wife, and the whole thing done ill, and being ill
also, I had no manner of pleasure in the play. Besides, the House,
though very fine, yet bad for the voice, for hearing. The sight of the
ladies, indeed, was exceeding noble; and above all, my Lady Castlemayne.
The play done by ten o'clock. I carried them all home, and then home
myself, and well satisfied with the sight, but not the play, we with
great content to bed.

30th. Up, and to the office, where sat all the morning, and at noon
home to dinner, and then to the office again, where late, very busy,
and dispatching much business. Mr. Hater staying most of the afternoon
abroad, he come to me, poor man, to make excuse, and it was that he had
been looking out for a little house for his family. His wife being much
frightened in the country with the discourses of troubles and disorders
like to be, and therefore durst not be from him, and therefore he is
forced to bring her to towne that they may be together. This is now the
general apprehension of all people; particulars I do not know, but my
owne fears are also great, and I do think it time to look out to save
something, if a storm should come. At night home to supper, and singing
with my wife, who hath lately begun to learn, and I think will come
to do something, though her eare is not good, nor I, I confess, have
patience enough to teach her, or hear her sing now and then a note out
of tune, and am to blame that I cannot bear with that in her which is
fit I should do with her as a learner, and one that I desire much could
sing, and so should encourage her. This I was troubled at, for I do find
that I do put her out of heart, and make her fearfull to sing before me.
So after supper to bed.

31st. Out with Sir W. Batten toward White Hall, being in pain in my
cods by being squeezed the other night in a little coach when I carried
Pierce and his wife and my people. But I hope I shall be soon well
again. This day is a great day at the House, so little to do with the
Duke of York, but soon parted. Coming out of the Court I met Colonell
Atkins, who tells me the whole city rings to-day of Sir Jeremy Smith's
killing of Holmes in a duell, at which I was not much displeased, for I
fear every day more and more mischief from the man, if he lives; but the
thing is not true, for in my coach I did by and by meet Sir Jer. Smith
going to Court. So I by coach to my goldsmith, there to see what gold I
can get, which is but little, and not under 22d. So away home to dinner,
and after dinner to my closett, where I spent the whole afternoon till
late at evening of all my accounts publique and private, and to my
great satisfaction I do find that I do bring my accounts to a very near
balance, notwithstanding all the hurries and troubles I have been put
to by the late fire, that I have not been able to even my accounts since
July last before; and I bless God I do find that I am worth more than
ever I yet was, which is L6,200, for which the Holy Name of God be
praised! and my other accounts of Tangier in a very plain and clear
condition, that I am not liable to any trouble from them; but in fear
great I am, and I perceive the whole city is, of some distractions and
disorders among us, which God of his goodness prevent! Late to supper
with my wife and brother, and then to bed. And thus ends the month
with an ill aspect, the business of the Navy standing wholly still. No
credit, no goods sold us, nobody will trust. All we have to do at the
office is to hear complaints for want of money. The Duke of York himself
for now three weeks seems to rest satisfied that we can do nothing
without money, and that all must stand still till the King gets
money, which the Parliament have been a great while about; but are so
dissatisfied with the King's management, and his giving himself up to
pleasures, and not minding the calling to account any of his officers,
and they observe so much the expense of the war, and yet that after we
have made it the most we can, it do not amount to what they have
given the King for the warn that they are backward of giving any more.
However, L1,800,000 they have voted, but the way of gathering it has
taken up more time than is fit to be now lost: The seamen grow very
rude, and every thing out of order; commanders having no power over
their seamen, but the seamen do what they please. Few stay on board, but
all coming running up hither to towne, and nobody can with justice blame
them, we owing them so much money; and their familys must starve if we
do not give them money, or they procure upon their tickets from some
people that will trust them. A great folly is observed by all people in
the King's giving leave to so many merchantmen to go abroad this winter,
and some upon voyages where it is impossible they should be back again
by the spring, and the rest will be doubtfull, but yet we let them go;
what the reason of State is nobody can tell, but all condemn it. The
Prince and Duke of Albemarle have got no great credit by this year's
service. Our losses both of reputation and ships having been greater
than is thought have ever been suffered in all ages put together before;
being beat home, and fleeing home the first fight, and then losing so
many ships then and since upon the sands, and some falling into the
enemy's hands, and not one taken this yeare, but the Ruby, French prize,
now at the end of the yeare, by the Frenchmen's mistake in running upon
us. Great folly in both Houses of Parliament, several persons falling
together by the eares, among others in the House of Lords, the Duke of
Buckingham and my Lord Ossory. Such is our case, that every body fears
an invasion the next yeare; and for my part, I do methinks foresee great
unhappiness coming upon us, and do provide for it by laying by something
against a rainy day, dividing what I have, and laying it in several
places, but with all faithfulness to the King in all respects; my grief
only being that the King do not look after his business himself, and
thereby will be undone both himself and his nation, it being not yet,
I believe, too late if he would apply himself to it, to save all,
and conquer the Dutch; but while he and the Duke of York mind their
pleasure, as they do and nothing else, we must be beaten. So late with
my mind in good condition of quiet after the settling all my accounts,
and to bed.




NOVEMBER 1666

November 1st. Up, and was presented by Burton, one of our smith's wives,
with a very noble cake, which I presently resolved to have my wife go
with to-day, and some wine, and house-warme my Betty Michell, which
she readily resolved to do. So I to the office and sat all the morning,
where little to do but answer people about want of money; so that there
is little service done the King by us, and great disquiet to ourselves;
I am sure there is to me very much, for I do not enjoy myself as I would
and should do in my employment if my pains could do the King better
service, and with the peace that we used to do it. At noon to dinner,
and from dinner my wife and my brother, and W. Hewer and Barker away to
Betty Michell's, to Shadwell, and I to my office, where I took in Mrs.
Bagwell and did what I would with her, and so she went away, and I all
the afternoon till almost night there, and then, my wife being come
back, I took her and set her at her brother's, who is very sicke, and I
to White Hall, and there all alone a pretty while with Sir W. Coventry
at his chamber. I find him very melancholy under the same considerations
of the King's service that I am. He confesses with me he expects all
will be undone, and all ruined; he complains and sees perfectly what I
with grief do, and said it first himself to me that all discipline is
lost in the fleete, no order nor no command, and concurs with me that
it is necessary we do again and again represent all things more and more
plainly to the Duke of York, for a guard to ourselves hereafter when
things shall come to be worse. He says the House goes on slowly in
finding of money, and that the discontented party do say they have
not done with us, for they will have a further bout with us as to our
accounts, and they are exceedingly well instructed where to hit us. I
left him with a thousand sad reflections upon the times, and the state
of the King's matters, and so away, and took up my wife and home, where
a little at the office, and then home to supper, and talk with my wife
(with whom I have much comfort) and my brother, and so to bed.

2nd. Up betimes, and with Sir W. Batten to Woolwich, where first we went
on board the Ruby, French prize, the only ship of war we have taken
from any of our enemies this year. It seems a very good ship, but with
galleries quite round the sterne to walk in as a balcone, which will
be taken down. She had also about forty good brass guns, but will make
little amends to our loss in The Prince. Thence to the Ropeyarde and the
other yards to do several businesses, he and I also did buy some apples
and pork; by the same token the butcher commended it as the best in
England for cloath and colour. And for his beef, says he, "Look how fat
it is; the lean appears only here and there a speck, like beauty-spots."
Having done at Woolwich, we to Deptford (it being very cold upon the
water), and there did also a little more business, and so home, I
reading all the why to make end of the "Bondman" (which the oftener I
read the more I like), and begun "The Duchesse of Malfy;" which seems a
good play. At home to dinner, and there come Mr. Pierce, surgeon, to
see me, and after I had eat something, he and I and my wife by coach to
Westminster, she set us down at White Hall, and she to her brother's. I
up into the House, and among other things walked a good while with the
Serjeant Trumpet, who tells me, as I wished, that the King's Italian
here is about setting three parts for trumpets, and shall teach some to
sound them, and believes they will be admirable musique. I also walked
with Sir Stephen Fox an houre, and good discourse of publique business
with him, who seems very much satisfied with my discourse, and desired
more of my acquaintance. Then comes out the King and Duke of York from
the Council, and so I spoke awhile to Sir W. Coventry about some office
business, and so called my wife (her brother being now a little better
than he was), and so home, and I to my chamber to do some business, and
then to supper and to bed.

3rd. This morning comes Mr. Lovett, and brings me my print of the
Passion, varnished by him, and the frame black, which indeed is very
fine, though not so fine as I expected; however, pleases me exceedingly.
This, and the sheets of paper he prepared for me, come to L3, which I
did give him, and though it be more than is fit to lay out on pleasure,
yet, it being ingenious, I did not think much of it. He gone, I to the
office, where all the morning to little purpose, nothing being before us
but clamours for money: So at noon home to dinner, and after dinner to
hang up my new varnished picture and set my chamber in order to be made
clean, and then to; the office again, and there all the afternoon till
late at night, and so to supper and to bed.

4th (Lord's day). Comes my taylor's man in the morning, and brings my
vest home, and coate to wear with it, and belt, and silver-hilted sword.
So I rose and dressed myself, and I like myself mightily in it, and so
do my wife. Then, being dressed, to church; and after church pulled my
Lady Pen and Mrs. Markham into my house to dinner, and Sir J. Minnes
he got Mrs. Pegg along with him. I had a good dinner for them, and very
merry; and after dinner to the waterside, and so, it being very cold,
to White Hall, and was mighty fearfull of an ague, my vest being new and
thin, and the coat cut not to meet before upon my breast. Here I waited
in the gallery till the Council was up, and among others did speak
with Mr. Cooling, my Lord Chamberlain's secretary, who tells me my Lord
Generall is become mighty low in all people's opinion, and that he hath
received several slurs from the King and Duke of York. The people at
Court do see the difference between his and the Prince's management, and
my Lord Sandwich's. That this business which he is put upon of crying
out against the Catholiques and turning them out of all employment, will
undo him, when he comes to turn-out the officers out of the Army, and
this is a thing of his own seeking. That he is grown a drunken sot, and
drinks with nobody but Troutbecke, whom nobody else will keep company
with. Of whom he told me this story: That once the Duke of Albemarle in
his drink taking notice as of a wonder that Nan Hide should ever come to
be Duchesse of York, "Nay," says Troutbecke, "ne'er wonder at that; for
if you will give me another bottle of wine, I will tell you as great,
if not greater, a miracle." And what was that, but that our dirty Besse
(meaning his Duchesse) should come to be Duchesse of Albemarle? Here we
parted, and so by and by the Council rose, and out comes Sir G. Carteret
and Sir W. Coventry, and they and my Lord Bruncker and I went to Sir G.
Carteret's lodgings, there to discourse about some money demanded by
Sir W. Warren, and having done that broke up. And Sir G. Carteret and
I alone together a while, where he shows a long letter, all in cipher,
from my Lord Sandwich to him. The contents he hath not yet found out,
but he tells me that my Lord is not sent for home, as several people
have enquired after of me. He spoke something reflecting upon me in the
business of pursers, that their present bad behaviour is what he did
foresee, and had convinced me of, and yet when it come last year to
be argued before the Duke of York I turned and said as the rest did. I
answered nothing to it, but let it go, and so to other discourse of
the ill state of things, of which all people are full of sorrow and
observation, and so parted, and then by water, landing in Southwarke,
home to the Tower, and so home, and there began to read "Potter's
Discourse upon 1666," which pleases me mightily, and then broke off and
to supper and to bed.

5th (A holyday). Lay long; then up, and to the office, where vexed to
meet with people come from the fleete at the Nore, where so many ships
are laid up and few going abroad, and yet Sir Thomas Allen hath sent up
some Lieutenants with warrants to presse men for a few ships to go out
this winter, while every day thousands appear here, to our great trouble
and affright, before our office and the ticket office, and no Captains
able to command one-man aboard. Thence by water to Westminster, and
there at the Swan find Sarah is married to a shoemaker yesterday, so
I could not see her, but I believe I shall hereafter at good leisure.
Thence by coach to my Lady Peterborough, and there spoke with my Lady,
who had sent to speak with me. She makes mighty moan of the badness of
the times, and her family as to money. My Lord's passionateness for want
thereof, and his want of coming in of rents, and no wages from the
Duke of York. No money to be had there for wages nor disbursements, and
therefore prays my assistance about his pension. I was moved with her
story, which she largely and handsomely told me, and promised I would
try what I could do in a few days, and so took leave, being willing to
keep her Lord fair with me, both for his respect to my Lord Sandwich and
for my owne sake hereafter, when I come to pass my accounts. Thence to
my Lord Crew's, and there dined, and mightily made of, having not, to my
shame, been there in 8 months before. Here my Lord and Sir Thomas Crew,
Mr. John, and Dr. Crew, and two strangers. The best family in the world
for goodness and sobriety. Here beyond my expectation I met my Lord
Hinchingbroke, who is come to towne two days since from Hinchingbroke,
and brought his sister and brother Carteret with him, who are at Sir G.
Carteret's. After dinner I and Sir Thomas Crew went aside to discourse
of public matters, and do find by him that all the country gentlemen are
publickly jealous of the courtiers in the Parliament, and that they do
doubt every thing that they propose; and that the true reason why the
country gentlemen are for a land-tax and against a general excise, is,
because they are fearful that if the latter be granted they shall never
get it down again; whereas the land-tax will be but for so much; and
when the war ceases, there will be no ground got by the Court to keep
it up. He do much cry out upon our accounts, and that all that they have
had from the King hath been but estimates both from my Lord Treasurer
and us, and from all people else, so that the Parliament is weary of
it. He says the House would be very glad to get something against Sir
G. Carteret, and will not let their inquiries die till they have got
something. He do, from what he hath heard at the Committee for examining
the burning of the City, conclude it as a thing certain that it was done
by plots; it being proved by many witnesses that endeavours were made in
several places to encrease the fire, and that both in City and country
it was bragged by several Papists that upon such a day or in such a time
we should find the hottest weather that ever was in England, and words
of plainer sense. But my Lord Crew was discoursing at table how the
judges have determined in the case whether the landlords or the tenants
(who are, in their leases, all of them generally tied to maintain and
uphold their houses) shall bear the losse of the fire; and they say that
tenants should against all casualties of fire beginning either in their
owne or in their neighbour's; but, where it is done by an enemy, they
are not to do it. And this was by an enemy, there having been one
convicted and hanged upon this very score. This is an excellent salvo
for the tenants, and for which I am glad, because of my father's house.
After dinner and this discourse I took coach, and at the same time find
my Lord Hinchingbroke and Mr. John Crew and the Doctor going out to see
the ruins of the City; so I took the Doctor into my hackney coach (and
he is a very fine sober gentleman), and so through the City. But,
Lord! what pretty and sober observations he made of the City and its
desolation; till anon we come to my house, and there I took them upon
Tower Hill to shew them what houses were pulled down there since the
fire; and then to my house, where I treated them with good wine of
several sorts, and they took it mighty respectfully, and a fine
company of gentlemen they are; but above all I was glad to see my Lord
Hinchingbroke drink no wine at all. Here I got them to appoint Wednesday
come se'nnight to dine here at my house, and so we broke up and all took
coach again, and I carried the Doctor to Chancery Lane, and thence I to
White Hall, where I staid walking up and down till night, and then got
almost into the play house, having much mind to go and see the play
at Court this night; but fearing how I should get home, because of the
bonefires and the lateness of the night to get a coach, I did not stay;
but having this evening seen my Lady Jemimah, who is come to towne,
and looks very well and fat, and heard how Mr. John Pickering is to be
married this week, and to a fortune with L5000, and seen a rich necklace
of pearle and two pendants of dyamonds, which Sir G. Carteret hath
presented her with since her coming to towne, I home by coach, but met
not one bonefire through the whole town in going round by the wall,
which is strange, and speaks the melancholy disposition of the City at
present, while never more was said of, and feared of, and done against
the Papists than just at this time. Home, and there find my wife and her
people at cards, and I to my chamber, and there late, and so to supper
and to bed.

6th. Up, and to the office, where all the morning sitting. At noon home
to dinner, and after dinner down alone by water to Deptford, reading
"Duchesse of Malfy," the play, which is pretty good, and there did some
business, and so up again, and all the evening at the office. At night
home, and there find Mr. Batelier, who supped with us, and good company
he is, and so after supper to bed.

7th. Up, and with Sir W. Batten to White Hall, where we attended as
usual the Duke of York and there was by the folly of Sir W. Batten
prevented in obtaining a bargain for Captain Cocke, which would, I
think have [been] at this time (during our great want of hempe), both
profitable to the King and of good convenience to me; but I matter
it not, it being done only by the folly, not any design, of Sir W.
Batten's. Thence to Westminster Hall, and, it being fast day, there was
no shops open, but meeting with Doll Lane, did go with her to the Rose
taverne, and there drank and played with her a good while. She went
away, and I staid a good while after, and was seen going out by one of
our neighbours near the office and two of the Hall people that I had
no mind to have been seen by, but there was no hurt in it nor can be
alledged from it. Therefore I am not solicitous in it, but took coach
and called at Faythorne's, to buy some prints for my wife to draw by
this winter, and here did see my Lady Castlemayne's picture, done by him
from Lilly's, in red chalke and other colours, by which he hath cut it
in copper to be printed. The picture in chalke is the finest thing I
ever saw in my life, I think; and did desire to buy it; but he says he
must keep it awhile to correct his copper-plate by, and when that is
done he will sell it me. Thence home and find my wife gone out with
my brother to see her brother. I to dinner and thence to my chamber to
read, and so to the office (it being a fast day and so a holiday), and
then to Mrs. Turner's, at her request to speake and advise about Sir
Thomas Harvy's coming to lodge there, which I think must be submitted
to, and better now than hereafter, when he gets more ground, for I
perceive he intends to stay by it, and begins to crow mightily upon
his late being at the payment of tickets; but a coxcombe he is and will
never be better in the business of the Navy. Thence home, and there find
Mr. Batelier come to bring my wife a very fine puppy of his mother's
spaniel, a very fine one indeed, which my wife is mighty proud of. He
staid and supped with us, and they to cards. I to my chamber to do some
business, and then out to them to play and were a little merry, and then
to bed. By the Duke of York his discourse to-day in his chamber, they
have it at Court, as well as we here, that a fatal day is to be expected
shortly, of some great mischiefe to the remainder of this day; whether
by the Papists, or what, they are not certain. But the day is disputed;
some say next Friday, others a day sooner, others later, and I hope all
will prove a foolery. But it is observable how every body's fears are
busy at this time.

8th. Up, and before I went to the office I spoke with Mr. Martin for his
advice about my proceeding in the business of the private man-of-war,
he having heretofore served in one of them, and now I have it in my
thoughts to send him purser in ours. After this discourse I to the
office, where I sat all the morning, Sir W. Coventry with us, where he
hath not been a great while, Sir W. Pen also, newly come from the Nore,
where he hath been some time fitting of the ships out. At noon home
to dinner and then to the office awhile, and so home for my sword,
and there find Mercer come to see her mistresse. I was glad to see her
there, and my wife mighty kind also, and for my part, much vexed that
the jade is not with us still. Left them together, designing to go
abroad to-morrow night to Mrs. Pierces to dance; and so I to Westminster
Hall, and there met Mr. Grey, who tells me the House is sitting still
(and now it was six o'clock), and likely to sit till midnight; and have
proceeded fair to give the King his supply presently; and herein
have done more to-day than was hoped for. So to White Hall to Sir W.
Coventry, and there would fain have carried Captain Cocke's business for
his bargain of hemp, but am defeated and disappointed, and know hardly
how to carry myself in it between my interest and desire not to offend
Sir W. Coventry. Sir W. Coventry did this night tell me how the business
is about Sir J. Minnes; that he is to be a Commissioner, and my Lord
Bruncker and Sir W. Pen are to be Controller joyntly, which I am very
glad of, and better than if they were either of them alone; and do
hope truly that the King's business will be better done thereby, and
infinitely better than now it is. Thence by coach home, full of thoughts
of the consequence of this alteration in our office, and I think no evil
to me. So at my office late, and then home to supper and to bed. Mr.
Grey did assure me this night, that he was told this day, by one of the
greater Ministers of State in England, and one of the King's Cabinet,
that we had little left to agree on between the Dutch and us towards a
peace, but only the place of treaty; which do astonish me to hear, but
I am glad of it, for I fear the consequence of the war. But he says that
the King, having all the money he is like to have, we shall be sure of a
peace in a little time.

9th. Up and to the office, where did a good deale of business, and then
at noon to the Exchange and to my little goldsmith's, whose wife is very
pretty and modest, that ever I saw any. Upon the 'Change, where I seldom
have of late been, I find all people mightily at a losse what to expect,
but confusion and fears in every man's head and heart. Whether war or
peace, all fear the event will be bad. Thence home and with my brother
to dinner, my wife being dressing herself against night; after dinner
I to my closett all the afternoon, till the porter brought my vest back
from the taylor's, and then to dress myself very fine, about 4 or 5
o'clock, and by that time comes Mr. Batelier and Mercer, and away by
coach to Mrs. Pierces, by appointment, where we find good company: a
fair lady, my Lady Prettyman, Mrs. Corbet, Knipp; and for men, Captain
Downing, Mr. Lloyd, Sir W. Coventry's clerk, and one Mr. Tripp, who
dances well. After some trifling discourse, we to dancing, and very good
sport, and mightily pleased I was with the company. After our first bout
of dancing, Knipp and I to sing, and Mercer and Captain Downing (who
loves and understands musique) would by all means have my song of
"Beauty, retire." which Knipp had spread abroad; and he extols it above
any thing he ever heard, and, without flattery, I know it is good in its
kind. This being done and going to dance again, comes news that White
Hall was on fire; and presently more particulars, that the Horse-guard
was on fire;

     ["Nov. 9th.  Between seven and eight at night, there happened a fire
     in the Horse Guard House, in the Tilt Yard, over against Whitehall,
     which at first arising, it is supposed, from some snuff of a candle
     falling amongst the straw, broke out with so sudden a flame, that at
     once it seized the north-west part of that building; but being so
     close under His Majesty's own eye, it was, by the timely help His
     Majesty and His Royal Highness caused to be applied, immediately
     stopped, and by ten o'clock wholly mastered, with the loss only of
     that part of the building it had at first seized."--The London
     Gazette, No. 103.--B.]

and so we run up to the garret, and find it so; a horrid great fire; and
by and by we saw and heard part of it blown up with powder. The ladies
begun presently to be afeard: one fell into fits. The whole town in
an alarme. Drums beat and trumpets, and the guards every where
spread, running up and down in the street. And I begun to have mighty
apprehensions how things might be at home, and so was in mighty pain
to get home, and that that encreased all is that we are in expectation,
from common fame, this night, or to-morrow, to have a massacre, by the
having so many fires one after another, as that in the City, and at
same time begun in Westminster, by the Palace, but put out; and since
in Southwarke, to the burning down some houses; and now this do make all
people conclude there is something extraordinary in it; but nobody knows
what. By and by comes news that the fire has slackened; so then we were
a little cheered up again, and to supper, and pretty merry. But, above
all, there comes in the dumb boy that I knew in Oliver's time, who is
mightily acquainted here, and with Downing; and he made strange signs of
the fire, and how the King was abroad, and many things they understood,
but I could not, which I wondering at, and discoursing with Downing
about it, "Why," says he, "it is only a little use, and you will
understand him, and make him understand you with as much ease as may
be." So I prayed him to tell him that I was afeard that my coach would
be gone, and that he should go down and steal one of the seats out of
the coach and keep it, and that would make the coachman to stay. He did
this, so that the dumb boy did go down, and, like a cunning rogue, went
into the coach, pretending to sleep; and, by and by, fell to his work,
but finds the seats nailed to the coach. So he did all he could, but
could not do it; however, stayed there, and stayed the coach till the
coachman's patience was quite spent, and beat the dumb boy by force, and
so went away. So the dumb boy come up and told him all the story,
which they below did see all that passed, and knew it to be true. After
supper, another dance or two, and then newes that the fire is as great
as ever, which put us all to our wit's-end; and I mightily [anxious] to
go home, but the coach being gone, and it being about ten at night, and
rainy dirty weather, I knew not what to do; but to walk out with Mr.
Batelier, myself resolving to go home on foot, and leave the women
there. And so did; but at the Savoy got a coach, and come back and took
up the women; and so, having, by people come from the fire, understood
that the fire was overcome, and all well, we merrily parted, and home.
Stopped by several guards and constables quite through the town, round
the wall, as we went, all being in armes. We got well home ....
Being come home, we to cards, till two in the morning, and drinking
lamb's-wool.

     [A beverage consisting of ale mixed with sugar, nutmeg, and the pulp
     of roasted apples.  "A cupp of lamb's-wool they dranke unto him
     then."  The King and the Miller of Mansfield (Percy's "Reliques,"
     Series III., book ii., No. 20).]

So to bed.

10th. Up and to the office, where Sir W. Coventry come to tell us that
the Parliament did fall foul of our accounts again yesterday; and we
must arme to have them examined, which I am sorry for: it will bring
great trouble to me, and shame upon the office. My head full this
morning how to carry on Captain Cocke's bargain of hemp, which I think I
shall by my dexterity do, and to the King's advantage as well as my own.
At noon with my Lord Bruncker and Sir Thomas Harvy, to Cocke's house,
and there Mrs. Williams and other company, and an excellent dinner. Mr.
Temple's wife; after dinner, fell to play on the harpsicon, till she
tired everybody, that I left the house without taking leave, and no
creature left standing by her to hear her. Thence I home and to the
office, where late doing of business, and then home. Read an hour, to
make an end of Potter's Discourse of the Number 666, which I like all
along, but his close is most excellent; and, whether it be right or
wrong, is mighty ingenious. Then to supper and to bed. This is the fatal
day that every body hath discoursed for a long time to be the day that
the Papists, or I know not who, had designed to commit a massacre upon;
but, however, I trust in God we shall rise to-morrow morning as well
as ever. This afternoon Creed comes to me, and by him, as, also my Lady
Pen, I hear that my Lady Denham is exceeding sick, even to death, and
that she says, and every body else discourses, that she is poysoned; and
Creed tells me, that it is said that there hath been a design to poison
the King. What the meaning of all these sad signs is, the Lord knows;
but every day things look worse and worse. God fit us for the worst!

11th (Lord's day). Up, and to church, myself and wife, where the
old dunce Meriton, brother to the known Meriton; of St. Martin's,
Westminster, did make a very good sermon, beyond my expectation. Home
to dinner, and we carried in Pegg Pen, and there also come to us little
Michell and his wife, and dined very pleasantly. Anon to church, my wife
and I and Betty Michell, her husband being gone to Westminster.... Alter
church home, and I to my chamber, and there did finish the putting time
to my song of "It is decreed," and do please myself at last and think
it will be thought a good song. By and by little Michell comes and takes
away his wife home, and my wife and brother and I to my uncle Wight's,
where my aunt is grown so ugly and their entertainment so bad that I
am in pain to be there; nor will go thither again a good while, if sent
for, for we were sent for to-night, we had not gone else. Wooly's wife,
a silly woman, and not very handsome, but no spirit in her at all; and
their discourse mean, and the fear of the troubles of the times hath
made them not to bring their plate to town, since it was carried out
upon the business of the fire, so that they drink in earth and a wooden
can, which I do not like. So home, and my people to bed. I late to
finish my song, and then to bed also, and the business of the firing of
the city, and the fears we have of new troubles and violences, and
the fear of fire among ourselves, did keep me awake a good while,
considering the sad condition I and my family should be in. So at last
to sleep.

12th. Lay long in bed, and then up, and Mr. Carcasse brought me near
500 tickets to sign, which I did, and by discourse find him a cunning,
confident, shrewd man, but one that I do doubt hath by his discourse of
the ill will he hath got with my Lord Marquess of Dorchester (with whom
he lived), he hath had cunning practices in his time, and would not now
spare to use the same to his profit. That done I to the office; whither
by and by comes Creed to me, and he and I walked in the garden a little,
talking of the present ill condition of things, which is the common
subject of all men's discourse and fears now-a-days, and particularly
of my Lady Denham, whom everybody says is poisoned, and he tells me she
hath said it to the Duke of York; but is upon the mending hand, though
the town says she is dead this morning. He and I to the 'Change. There I
had several little errands, and going to Sir R. Viner's, I did get
such a splash and spots of dirt upon my new vest, that I was out of
countenance to be seen in the street. This day I received 450 pieces
of gold more of Mr. Stokes, but cost me 22 1/2d. change; but I am well
contented with it,--I having now near L2800 in gold, and will not rest
till I get full L3000, and then will venture my fortune for the saving
that and the rest. Home to dinner, though Sir R. Viner would have staid
us to dine with him, he being sheriffe; but, poor man, was so out of
countenance that he had no wine ready to drink to us, his butler being
out of the way, though we know him to be a very liberal man. And after
dinner I took my wife out, intending to have gone and have seen my
Lady Jemimah, at White Hall, but so great a stop there was at the New
Exchange, that we could not pass in half an houre, and therefore 'light
and bought a little matter at the Exchange, and then home, and then at
the office awhile, and then home to my chamber, and after my wife and
all the mayds abed but Jane, whom I put confidence in--she and I, and
my brother, and Tom, and W. Hewer, did bring up all the remainder of my
money, and my plate-chest, out of the cellar, and placed the money in my
study, with the rest, and the plate in my dressing-room; but indeed I
am in great pain to think how to dispose of my money, it being wholly
unsafe to keep it all in coin in one place. 'But now I have it all at my
hand, I shall remember it better to think of disposing of it. This done,
by one in the morning to bed. This afternoon going towards Westminster,
Creed and I did stop, the Duke of York being just going away from seeing
of it, at Paul's, and in the Convocation House Yard did there see the
body of Robert Braybrooke, Bishop of London, that died 1404: He fell
down in his tomb out of the great church into St. Fayth's this late
fire, and is here seen his skeleton with the flesh on; but all tough and
dry like a spongy dry leather, or touchwood all upon his bones. His
head turned aside. A great man in his time, and Lord Chancellor; and his
skeletons now exposed to be handled and derided by some, though admired
for its duration by others. Many flocking to see it.

13th. At the office all the morning, at noon home to dinner, and out to
Bishopsgate Street, and there bought some drinking-glasses, a case of
knives, and other things, against tomorrow, in expectation of my Lord
Hinchingbroke's coming to dine with me. So home, and having set some
things in the way of doing, also against to-morrow, I to my office,
there to dispatch business, and do here receive notice from my Lord
Hinchingbroke that he is not well, and so not in condition to come to
dine with me to-morrow, which I am not in much trouble for, because
of the disorder my house is in, by the bricklayers coming to mend the
chimney in my dining-room for smoking, which they were upon almost till
midnight, and have now made it very pretty, and do carry smoke exceeding
well. This evening come all the Houblons to me, to invite me to sup with
them to-morrow night. I did take them home, and there we sat and talked
a good while, and a glass of wine, and then parted till to-morrow night.
So at night, well satisfied in the alteration of my chimney, to bed.

14th. Up, and by water to White Hall, and thence to Westminster, where
I bought several things, as a hone, ribbon, gloves, books, and then took
coach and to Knipp's lodging, whom I find not ready to go home with me.
So I away to do a little business, among others to call upon Mr. Osborne
for my Tangier warrant for the last quarter, and so to the Exchange
for some things for my wife, and then to Knipp's again, and there staid
reading of Waller's verses, while she finished dressing, her husband
being by. I had no other pastime. Her lodging very mean, and the
condition she lives in; yet makes a shew without doors, God bless us! I
carried him along with us into the City, and set him down in Bishopsgate
Street, and then home with her. She tells me how Smith, of the Duke's
house, hath killed a man upon a quarrel in play; which makes every body
sorry, he being a good actor, and, they say, a good man, however this
happens. The ladies of the Court do much bemoan him, she says. Here she
and we alone at dinner to some good victuals, that we could not put off,
that was intended for the great dinner of my Lord Hinchingbroke's, if
he had come. After dinner I to teach her my new recitative of "It is
decreed," of which she learnt a good part, and I do well like it and
believe shall be well pleased when she hath it all, and that it will
be found an agreeable thing. Then carried her home, and my wife and I
intended to have seen my Lady Jemimah at White Hall, but the Exchange
Streete was so full of coaches, every body, as they say, going thither
to make themselves fine against tomorrow night, that, after half an
hour's stay, we could not do any [thing], only my wife to see her
brother, and I to go speak one word with Sir G. Carteret about office
business, and talk of the general complexion of matters, which he looks
upon, as I do, with horrour, and gives us all for an undone people.
That there is no such thing as a peace in hand, nor possibility of any
without our begging it, they being as high, or higher, in their terms
than ever, and tells me that, just now, my Lord Hollis had been with
him, and wept to think in what a condition we are fallen. He shewed
me my Lord Sandwich's letter to him, complaining of the lack of money,
which Sir G. Carteret is at a loss how in the world to get the King
to supply him with, and wishes him, for that reason, here; for that he
fears he will be brought to disgrace there, for want of supplies. He
says the House is yet in a bad humour; and desiring to know whence it is
that the King stirs not, he says he minds it not, nor will be brought
to it, and that his servants of the House do, instead of making the
Parliament better, rather play the rogue one with another, and will put
all in fire. So that, upon the whole, we are in a wretched condition,
and I went from him in full apprehensions of it. So took up my wife, her
brother being yet very bad, and doubtful whether he will recover or no,
and so to St. Ellen's [St. Helen's], and there sent my wife home, and
myself to the Pope's Head, where all the Houblons were, and Dr. Croone,

     [William Croune, or Croone, of Emanuel College, Cambridge, chosen
     Rhetoric Professor at Gresham College, 1659, F.R.S. and M.D. Died
     October 12th, 1684, and was interred at St. Mildred's in the
     Poultry.  He was a prominent Fellow of the Royal Society and first
     Registrar.  In accordance with his wishes his widow (who married Sir
     Edwin Sadleir, Bart.) left by will one-fifth of the clear rent of
     the King's Head tavern in or near Old Fish Street, at the corner of
     Lambeth Hill, to the Royal Society for the support of a lecture and
     illustrative experiments for the advancement of natural knowledge on
     local motion.  The Croonian lecture is still delivered before the
     Royal Society.]

and by and by to an exceeding pretty supper, excellent discourse of all
sorts, and indeed [they] are a set of the finest gentlemen that ever I
met withal in my life. Here Dr. Croone told me, that, at the meeting at
Gresham College to-night, which, it seems, they now have every Wednesday
again, there was a pretty experiment of the blood of one dogg let out,
till he died, into the body of another on one side, while all his own
run out on the other side.

     [At the meeting on November 14th, "the experiment of transfusing the
     blood of one dog into another was made before the Society by Mr.
     King and Mr. Thomas Coxe upon a little mastiff and a spaniel with
     very good success, the former bleeding to death, and the latter
     receiving the blood of the other, and emitting so much of his own,
     as to make him capable of receiving that of the other."  On November
     21st the spaniel "was produced and found very well" (Birch's
     "History of the Royal Society," vol.  ii., pp.  123, 125).  The
     experiment of transfusion of blood, which occupied much of the
     attention of the Royal Society in its early days, was revived within
     the last few years.]

The first died upon the place, and the other very well, and likely to do
well. This did give occasion to many pretty wishes, as of the blood of
a Quaker to be let into an Archbishop, and such like; but, as Dr.
Croone says, may, if it takes, be of mighty use to man's health, for
the amending of bad blood by borrowing from a better body. After supper,
James Houblon and another brother took me aside and to talk of some
businesses of their owne, where I am to serve them, and will, and then
to talk of publique matters, and I do find that they and all merchants
else do give over trade and the nation for lost, nothing being done
with care or foresight, no convoys granted, nor any thing done to
satisfaction; but do think that the Dutch and French will master us the
next yeare, do what we can: and so do I, unless necessity makes the King
to mind his business, which might yet save all. Here we sat talking till
past one in the morning, and then home, where my people sat up for me,
my wife and all, and so to bed.

15th. This [morning] come Mr. Shepley (newly out of the country) to see
me; after a little discourse with him, I to the office, where we sat
all the morning, and at noon home, and there dined, Shepley with me, and
after dinner I did pay him L70, which he had paid my father for my use
in the country. He being gone, I took coach and to Mrs. Pierce's, where
I find her as fine as possible, and himself going to the ball at night
at Court, it being the Queen's birth-day, and so I carried them in my
coach, and having set them into the house, and gotten Mr. Pierce to
undertake the carrying in my wife, I to Unthanke's, where she appointed
to be, and there told her, and back again about business to White Hall,
while Pierce went and fetched her and carried her in. I, after I had met
with Sir W. Coventry and given him some account of matters, I also to
the ball, and with much ado got up to the loft, where with much trouble
I could see very well. Anon the house grew full, and the candles light,
and the King and Queen and all the ladies set: and it was, indeed, a
glorious sight to see Mrs. Stewart in black and white lace, and her head
and shoulders dressed with dyamonds, and the like a great many great
ladies more, only the Queen none; and the King in his rich vest of some
rich silke and silver trimming, as the Duke of York and all the dancers
were, some of cloth of silver, and others of other sorts, exceeding
rich. Presently after the King was come in, he took the Queene, and
about fourteen more couple there was, and began the Bransles. As many
of the men as I can remember presently, were, the King, Duke of York,
Prince Rupert, Duke of Monmouth, Duke of Buckingham, Lord Douglas,' Mr.
[George] Hamilton, Colonell Russell, Mr. Griffith, Lord Ossory, Lord
Rochester; and of the ladies, the Queene, Duchess of York, Mrs.
Stewart, Duchess of Monmouth, Lady Essex Howard, Mrs. Temples Swedes
Embassadress, Lady Arlington; Lord George Barkeley's daughter, and
many others I remember not; but all most excellently dressed in rich
petticoats and gowns, and dyamonds, and pearls. After the Bransles, then
to a Corant, and now and then a French dance; but that so rare that the
Corants grew tiresome, that I wished it done. Only Mrs. Stewart danced
mighty finely, and many French dances, specially one the King called
the New Dance, which was very pretty; but upon the whole matter, the
business of the dancing of itself was not extraordinary pleasing. But
the clothes and sight of the persons was indeed very pleasing, and worth
my coming, being never likely to see more gallantry while I live, if I
should come twenty times. About twelve at night it broke up, and I to
hire a coach with much difficulty, but Pierce had hired a chair for my
wife, and so she being gone to his house, he and I, taking up Barker at
Unthanke's, to his house, whither his wife was come home a good while
ago and gone to bed. So away home with my wife, between displeased with
the dull dancing, and satisfied at the clothes and persons. My Lady
Castlemayne, without whom all is nothing, being there, very rich, though
not dancing. And so after supper, it being very cold, to bed.

16th. Up again betimes to attend the examination of Mr. Gawden's,
accounts, where we all met, but I did little but fit myself for the
drawing my great letter to the Duke of York of the state of the Navy
for want of money. At noon to the 'Change, and thence back to the new
taverne come by us; the Three Tuns, where D. Gawden did feast us all
with a chine of beef and other good things, and an infinite dish of
fowl, but all spoiled in the dressing. This noon I met with Mr. Hooke,
and he tells me the dog which was filled with another dog's blood, at
the College the other day, is very well, and like to be so as ever, and
doubts not its being found of great use to men; and so do Dr. Whistler,
who dined with us at the taverne. Thence home in the evening, and I to
my preparing my letter, and did go a pretty way in it, staying late upon
it, and then home to supper and to bed, the weather being on a sudden
set in to be very cold.

17th. Up, and to the office, where all the morning. At noon home to
dinner, and in the afternoon shut myself in my chamber, and there till
twelve at night finishing my great letter to the Duke of York, which do
lay the ill condition of the Navy so open to him, that it is impossible
if the King and he minds any thing of their business, but it will
operate upon them to set all matters right, and get money to carry on
the war, before it be too late, or else lay out for a peace upon any
termes. It was a great convenience to-night that what I had writ foule
in short hand, I could read to W. Hewer, and he take it fair in short
hand, so as I can read it to-morrow to Sir W. Coventry, and then come
home, and Hewer read it to me while I take it in long-hand to present,
which saves me much time. So to bed.

18th (Lord's day). Up by candle-light and on foote to White Hall, where
by appointment I met Lord Bruncker at Sir W. Coventry's chamber, and
there I read over my great letter, and they approved it: and as I do do
our business in defence of the Board, so I think it is as good a letter
in the manner, and believe it is the worst in the matter of it, as ever
come from any office to a Prince. Back home in my Lord Bruncker's coach,
and there W. Hewer and I to write it over fair; dined at noon, and
Mercer with us, and mighty merry, and then to finish my letter; and it
being three o'clock ere we had done, when I come to Sir W. Batten; he
was in a huffe, which I made light of, but he signed the letter, though
he would not go, and liked the letter well. Sir W. Pen, it seems, he
would not stay for it: so, making slight of Sir W. Pen's putting so much
weight upon his hand to Sir W. Batten, I down to the Tower Wharf, and
there got a sculler, and to White Hall, and there met Lord Bruncker, and
he signed it, and so I delivered it to Mr. Cheving,

     [William Chiffinch, pimp to Charles II. and receiver of the secret
     pensions paid by the French Court.  He succeeded his brother, Thomas
     Chiffinch (who died in April, 1666), as Keeper of the King's Private
     Closet (see note, vol. v., p. 265).  He is introduced by Scott into
     his "Peveril of the Peak."]

and he to Sir W. Coventry, in the cabinet, the King and councill being
sitting, where I leave it to its fortune, and I by water home again, and
to my chamber, to even my Journall; and then comes Captain Cocke to me,
and he and I a great deal of melancholy discourse of the times, giving
all over for gone, though now the Parliament will soon finish the Bill
for money. But we fear, if we had it, as matters are now managed, we
shall never make the best of it, but consume it all to no purpose or a
bad one. He being gone, I again to my Journall and finished it, and so
to supper and to bed.

19th. Lay pretty long in bed talking with pleasure with my wife, and
then up and all the morning at my own chamber fitting some Tangier
matters against the afternoon for a meeting. This morning also came Mr.
Caesar, and I heard him on the lute very finely, and my boy begins to
play well. After dinner I carried and set my wife down at her brother's,
and then to Barkeshire-house, where my Lord Chancellor hath been ever
since the fire, but he is not come home yet, so I to Westminster Hall,
where the Lords newly up and the Commons still sitting. Here I met with
Mr. Robinson, who did give me a printed paper wherein he states his
pretence to the post office, and intends to petition the Parliament in
it. Thence I to the Bull-head tavern, where I have not been since Mr.
Chetwind and the time of our club, and here had six bottles of claret
filled, and I sent them to Mrs. Martin, whom I had promised some of
my owne, and, having none of my owne, sent her this. Thence to my Lord
Chancellor's, and there Mr. Creed and Gawden, Cholmley, and Sir G.
Carteret walking in the Park over against the house. I walked with Sir
G. Carteret, who I find displeased with the letter I have drawn and sent
in yesterday, finding fault with the account we give of the ill state of
the Navy, but I said little, only will justify the truth of it. Here we
walked to and again till one dropped away after another, and so I
took coach to White Hall, and there visited my Lady Jemimah, at Sir G.
Carteret's lodgings. Here was Sir Thomas Crew, and he told me how hot
words grew again to-day in the House of Lords between my Lord Ossory and
Ashly, the former saying that something said by the other was said like
one of Oliver's Council. Ashly said that he must give him reparation,
or he would take it his owne way. The House therefore did bring my Lord
Ossory to confess his fault, and ask pardon for it, as he was also to
my Lord Buckingham, for saying that something was not truth that my Lord
Buckingham had said. This will render my Lord Ossory very little in a
little time. By and by away, and calling my wife went home, and then a
little at Sir W. Batten's to hear news, but nothing, and then home to
supper, whither Captain Cocke, half foxed, come and sat with us, and so
away, and then we to bed.

20th. Called up by Mr. Sheply, who is going into the country to-day to
Hinchingbroke, I sent my service to my Lady, and in general for newes:
that the world do think well of my Lord, and do wish he were here again,
but that the publique matters of the State as to the war are in the
worst condition that is possible. By and by Sir W. Warren, and with him
half an hour discoursing of several businesses, and some I hope will
bring me a little profit. He gone, and Sheply, I to the office a little,
and then to church, it being thanksgiving-day for the cessation of the
plague; but, Lord! how the towne do say that it is hastened before the
plague is quite over, there dying some people still,

     [According to the Bills of Mortality seven persons died in London of
     the plague during the week November 20th to 27th; and for some weeks
     after deaths continued from this cause.]

but only to get ground for plays to be publickly acted, which the
Bishops would not suffer till the plague was over; and one would thinke
so, by the suddenness of the notice given of the day, which was last
Sunday, and the little ceremony. The sermon being dull of Mr. Minnes,
and people with great indifferency come to hear him. After church home,
where I met Mr. Gregory, who I did then agree with to come to teach
my wife to play on the Viall, and he being an able and sober man, I am
mightily glad of it. He had dined, therefore went away, and I to dinner,
and after dinner by coach to Barkeshire-house, and there did get a very
great meeting; the Duke of York being there, and much business done,
though not in proportion to the greatness of the business, and my Lord
Chancellor sleeping and snoring the greater part of the time. Among
other things I declared the state of our credit as to tallys to raise
money by, and there was an order for payment of L5000 to Mr. Gawden, out
of which I hope to get something against Christmas. Here we sat late,
and here I did hear that there are some troubles like to be in Scotland,
there being a discontented party already risen, that have seized on the
Governor of Dumfreeze and imprisoned him,

     [William Fielding, writing to Sir Phil. Musgrave from Carlisle on
     November 15th, says: "Major Baxter, who has arrived from Dumfries,
     reports that this morning a great number of horse and foot came into
     that town, with drawn swords and pistols, gallopped up to Sir Jas.
     Turner's lodgings, seized him in his bed, carried him without
     clothes to the marketplace, threatened to cut him to pieces, and
     seized and put into the Tollbooth all the foot soldiers that were
     with him; they also secured the minister of Dumfries.  Many of the
     party were lairds and county people from Galloway--200 horse well
     mounted, one minister was with them who had swords and pistols, and
     200 or 300 foot, some with clubs, others with scythes."  On November
     17th Rob. Meine wrote to Williamson: "On the 15th 120 fanatics from
     the Glenkins, Deray; and neighbouring parishes in Dumfriesshire,
     none worth L10 except two mad fellows, the lairds of Barscob and
     Corsuck, came to Dumfries early in the morning, seized Sir Jas.
     Turner, commander of a company of men in Dumfriesshire, and carried
     him, without violence to others, to a strong house in Maxwell town,
     Galloway, declaring they sought only revenge against the tyrant who
     had been severe with them for not keeping to church, and had laid
     their families waste" ("Calendar of State Papers," 1666-67, pp. 262,
     268).]

but the story is yet very uncertain, and therefore I set no great weight
on it. I home by Mr. Gawden in his coach, and so with great pleasure to
spend the evening at home upon my Lyra Viall, and then to supper and to
bed. With mighty peace of mind and a hearty desire that I had but what I
have quietly in the country, but, I fear, I do at this day see the best
that either I or the rest of our nation will ever see.

21st. Up, with Sir W. Batten to Charing Cross, and thence I to wait on
Sir Philip Howard, whom I find dressing himself in his night-gown and
turban like a Turke, but one of the finest persons that ever I saw in
my life. He had several gentlemen of his owne waiting on him, and one
playing finely on the gittar: he discourses as well as ever I heard man,
in few words and handsome. He expressed all kindness to Balty, when I
told him how sick he is: he says that, before he comes to be mustered
again, he must bring a certificate of his swearing the oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy, and having taken the Sacrament according to
the rites of the Church of England. This, I perceive, is imposed on all,
and he will be ready to do. I pray God he may have his health again to
be able to do it. Being mightily satisfied with his civility, I away
to Westminster Hall, and there walked with several people, and all the
discourse is about some trouble in Scotland I heard of yesterday, but
nobody can tell the truth of it. Here was Betty Michell with her mother.
I would have carried her home, but her father intends to go with her, so
I lost my hopes. And thence I to the Excise Office about some tallies,
and then to the Exchange, where I did much business, and so home to
dinner, and then to the office, where busy all the afternoon till night,
and then home to supper, and after supper an hour reading to my wife and
brother something in Chaucer with great pleasure, and so to bed.

22nd. Up, and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and my Lord
Bruncker did show me Hollar's new print of the City, with a pretty
representation of that part which is burnt, very fine indeed; and tells
me that he was yesterday sworn the King's servant, and that the King
hath commanded him to go on with his great map of the City, which he was
upon before the City was burned, like Gombout of Paris, which I am
glad of. At noon home to dinner, where my wife and I fell out, I being
displeased with her cutting away a lace handkercher sewed about the neck
down to her breasts almost, out of a belief, but without reason, that it
is the fashion. Here we did give one another the lie too much, but were
presently friends, and then I to my office, where very late and did much
business, and then home, and there find Mr. Batelier, and did sup and
play at cards awhile. But he tells me the newes how the King of France
hath, in defiance to the King of England, caused all his footmen to be
put into vests, and that the noblemen of France will do the like; which,
if true, is the greatest indignity ever done by one Prince to another,
and would incite a stone to be revenged; and I hope our King will, if it
be so, as he tells me it is:

     [Planche throws some doubt on this story in his "Cyclopaedia of
     Costume" (vol. ii., p. 240), and asks the question, "Was Mr.
     Batelier hoaxing the inquisitive secretary, or was it the idle
     gossip of the day, as untrustworthy as such gossip is in general?"
     But the same statement was made by the author of the "Character of a
     Trimmer," who wrote from actual knowledge of the Court: "About this
     time a general humour, in opposition to France, had made us throw
     off their fashion, and put on vests, that we might look more like a
     distinct people, and not be under the servility of imitation, which
     ever pays a greater deference to the original than is consistent
     with the equality all independent nations should pretend to.  France
     did not like this small beginning of ill humours, at least of
     emulation; and wisely considering, that it is a natural
     introduction, first to make the world their apes, that they may be
     afterwards their slaves.  It was thought, that one of the
     instructions Madame [Henrietta, Duchess of Orleans] brought along
     with her, was to laugh us out of these vests; which she performed so
     effectually, that in a moment, like so many footmen who had quitted
     their master's livery, we all took it again, and returned to our old
     service; so that the very time of doing it gave a very critical
     advantage to France, since it looked like an evidence of our
     returning to her interest, as well as to their fashion. "The
     Character of a Trimmer" ("Miscellanies by the Marquis of Halifax,"
     1704, p. 164).  Evelyn reports that when the king expressed his
     intention never to alter this fashion, "divers courtiers and
     gentlemen gave his Majesty gold by way of wager that he would not
     persist in this resolution" ("Diary," October 18th, 1666).]

being told by one that come over from Paris with my Lady Fanshaw, who is
come over with the dead body of her husband, and that saw it before he
come away. This makes me mighty merry, it being an ingenious kind of
affront; but yet it makes me angry, to see that the King of England is
become so little as to have the affront offered him. So I left my people
at cards, and so to my chamber to read, and then to bed. Batelier did
bring us some oysters to-night, and some bottles of new French wine of
this year, mighty good, but I drank but little. This noon Bagwell's wife
was with me at the office, and I did what I would, and at night comes
Mrs. Burroughs, and appointed to meet upon the next holyday and go
abroad together.

23rd. Up, and with Sir J. Minnes to White Hall, where we and the rest
attended the Duke of York, where, among other things, we had a complaint
of Sir William Jennings against his lieutenant, Le Neve, one that had
been long the Duke's page, and for whom the Duke of York hath great
kindness. It was a drunken quarrel, where one was as blameable as the
other. It was referred to further examination, but the Duke of
York declared, that as he would not favour disobedience, so neither
drunkenness, and therein he said very well. Thence with Sir W. Coventry
to Westminster Hall, and there parted, he having told me how Sir J.
Minnes do disagree from the proposition of resigning his place, and that
so the whole matter is again at a stand, at which I am sorry for the
King's sake, but glad that Sir W. Pen is again defeated, for I would not
have him come to be Comptroller if I could help it, he will be so cruel
proud. Here I spoke with Sir G. Downing about our prisoners in Holland,
and their being released; which he is concerned in, and most of them
are. Then, discoursing of matters of the House of Parliament, he tells
me that it is not the fault of the House, but the King's own party, that
have hindered the passing of the Bill for money, by their popping in
of new projects for raising it: which is a strange thing; and mighty
confident he is, that what money is raised, will be raised and put into
the same form that the last was, to come into the Exchequer; and, for
aught I see, I must confess I think it is the best way. Thence down to
the Hall, and there walked awhile, and all the talk is about Scotland,
what news thence; but there is nothing come since the first report, and
so all is given over for nothing. Thence home, and after dinner to my
chamber with Creed, who come and dined with me, and he and I to reckon
for his salary, and by and by comes in Colonel Atkins, and I did the
like with him, and it was Creed's design to bring him only for his
own ends, to seem to do him a courtesy, and it is no great matter. The
fellow I hate, and so I think all the world else do. Then to talk of
my report I am to make of the state of our wants of money to the Lord
Treasurer, but our discourse come to little. However, in the evening, to
be rid of him, I took coach and saw him to the Temple and there 'light,
and he being gone, with all the haste back again and to my chamber late
to enter all this day's matters of account, and to draw up my report to
my Lord Treasurer, and so to bed. At the Temple I called at Playford's,
and there find that his new impression of his ketches

     [John Hilton's "Catch that catch can, or a Choice Collection of
     Catches, Rounds and Canons for 3 or 4 voyces," was first published
     by Playford in 1651 or 1652.  The book was republished "with large
     additions by John Playford" in 1658.  The edition referred to in the
     text was published in 1667 with a second title of "The Musical
     Companion."  The book was republished in 1672-73.]

are not yet out, the fire having hindered it, but his man tells me that
it will be a very fine piece, many things new being added to it.

24th. Up, and to the office, where we sat all the morning. At noon rose
and to my closet, and finished my report to my Lord Treasurer of our
Tangier wants, and then with Sir J. Minnes by coach to Stepney to the
Trinity House, where it is kept again now since the burning of their
other house in London. And here a great many met at Sir Thomas Allen's
feast, of his being made an Elder Brother; but he is sick, and so
could not be there. Here was much good company, and very merry; but the
discourse of Scotland, it seems, is confirmed, and that they are 4000 of
them in armes, and do declare for King and Covenant, which is very ill
news. I pray God deliver us from the ill consequences we may justly fear
from it. Here was a good venison pasty or two and other good victuals;
but towards the latter end of the dinner I rose, and without taking
leave went away from the table, and got Sir J. Minnes' coach and away
home, and thence with my report to my Lord Treasurer's, where I did
deliver it to Sir Philip Warwicke for my Lord, who was busy, my report
for him to consider against to-morrow's council. Sir Philip Warwicke, I
find, is full of trouble in his mind to see how things go, and what
our wants are; and so I have no delight to trouble him with discourse,
though I honour the man with all my heart, and I think him to be a very
able and right honest man. So away home again, and there to my office
to write my letters very late, and then home to supper, and then to read
the late printed discourse of witches by a member of Gresham College,
and then to bed; the discourse being well writ, in good stile, but
methinks not very convincing. This day Mr. Martin is come to tell me his
wife is brought to bed of a girle, and I promised to christen it next
Sunday.

25th (Lord's day). Up, and with Sir J. Minnes by coach to White Hall,
and there coming late, I to rights to the chapel, where in my usual
place I heard one of the King's chaplains, one Mr. Floyd, preach. He was
out two or three times in his prayer, and as many in his sermon, but yet
he made a most excellent good sermon, of our duty to imitate the
lives and practice of Christ and the saints departed, and did it very
handsomely and excellent stile; but was a little overlarge in magnifying
the graces of the nobility and prelates, that we have seen in our
memorys in the world, whom God hath taken from us. At the end of
the sermon an excellent anthem; but it was a pleasant thing, an
idle companion in our pew, a prating, bold counsellor that hath been
heretofore at the Navy Office, and noted for a great eater and drinker,
not for quantity, but of the best, his name Tom Bales, said, "I know a
fitter anthem for this sermon," speaking only of our duty of following
the saints, and I know not what. "Cooke should have sung, 'Come, follow,
follow me.'" I After sermon up into the gallery, and then to Sir G.
Carteret's to dinner; where much company. Among others, Mr. Carteret and
my Lady Jemimah, and here was also Mr. [John] Ashburnham, the great man,
who is a pleasant man, and that hath seen much of the world, and more
of the Court. After dinner Sir G. Carteret and I to another room, and he
tells me more and more of our want of money and in how ill condition
we are likely to be soon in, and that he believes we shall not have a
fleete at sea the next year. So do I believe; but he seems to speak
it as a thing expected by the King and as if their matters were laid
accordingly. Thence into the Court and there delivered copies of my
report to my Lord Treasurer, to the Duke of York, Sir W. Coventry, and
others, and attended there till the Council met, and then was called
in, and I read my letter. My Lord Treasurer declared that the King had
nothing to give till the Parliament did give him some money. So the King
did of himself bid me to declare to all that would take our tallys for
payment, that he should, soon as the Parliament's money do come in, take
back their tallys, and give them money: which I giving him occasion to
repeat to me, it coming from him against the 'gre'

     [Apparently a translation of the French 'contre le gre', and
     presumably an expression in common use.  "Against the grain" is
     generally supposed to have its origin in the use of a plane against
     the grain of the wood.]

I perceive, of my Lord Treasurer, I was content therewith, and went
out, and glad that I have got so much. Here staid till the Council
rose, walking in the gallery. All the talke being of Scotland, where
the highest report, I perceive, runs but upon three or four hundred in
armes; but they believe that it will grow more, and do seem to apprehend
it much, as if the King of France had a hand in it. My Lord Lauderdale
do make nothing of it, it seems, and people do censure him for it, he
from the beginning saying that there was nothing in it, whereas it do
appear to be a pure rebellion; but no persons of quality being in it,
all do hope that it cannot amount to much. Here I saw Mrs. Stewart this
afternoon, methought the beautifullest creature that ever I saw in my
life, more than ever I thought her so, often as I have seen her; and I
begin to think do exceed my Lady Castlemayne, at least now. This being
St. Catherine's day, the Queene was at masse by seven o'clock this
morning; and. Mr. Ashburnham do say that he never saw any one have so
much zeale in his life as she hath: and, the question being asked by my
Lady Carteret, much beyond the bigotry that ever the old Queen-mother
had. I spoke with Mr. Maya who tells me that the design of building the
City do go on apace, and by his description it will be mighty handsome,
and to the satisfaction of the people; but I pray God it come not out
too late. The Council up, after speaking with Sir W. Coventry a little,
away home with Captain Cocke in his coach, discourse about the forming
of his contract he made with us lately for hempe, and so home, where we
parted, and I find my uncle Wight and Mrs. Wight and Woolly, who staid
and supped, and mighty merry together, and then I to my chamber to even
my journal, and then to bed. I will remember that Mr. Ashburnham
to-day at dinner told how the rich fortune Mrs. Mallett reports of her
servants; that my Lord Herbert would have had her; my Lord Hinchingbroke
was indifferent to have her;

     [They had quarrelled (see August 26th).  She, perhaps, was piqued at
     Lord Hinchingbroke's refusal "to compass the thing without consent
     of friends" (see February 25th), whence her expression,
     "indifferent" to have her.  It is worthy of remark that their
     children intermarried; Lord Hinchingbroke's son married Lady
     Rochester's daughter.--B.]

my Lord John Butler might not have her; my Lord of Rochester would have
forced her;

     [Of the lady thus sought after, whom Pepys calls "a beauty" as well
     as a fortune, and who shortly afterwards, about the 4th February,
     1667, became the wife of the Earl of Rochester, then not twenty
     years old, no authentic portrait is known to exist.  When Mr.
     Miller, of Albemarle Street, in 1811, proposed to publish an edition
     of the "Memoires de Grammont," he sent an artist to Windsor to copy
     there the portraits which he could find of those who figure in that
     work.  In the list given to him for this purpose was the name of
     Lady Rochester.  Not finding amongst the "Beauties," or elsewhere,
     any genuine portrait of her, but seeing that by Hamilton she is
     absurdly styled "une triste heritiere," the artist made a drawing
     from some unknown portrait at Windsor of a lady of a sorrowful
     countenance, and palmed it off upon the bookseller.  In the edition
     of "Grammont" it is not actually called Lady Rochester, but "La
     Triste Heritiere."  A similar falsification had been practised in
     Edwards's edition of 1793, but a different portrait had been copied.
     It is needless, almost, to remark how ill applied is Hamilton's
     epithet.--B.]

and Sir------Popham, who nevertheless is likely to have her, would kiss
her breach to have her.

26th. Up, and to my chamber to do some business. Then to speak with
several people, among others with Mrs. Burroughs, whom I appointed to
meet me at the New Exchange in the afternoon. I by water to Westminster,
and there to enquire after my tallies, which I shall get this week.
Thence to the Swan, having sent for some burnt claret, and there by
and by comes Doll Lane, and she and I sat and drank and talked a great
while, among other things about her sister's being brought to bed, and
I to be godfather to the girle. I did tumble Doll, and do almost what
I would with her, and so parted, and I took coach, and to the New
Exchange, buying a neat's tongue by the way, thinking to eat it out of
town, but there I find Burroughs in company of an old woman, an aunt of
hers, whom she could not leave for half an hour. So after buying a few
baubles to while away time, I down to Westminster, and there into the
House of Parliament, where, at a great Committee, I did hear, as long
as I would, the great case against my Lord Mordaunt, for some arbitrary
proceedings of his against one Taylor, whom he imprisoned, and did all
the violence to imaginable, only to get him to give way to his abusing
his daughter. Here was Mr. Sawyer, my old chamber-fellow, a counsel
against my Lord; and I am glad to see him in so good play. Here I met,
before the committee sat, with my cozen Roger Pepys, the first time I
have spoke with him this parliament. He hath promised to come, and bring
Madam Turner with him, who is come to towne to see the City, but hath
lost all her goods of all kinds in Salisbury Court, Sir William Turner
having not endeavoured, in her absence, to save one penny, to dine with
me on Friday next, of which I am glad. Roger bids me to help him to some
good rich widow; for he is resolved to go, and retire wholly, into
the country; for, he says, he is confident we shall be all ruined very
speedily, by what he sees in the State, and I am much in his mind.
Having staid as long as I thought fit for meeting of Burroughs, I away
and to the 'Change again, but there I do not find her now, I having
staid too long at the House, and therefore very hungry, having eat
nothing to-day. Home, and there to eat presently, and then to the office
a little, and to Sir W. Batten, where Sir J. Minnes and Captain Cocke
was; but no newes from the North at all to-day; and the newes-book makes
the business nothing, but that they are all dispersed. I pray God it may
prove so. So home, and, after a little, to my chamber to bed.

27th. Up, and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and here I
had a letter from Mr. Brisband on another occasion, which, by the by,
intimates my Lord Hinchingbroke's intention to come and dine with me
to-morrow. This put me into a great surprise, and therefore endeavoured
all I could to hasten over our business at the office, and so home at
noon and to dinner, and then away by coach, it being a very foul day, to
White Hall, and there at Sir G. Carteret's find my Lord Hinchingbroke,
who promises to dine with me to-morrow, and bring Mr. Carteret along
with him. Here I staid a little while talking with him and the ladies,
and then away to my Lord Crew's, and then did by the by make a visit to
my Lord Crew, and had some good discourse with him, he doubting that all
will break in pieces in the kingdom; and that the taxes now coming out,
which will tax the same man in three or four several capacities, as for
lands, office, profession, and money at interest, will be the hardest
that ever come out; and do think that we owe it, and the lateness of its
being given, wholly to the unpreparedness of the King's own party, to
make their demand and choice; for they have obstructed the giving it by
land-tax, which had been done long since. Having ended my visit, I
spoke to Sir Thomas Crew, to invite him and his brother John to dinner
tomorrow, at my house, to meet Lord Hinchingbroke; and so homewards,
calling at the cook's, who is to dress it, to bespeak him, and then
home, and there set things in order for a very fine dinner, and then to
the office, where late very busy and to good purpose as to dispatch of
business, and then home. To bed, my people sitting up to get things in
order against to-morrow. This evening was brought me what Griffin had,
as he says, taken this evening off of the table in the office, a letter
sealed and directed to the Principal Officers and Commissioners of the
Navy. It is a serious and just libel against our disorder in paying of
our money, making ten times more people wait than we have money for,
and complaining by name of Sir W. Batten for paying away great sums
to particular people, which is true. I was sorry to see this way of
reproach taken against us, but more sorry that there is true ground for
it.

28th. Up, and with Sir W. Pen to White Hall (setting his lady and
daughter down by the way at a mercer's in the Strand, where they are
going to lay out some money), where, though it blows hard and rains
hard, yet the Duke of York is gone a-hunting. We therefore lost our
labour, and so back again, and by hackney coach to secure places to get
things ready against dinner, and then home, and did the like there, and
to my great satisfaction: and at noon comes my Lord Hinchingbroke, Sir
Thomas Crew, Mr. John Crew, Mr. Carteret, and Brisband. I had six noble
dishes for them, dressed by a man-cook, and commended, as indeed they
deserved, for exceeding well done. We eat with great pleasure, and I
enjoyed myself in it with reflections upon the pleasures which I at best
can expect, yet not to exceed this; eating in silver plates, and
all things mighty rich and handsome about me. A great deal of fine
discourse, sitting almost till dark at dinner, and then broke up with
great pleasure, especially to myself; and they away, only Mr. Carteret
and I to Gresham College, where they meet now weekly again, and here
they had good discourse how this late experiment of the dog, which is
in perfect good health, may be improved for good uses to men, and other
pretty things, and then broke up. Here was Mr. Henry Howard, that
will hereafter be Duke of Norfolke, who is admitted this day into the
Society, and being a very proud man, and one that values himself upon
his family, writes his name, as he do every where, Henry Howard of
Norfolke. Thence home and there comes my Lady Pen, Pegg, and Mrs.
Turner, and played at cards and supped with us, and were pretty merry,
and Pegg with me in my closet a good while, and did suffer me 'a la
baiser mouche et toucher ses cosas' upon her breast, wherein I had great
pleasure, and so spent the evening and then broke up, and I to bed, my
mind mightily pleased with the day's entertainment.

29th. Up, and to the office, where busy all the morning. At noon home to
dinner, where I find Balty come out to see us, but looks like death,
and I do fear he is in a consumption; he has not been abroad many
weeks before, and hath now a well day, and a fit day of the headake in
extraordinary torture. After dinner left him and his wife, they having
their mother hard by and my wife, and I a wet afternoon to White Hall
to have seen my Lady Carteret and Jemimah, but as God would have it
they were abroad, and I was well contented at it. So my wife and I to
Westminster Hall, where I left her a little, and to the Exchequer,
and then presently home again, calling at our man-cooke's for his help
to-morrow, but he could not come. So I home to the office, my people all
busy to get a good dinner to-morrow again. I late at the office, and all
the newes I hear I put into a letter this night to my Lord Bruncker at
Chatham, thus:--

     "I doubt not of your lordship's hearing of Sir Thomas Clifford's
     succeeding Sir H. Pollard' in the Comptrollership of the King's
     house; but perhaps our ill, but confirmed, tidings from the
     Barbadoes may not [have reached you] yet, it coming but yesterday;
     viz., that about eleven ships, whereof two of the King's, the Hope
     and Coventry, going thence with men to attack St. Christopher's,
     were seized by a violent hurricane, and all sunk--two only of
     thirteen escaping, and those with loss of masts, &c.  My Lord
     Willoughby  himself is involved in the disaster, and I think two
     ships thrown upon an island of the French, and so all the men, to
     500, become their prisoners.  'Tis said, too, that eighteen Dutch
     men-of-war are passed the Channell, in order to meet with our Smyrna
     ships; and some, I hear, do fright us with the King of Sweden's
     seizing our mast-ships at Gottenburgh.  But we have too much ill
     newes true, to afflict ourselves with what is uncertain.  That which
     I hear from Scotland is, the Duke of York's saying, yesterday, that
     he is confident the Lieutenant-Generall there hath driven them into
     a pound, somewhere towards the mountains."

Having writ my letter, I home to supper and to bed, the world being
mightily troubled at the ill news from Barbadoes, and the consequence of
the Scotch business, as little as we do make of it. And to shew how mad
we are at home, here, and unfit for any troubles: my Lord St. John did,
a day or two since, openly pull a gentleman in Westminster Hall by the
nose, one Sir Andrew Henly, while the judges were upon their benches,
and the other gentleman did give him a rap over the pate with his cane,
of which fray the judges, they say, will make a great matter: men are
only sorry the gentle man did proceed to return a blow; for, otherwise,
my Lord would have been soundly fined for the affront, and may be yet
for his affront to the judges.

30th. Up, and with Sir W. Batten to White Hall, and there we did attend
the Duke of York, and had much business with him; and pretty to see, it
being St. Andrew's day, how some few did wear St. Andrew's crosse; but
most did make a mockery at it, and the House of Parliament, contrary
to practice, did sit also: people having no mind to observe the Scotch
saints' days till they hear better newes from Scotland. Thence to
Westminster Hall and the Abbey, thinking as I had appointed to have met
Mrs. Burroughs there, but not meeting her I home, and just overtook
my cozen Roger Pepys, Mrs. Turner, Dicke, and Joyce Norton, coming by
invitation to dine with me. These ladies I have not seen since before
the plague. Mrs. Turner is come to towne to look after her things in her
house, but all is lost. She is quite weary of the country, but cannot
get her husband to let her live here any more, which troubles her
mightily. She was mighty angry with me, that in all this time I never
writ to her, which I do think and take to myself as a fault, and which
I have promised to mend. Here I had a noble and costly dinner for them,
dressed by a man-cooke, as that the other day was, and pretty merry
we were, as I could be with this company and so great a charge. We sat
long, and after much talk of the plenty of her country in fish, but in
nothing also that is pleasing, we broke up with great kindness, and when
it begun to be dark we parted, they in one coach home, and I in another
to Westminster Hall, where by appointment Mrs. Burroughs and I were to
meet, but did not after I had spent the whole evening there. Only I did
go drink at the Swan, and there did meet with Sarah, who is now newly
married, and there I did lay the beginnings of a future 'amour con
elle'..... Thence it being late away called at Mrs. Burroughs' mother's
door, and she come out to me, and I did hazer whatever I would.... and
then parted, and home, and after some playing at cards with my wife, we
to supper and to bed.




DECEMBER 1666

December 1st. Up, and to the office, where we sat all the morning. At
home to dinner, and then abroad walking to the Old Swan, and in my way
I did see a cellar in Tower Streete in a very fresh fire, the late great
winds having blown it up.

     [The fire continued burning in some cellars of the ruins of the city
     for four months, though it rained in the month of October ten days
     without ceasing (Rugge's "Diurnal").--B.]

It seemed to be only of log-wood, that Hath kept the fire all this while
in it. Going further, I met my late Lord Mayor Bludworth, under whom the
City was burned, and went with him by water to White Hall. But, Lord!
the silly talk that this fellow had, only how ready he would be to
part with all his estate in these difficult times to advance the King's
service, and complaining that now, as every body did lately in the fire,
every body endeavours to save himself, and let the whole perish: but a
very weak man he seems to be. I left him at White Hall, he giving 6d.
towards the boat, and I to Westminster Hall, where I was again defeated
in my expectation of Burroughs. However, I was not much sorry for it,
but by coach home, in the evening, calling at Faythorne's, buying three
of my Lady Castlemayne's heads, printed this day, which indeed is, as
to the head, I think, a very fine picture, and like her. I did this
afternoon get Mrs. Michell to let me only have a sight of a pamphlet
lately printed, but suppressed and much called after, called "The
Catholique's Apology;" lamenting the severity of the Parliament against
them, and comparing it with the lenity of other princes to Protestants;
giving old and late instances of their loyalty to their princes,
whatever is objected against them; and excusing their disquiets in Queen
Elizabeth's time, for that it was impossible for them to think her a
lawfull Queen, if Queen Mary, who had been owned as such, were so; one
being the daughter of the true, and the other of a false wife: and that
of the Gunpowder Treason, by saying that it was only the practice of
some of us, if not the King, to trepan some of their religion into it,
it never being defended by the generality of their Church, nor indeed
known by them; and ends with a large Catalogue, in red letters, of the
Catholiques which have lost their lives in the quarrel of the late King
and this. The thing is very well writ indeed. So home to my letters, and
then to my supper and to bed.

2nd (Lord's day). Up, and to church, and after church home to dinner,
where I met Betty Michell and her husband, very merry at dinner, and
after dinner, having borrowed Sir W. Pen's coach, we to Westminster,
they two and my wife and I to Mr. Martin's, where find the company
almost all come to the christening of Mrs. Martin's child, a girl. A
great deal of good plain company. After sitting long, till the church
was done, the Parson comes, and then we to christen the child. I was
Godfather, and Mrs. Holder (her husband, a good man, I know well), and
a pretty lady, that waits, it seems, on my Lady Bath, at White Hall, her
name, Mrs. Noble, were Godmothers. After the christening comes in the
wine and the sweetmeats, and then to prate and tattle, and then very
good company they were, and I among them. Here was old Mrs. Michell and
Howlett, and several married women of the Hall, whom I knew mayds. Here
was also Mrs. Burroughs and Mrs. Bales, the young widow, whom I led
home, and having staid till the moon was up, I took my pretty gossip
to White Hall with us, and I saw her in her lodging, and then my owne
company again took coach, and no sooner in the coach but something
broke, that we were fain there to stay till a smith could be fetched,
which was above an hour, and then it costing me 6s. to mend. Away round
by the wall and Cow Lane,

     [Cow Lane, West Smithfield (now named King Street), was famous for
     its coachmakers.]

for fear it should break again; and in pain about the coach all the way.
But to ease myself therein Betty Michell did sit at the same end with
me. ... Being very much pleased with this, we at last come home, and so
to supper, and then sent them by boat home, and we to bed. When I come
home I went to Sir W. Batten's, and there I hear more ill newes still:
that all our New England fleete, which went out lately, are put back a
third time by foul weather, and dispersed, some to one port and some to
another; and their convoys also to Plymouth; and whether any of them be
lost or not, we do not know. This, added to all the rest, do lay us flat
in our hopes and courages, every body prophesying destruction to the
nation.

3rd. Up, and, among a great many people that come to speak with me, one
was my Lord Peterborough's gentleman, who comes to me to dun me to get
some money advanced for my Lord; and I demanding what newes, he tells me
that at Court they begin to fear the business of Scotland more and more;
and that the Duke of York intends to go to the North to raise an army,
and that the King would have some of the Nobility and others to go and
assist; but they were so served the last year, among others his Lord, in
raising forces at their own charge, for fear of the French invading us,
that they will not be got out now, without money advanced to them by
the King, and this is like to be the King's case for certain, if ever
he comes to have need of any army. He and others gone, I by water to
Westminster, and there to the Exchequer, and put my tallys in a way of
doing for the last quarter. But my not following it the last week has
occasioned the clerks some trouble, which I am sorry for, and they are
mad at. Thence at noon home, and there find Kate Joyce, who dined
with me: Her husband and she are weary of their new life of being an
Innkeeper, and will leave it, and would fain get some office; but I know
none the foole is fit for, but would be glad to help them, if I could,
though they have enough to live on, God be thanked! though their loss
hath been to the value of L3000 W. Joyce now has all the trade, she
says, the trade being come to that end of the towne. She dined with me,
my wife being ill of her months in bed. I left her with my wife, and
away myself to Westminster Hall by appointment and there found out
Burroughs, and I took her by coach as far as the Lord Treasurer's and
called at the cake house by Hales's, and there in the coach eat and
drank and then carried her home.... So having set her down in the palace
I to the Swan, and there did the first time 'baiser' the little sister
of Sarah that is come into her place, and so away by coach home, where
to my vyall and supper and then to bed, being weary of the following of
my pleasure and sorry for my omitting (though with a true salvo to my
vowes) the stating my last month's accounts in time, as I should, but
resolve to settle, and clear all my business before me this month, that
I may begin afresh the next yeare, and enjoy some little pleasure freely
at Christmasse. So to bed, and with more cheerfulness than I have done
a good while, to hear that for certain the Scott rebells are all routed;
they having been so bold as to come within three miles of Edinburgh, and
there given two or three repulses to the King's forces, but at last
were mastered. Three or four hundred killed or taken, among which their
leader, one Wallis, and seven ministers, they having all taken the
Covenant a few days before, and sworn to live and die in it, as they
did; and so all is likely to be there quiet again. There is also
the very good newes come of four New-England ships come home safe to
Falmouth with masts for the King; which is a blessing mighty unexpected,
and without which, if for nothing else, we must have failed the next
year. But God be praised for thus much good fortune, and send us the
continuance of his favour in other things! So to bed.

4th. Up, and to the office, where we sat all the morning. At noon dined
at home. After dinner presently to my office, and there late and then
home to even my Journall and accounts, and then to supper much eased in
mind, and last night's good news, which is more and more confirmed with
particulars to very good purpose, and so to bed.

5th. Up, and by water to White Hall, where we did much business before
the Duke of York, which being done, I away home by water again, and
there to my office till noon busy. At noon home, and Goodgroome dined
with us, who teaches my wife to sing. After dinner I did give him my
song, "Beauty retire," which he has often desired of me, and without
flattery I think is a very good song. He gone, I to the office, and
there late, very busy doing much business, and then home to supper and
talk, and then scold with my wife for not reckoning well the times that
her musique master hath been with her, but setting down more than I am
sure, and did convince her, they had been with her, and in an ill humour
of anger with her to bed.

6th. Up, but very good friends with her before I rose, and so to the
office, where we sat all the forenoon, and then home to dinner, where
Harman dined with us, and great sport to hear him tell how Will Joyce
grows rich by the custom of the City coming to his end of the towne, and
how he rants over his brother and sister for their keeping an Inne,
and goes thither and tears like a prince, calling him hosteller and
his sister hostess. Then after dinner, my wife and brother, in another
habit; go out to see a play; but I am not to take notice that I know
of my brother's going. So I to the office, where very busy till late at
night, and then home. My wife not pleased with the play, but thinks that
it is because she is grown more critical than she used to be, but my
brother she says is mighty taken with it. So to supper and to bed. This
day, in the Gazette, is the whole story of defeating the Scotch rebells,
and of the creation of the Duke of Cambridge, Knight of the Garter.

7th. Up, and by water to the Exchequer, where I got my tallys finished
for the last quarter for Tangier, and having paid all my fees I to
the Swan, whither I sent for some oysters, and thither comes Mr.
Falconbridge and Spicer and many more clerks; and there we eat and
drank, and a great deal of their sorry discourse, and so parted, and
I by coach home, meeting Balty in the streete about Charing Crosse
walking, which I am glad to see and spoke to him about his mustering
business, I being now to give an account how the several muster-masters
have behaved themselves, and so home to dinner, where finding the cloth
laid and much crumpled but clean, I grew angry and flung the trenchers
about the room, and in a mighty heat I was: so a clean cloth was laid,
and my poor wife very patient, and so to dinner, and in comes Mrs.
Barbara Sheldon, now Mrs. Wood, and dined with us, she mighty fine, and
lives, I perceive, mighty happily, which I am glad [of] for her sake,
but hate her husband for a block-head in his choice. So away after
dinner, leaving my wife and her, and by water to the Strand, and so to
the King's playhouse, where two acts were almost done when I come in;
and there I sat with my cloak about my face, and saw the remainder of
"The Mayd's Tragedy;" a good play, and well acted, especially by the
younger Marshall, who is become a pretty good actor, and is the first
play I have seen in either of the houses since before the great plague,
they having acted now about fourteen days publickly. But I was in mighty
pain lest I should be seen by any body to be at a play. Soon as done I
home, and then to my office awhile, and then home and spent the night
evening my Tangier accounts, much to my satisfaction, and then to
supper, and mighty good friends with my poor wife, and so to bed.

8th. Up, and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and at noon
home to dinner, and there find Mr. Pierce and his wife and Betty, a
pretty girle, who in discourse at table told me the great Proviso passed
the House of Parliament yesterday; which makes the King and Court
mad, the King having given order to my Lord Chamberlain to send to the
playhouses and bawdy houses, to bid all the Parliament-men that were
there to go to the Parliament presently. This is true, it seems; but it
was carried against the Court by thirty or forty voices. It is a Proviso
to the Poll Bill, that there shall be a Committee of nine persons that
shall have the inspection upon oath, and power of giving others, of all
the accounts of the money given and spent for this warr. This hath a
most sad face, and will breed very ill blood. He tells me, brought in
by Sir Robert Howard, who is one of the King's servants, at least hath
a great office, and hath got, they say, L20,000 since the King come in.
Mr. Pierce did also tell me as a great truth, as being told it by Mr.
Cowly, who was by, and heard it, that Tom Killigrew should publiquely
tell the King that his matters were coming into a very ill state; but
that yet there was a way to help all, which is, says he, "There is a
good, honest, able man, that I could name, that if your Majesty would
employ, and command to see all things well executed, all things would
soon be mended; and this is one Charles Stuart, who now spends his time
in employing his lips.... about the Court, and hath no other employment;
but if you would give him this employment, he were the fittest man in
the world to perform it." This, he says, is most true; but the King do
not profit by any of this, but lays all aside, and remembers nothing,
but to his pleasures again; which is a sorrowful consideration. Very
good company we were at dinner, and merry, and after dinner, he being
gone about business, my wife and I and Mrs. Pierce and Betty and Balty,
who come to see us to-day very sick, and went home not well, together
out, and our coach broke the wheel off upon Ludgate Hill. So we were
fain to part ourselves and get room in other people's coaches, and Mrs.
Pierce and I in one, and I carried her home and set her down, and myself
to the King's playhouse, which troubles me since, and hath cost me a
forfeit of 10s., which I have paid, and there did see a good part of
"The English Monsieur," which is a mighty pretty play, very witty and
pleasant. And the women do very well; but, above all, little Nelly; that
I am mightily pleased with the play, and much with the House, more than
ever I expected, the women doing better than ever I expected, and very
fine women. Here I was in pain to be seen, and hid myself; but, as God
would have it, Sir John Chichly come, and sat just by me. Thence to Mrs.
Pierce's, and there took up my wife and away home, and to the office
and Sir W. Batten's, of whom I hear that this Proviso in Parliament is
mightily ill taken by all the Court party as a mortal blow, and that,
that strikes deep into the King's prerogative, which troubles me
mightily. Home, and set some papers right in my chamber, and then to
supper and to bed, we being in much fear of ill news of our colliers. A
fleete of two hundred sail, and fourteen Dutch men-of-war between them
and us and they coming home with small convoy; and the City in great
want, coals being at L3 3s. per chaldron, as I am told. I saw smoke in
the ruines this very day.

9th (Lord's day). Up, not to church, but to my chamber, and there begun
to enter into this book my journall of September, which in the fire-time
I could not enter here, but in loose papers. At noon dined, and then
to my chamber all the afternoon and night, looking over and tearing and
burning all the unnecessary letters, which I have had upon my file for
four or five years backward, which I intend to do quite through all my
papers, that I may have nothing by me but what is worth keeping, and fit
to be seen, if I should miscarry. At this work till midnight, and then
to supper and to bed.

10th. Up, and at my office all the morning, and several people with me,
Sir W. Warren, who I do every day more and more admire for a miracle of
cunning and forecast in his business, and then Captain Cocke, with whom
I walked in the garden, and he tells me how angry the Court is at the
late Proviso brought in by the House. How still my Lord Chancellor is,
not daring to do or say any thing to displease the Parliament; that the
Parliament is in a very ill humour, and grows every day more and more
so; and that the unskilfulness of the Court, and their difference among
one another, is the occasion of all not agreeing in what they would
have, and so they give leisure and occasion to the other part to run
away with what the Court would not have. Then comes Mr. Gawden, and he
and I in my chamber discoursing about his business, and to pay him some
Tangier orders which he delayed to receive till I had money instead of
tallies, but do promise me consideration for my victualling business for
this year, and also as Treasurer for Tangier, which I am glad of, but
would have been gladder to have just now received it. He gone, I alone
to dinner at home, my wife and her people being gone down the river
to-day for pleasure, though a cold day and dark night to come up. In the
afternoon I to the Excise Office to enter my tallies, which I did, and
come presently back again, and then to the office and did much business,
and then home to supper, my wife and people being come well and hungry
home from Erith. Then I to begin the setting of a Base to "It is
Decreed," and so to bed.

11th. Up, and to the office, where we sat, and at noon home to dinner,
a small dinner because of a good supper. After dinner my wife and I by
coach to St. Clement's Church, to Mrs. Turner's lodgings, hard by, to
take our leaves of her. She is returning into the North to her children,
where, I perceive, her husband hath clearly got the mastery of her, and
she is likely to spend her days there, which for her sake I am a little
sorry for, though for his it is but fit she should live where he hath
a mind. Here were several people come to see and take leave of her, she
going to-morrow: among others, my Lady Mordant, which was Betty Turner,
a most homely widow, but young, and pretty rich, and good natured.
Thence, having promised to write every month to her, we home, and I to
my office, while my wife to get things together for supper. Dispatching
my business at the office. Anon come our guests, old Mr. Batelier, and
his son and daughter, Mercer, which was all our company. We had a
good venison pasty and other good cheer, and as merry as in so good,
innocent, and understanding company I could be. He is much troubled
that wines, laden by him in France before the late proclamation was out,
cannot now be brought into England, which is so much to his and other
merchants' loss. We sat long at supper and then to talk, and so late
parted and so to bed. This day the Poll Bill was to be passed, and great
endeavours used to take away the Proviso.

12th. Up, and to the office, where some accounts of Mr. Gawden's were
examined, but I home most of the morning to even some accounts with Sir
H. Cholmly, Mr. Moone, and others one after another. Sir H. Cholmly did
with grief tell me how the Parliament hath been told plainly that the
King hath been heard to say, that he would dissolve them rather than
pass this Bill with the Proviso; but tells me, that the Proviso is
removed, and now carried that it shall be done by a Bill by itself. He
tells me how the King hath lately paid about L30,000

     [Two thousand pounds of this sum went to Alderman Edward Bakewell
     for two diamond rings, severally charged L1000 and L900, bought
     March 14th, 1665-66 (Second addenda to Steinman's "Memoir of the
     Duchess of Cleveland," privately printed, 1878, p. 4.).]

to clear debts of my Lady Castlemayne's; and that she and her husband
are parted for ever, upon good terms, never to trouble one another more.
He says that he hears L400,000 hath gone into the Privypurse since this
warr; and that that hath consumed so much of our money, and makes the
King and Court so mad to be brought to discover it. He gone, and after
him the rest, I to the office, and at noon to the 'Change, where the
very good newes is just come of our four ships from Smyrna, come safe
without convoy even into the Downes, without seeing any enemy; which is
the best, and indeed only considerable good newes to our Exchange, since
the burning of the City; and it is strange to see how it do cheer up
men's hearts. Here I saw shops now come to be in this Exchange, and met
little Batelier, who sits here but at L3 per annum, whereas he sat
at the other at L100, which he says he believes will prove of as good
account to him now as the other did at that rent. From the 'Change to
Captain Cocke's, and there, by agreement, dined, and there was Charles
Porter, Temple, Fern, Debasty, whose bad English and pleasant discourses
was exceeding good entertainment, Matt. Wren, Major Cooper, and myself,
mighty merry and pretty discourse. They talked for certain, that now the
King do follow Mrs. Stewart wholly, and my Lady Castlemayne not above
once a week; that the Duke of York do not haunt my Lady Denham so much;
that she troubles him with matters of State, being of my Lord Bristoll's
faction, and that he avoids; that she is ill still. After dinner I away
to the office, where we sat late upon Mr. Gawden's accounts, Sir J.
Minnes being gone home sick. I late at the office, and then home to
supper and to bed, being mightily troubled with a pain in the small of
my back, through cold, or (which I think most true) my straining last
night to get open my plate chest, in such pain all night I could not
turn myself in my bed. Newes this day from Brampton, of Mr. Ensum, my
sister's sweetheart, being dead: a clowne.

13th. Up, and to the office, where we sat. At noon to the 'Change and
there met Captain Cocke, and had a second time his direction to bespeak
L100 of plate, which I did at Sir R. Viner's, being twelve plates more,
and something else I have to choose. Thence home to dinner, and there
W. Hewer dined with me, and showed me a Gazette, in April last, which I
wonder should never be remembered by any body, which tells how several
persons were then tried for their lives, and were found guilty of a
design of killing the King and destroying the Government; and as a means
to it, to burn the City; and that the day intended for the plot was the
3rd of last September.

     [The "Gazette" of April 23rd-26th, 1666, which contains the
     following remarkable passage: "At the Sessions in the Old Bailey,
     John Rathbone, an old army colonel, William Saunders, Henry Tucker,
     Thomas Flint, Thomas Evans, John Myles, Will. Westcot, and John
     Cole, officers or soldiers in the late Rebellion, were indicted for
     conspiring the death of his Majesty and the overthrow of the
     Government.  Having laid their plot and contrivance for the
     surprisal of the Tower, the killing his Grace the Lord General, Sir
     John Robinson, Lieutenant of the Tower, and Sir Richard Brown; and
     then to have declared for an equal division of lands, &c.  The
     better to effect this hellish design, the City was to have been
     fired, and the portcullis let down to keep out all assistance; and
     the Horse Guards to have been surprised in the inns where they were
     quartered, several ostlers having been gained for that purpose.  The
     Tower was accordingly viewed, and its surprise ordered by boats over
     the moat, and from thence to scale the wall.  One Alexander, not yet
     taken, had likewise distributed money to these conspirators; and,
     for the carrying on the design more effectually, they were told of a
     Council of the great ones that sat frequently in London, from whom
     issued all orders; which Council received their directions from
     another in Holland, who sat with the States; and that the third of
     September was pitched on for the attempt, as being found by Lilly's
     Almanack, and a scheme erected for that purpose, to be a lucky day,
     a planet then ruling which prognosticated the downfall of Monarchy.
     The evidence against these persons was very full and clear, and they
     were accordingly found guilty of High Treason." See November 10th,
     1666--B.]

And the fire did indeed break out on the 2nd of September, which is
very strange, methinks, and I shall remember it. At the office all the
afternoon late, and then home to even my accounts in my Tangier book,
which I did to great content in all respects, and joy to my heart,
and so to bed. This afternoon Sir W. Warren and Mr. Moore, one after
another, walked with me in the garden, and they both tell me that my
Lord Sandwich is called home, and that he do grow more and more in
esteem everywhere, and is better spoken of, which I am mighty glad of,
though I know well enough his deserving the same before, and did foresee
that it will come to it. In mighty great pain in my back still, but I
perceive it changes its place, and do not trouble me at all in making of
water, and that is my joy, so that I believe it is nothing but a strain,
and for these three or four days I perceive my overworking of my eyes
by candlelight do hurt them as it did the last winter, that by day I am
well and do get them right, but then after candlelight they begin to be
sore and run, so that I intend to get some green spectacles.

14th. Up, and very well again of my pain in my back, it having been
nothing but cold. By coach to White Hall, seeing many smokes of the fire
by the way yet, and took up into the coach with me a country gentleman,
who asked me room to go with me, it being dirty--one come out of the
North to see his son, after the burning his house: a merchant. Here
endeavoured to wait on the Duke of York, but he would not stay from the
Parliament. So I to Westminster Hall, and there met my good friend Mr.
Evelyn, and walked with him a good while, lamenting our condition
for want of good council, and the King's minding of his business and
servants. I out to the Bell Taverne, and thither comes Doll to me....,
and after an hour's stay, away and staid in Westminster Hall till the
rising of the house, having told Mr. Evelyn, and he several others, of
my Gazette which I had about me that mentioned in April last a plot
for which several were condemned of treason at the Old Bayly for many
things, and among others for a design of burning the city on the 3rd
of September. The house sat till three o'clock, and then up: and I home
with Sir Stephen Fox to his house to dinner, and the Cofferer with us.
There I find Sir S. Fox's lady, a fine woman, and seven the prettiest
children of theirs that ever I knew almost. A very genteel dinner, and
in great state and fashion, and excellent discourse; and nothing like an
old experienced man and a courtier, and such is the Cofferer Ashburnham.
The House have been mighty hot to-day against the Paper Bill, showing
all manner of averseness to give the King money; which these courtiers
do take mighty notice of, and look upon the others as bad rebells as
ever the last were. But the courtiers did carry it against those men
upon a division of the House, a great many, that it should be committed;
and so it was: which they reckon good news. After dinner we three to
the Excise Office, and there had long discourse about our monies, but
nothing to satisfaction, that is, to shew any way of shortening the time
which our tallies take up before they become payable, which is now full
two years, which is 20 per, cent. for all the King's money for interest,
and the great disservice of his Majesty otherwise. Thence in the evening
round by coach home, where I find Foundes his present, of a fair pair of
candlesticks, and half a dozen of plates come, which cost him full L50,
and is a very good present; and here I met with, sealed up, from Sir H.
Cholmly, the lampoone, or the Mocke-Advice to a Paynter,

     [In a broadside (1680), quoted by Mr. G. T. Drury in his edition of
     Waller's Poems, 1893, satirical reference is made to the fashionable
     form of advice to the painters

               "Each puny brother of the rhyming trade
               At every turn implores the Painter's aid,
               And fondly enamoured of own foul brat
               Cries in an ecstacy, Paint this, draw that."

     The series was continued, for we find "Advice to a Painter upon the
     Defeat of the Rebels in the West and the Execution of the late Duke
     of Monmouth" ("Poems on Affairs of State," vol. ii., p. 148);
     "Advice to a Painter, being a Satire on the French King," &c., 1692,
     and "Advice to a Painter," 1697 ("Poems on Affairs of State," vol.
     ii., p. 428).]

abusing the Duke of York and my Lord Sandwich, Pen, and every body, and
the King himself, in all the matters of the navy and warr. I am sorry
for my Lord Sandwich's having so great a part in it. Then to supper and
musique, and to bed.

15th. Up and to the office, where my Lord Bruncker newly come to town,
from his being at Chatham and Harwich to spy enormities: and at noon I
with him and his lady Williams, to Captain Cocke's, where a good dinner,
and very merry. Good news to-day upon the Exchange, that our Hamburgh
fleete is got in; and good hopes that we may soon have the like of our
Gottenburgh, and then we shall be well for this winter. Very merry at
dinner. And by and by comes in Matt. Wren from the Parliament-house;
and tells us that he and all his party of the House, which is the Court
party, are fools, and have been made so this day by the wise men of
the other side; for, after the Court party had carried it yesterday so
powerfully for the Paper-Bill,

     [It was called "A Bill for raising part of the supply for his
     Majesty by an imposition on Sealed Paper and Parchment"--B.]

yet now it is laid aside wholly, and to be supplied by a land-tax; which
it is true will do well, and will be the sooner finished, which was the
great argument for the doing of it. But then it shews them fools, that
they would not permit this to have been done six weeks ago, which they
might have had. And next, they have parted with the Paper Bill, which,
when once begun, might have proved a very good flower in the Crowne, as
any there. So do really say that they are truly outwitted by the other
side. Thence away to Sir R. Viner's, and there chose some plate besides
twelve plates which I purpose to have with Captain Cocke's gift of L100,
and so home and there busy late, and then home and to bed.

16th (Lord's day). Lay long talking with my wife in bed, then up with
great content and to my chamber to set right a picture or two, Lovett
having sent me yesterday Sancta Clara's head varnished, which is very
fine, and now my closet is so full stored, and so fine, as I would never
desire to have it better. Dined without any strangers with me, which I
do not like on Sundays. Then after dinner by water to Westminster to see
Mrs. Martin, whom I found up in her chamber and ready to go abroad. I
sat there with her and her husband and others a pretty while, and then
away to White Hall, and there walked up and down to the Queen's side,
and there saw my dear Lady Castlemayne, who continues admirable,
methinks, and I do not hear but that the King is the same to her still
as ever. Anon to chapel, by the King's closet, and heard a very good
anthemne. Then with Lord Bruncker to Sir W. Coventry's chamber; and
there we sat with him and talked. He is weary of anything to do, he
says, in the Navy. He tells us this Committee of Accounts will enquire
sharply into our office. And, speaking of Sir J. Minnes, he says he will
not bear any body's faults but his own. He discoursed as bad of Sir W.
Batten almost, and cries out upon the discipline of the fleete, which is
lost, and that there is not in any of the fourth rates and under scarce
left one Sea Commander, but all young gentlemen; and what troubles
him, he hears that the gentlemen give out that in two or three years a
Tarpaulin shall not dare to look after being better than a Boatswain.
Which he is troubled at, and with good reason, and at this day Sir
Robert Holmes is mighty troubled that his brother do not command in
chief, but is commanded by Captain Hannum, who, Sir W. Coventry says,
he believes to be at least of as good blood, is a longer bred seaman, an
elder officer, and an elder commander, but such is Sir R. Holmes's pride
as never to be stopt, he being greatly troubled at my Lord Bruncker's
late discharging all his men and officers but the standing officers at
Chatham, and so are all other Commanders, and a very great cry hath been
to the King from them all in my Lord's absence. But Sir W. Coventry do
undertake to defend it, and my Lord Bruncker got ground I believe by it,
who is angry at Sir W. Batten's and Sir W. Pen's bad words concerning
it, and I have made it worse by telling him that they refuse to sign to
a paper which he and I signed on Saturday to declare the reason of his
actions, which Sir W. Coventry likes and would have it sent him and
he will sign it, which pleases me well. So we parted, and I with Lord
Bruncker to Sir P. Neale's chamber, and there sat and talked awhile,
Sir Edward Walker being there, and telling us how he hath lost many fine
rowles of antiquity in heraldry by the late fire, but hath saved the
most of his papers. Here was also Dr. Wallis, the famous scholar and
mathematician; but he promises little. Left them, and in the dark and
cold home by water, and so to supper and to read and so to bed, my eyes
being better to-day, and I cannot impute it to anything but by my being
much in the dark to-night, for I plainly find that it is only excess
of light that makes my eyes sore. This after noon I walked with Lord
Bruncker into the Park and there talked of the times, and he do think
that the King sees that he cannot never have much more money or good
from this Parliament, and that therefore he may hereafter dissolve them,
that as soon as he has the money settled he believes a peace will be
clapped up, and that there are overtures of a peace, which if such as
the Lord Chancellor can excuse he will take. For it is the Chancellor's
interest, he says, to bring peace again, for in peace he can do all and
command all, but in war he cannot, because he understands not the nature
of the war as to the management thereof. He tells me he do not believe
the Duke of York will go to sea again, though there are a great many
about the King that would be glad of any occasion to take him out of
the world, he standing in their ways; and seemed to mean the Duke of
Monmouth, who spends his time the most viciously and idly of any man,
nor will be fit for any thing; yet bespeaks as if it were not impossible
but the King would own him for his son, and that there was a marriage
between his mother and him; which God forbid should be if it be not
true, nor will the Duke of York easily be gulled in it. But this put to
our other distractions makes things appear very sad, and likely to be
the occasion of much confusion in a little time, and my Lord Bruncker
seems to say that nothing can help us but the King's making a peace soon
as he hath this money; and thereby putting himself out of debt, and
so becoming a good husband, and then he will neither need this nor any
other Parliament, till he can have one to his mind: for no Parliament
can, as he says, be kept long good, but they will spoil one another, and
that therefore it hath been the practice of kings to tell Parliaments
what he hath for them to do, and give them so long time to do it in, and
no longer. Harry Kembe, one of our messengers, is lately dead.

17th. Up, and several people to speak with me, and then comes Mr.
Caesar, and then Goodgroome, and, what with one and the other, nothing
but musique with me this morning, to my great content; and the more, to
see that God Aimighty hath put me into condition to bear the charge of
all this. So out to the 'Change, and did a little business, and then
home, where they two musicians and Mr. Cooke come to see me, and Mercer
to go along with my wife this afternoon to a play. To dinner, and then
our company all broke up, and to my chamber to do several things. Among
other things, to write a letter to my Lord Sandwich, it being one of
the burdens upon my mind that I have not writ to him since he went into
Spain, but now I do intend to give him a brief account of our whole
year's actions since he went, which will make amends. My wife well home
in the evening from the play; which I was glad of, it being cold and
dark, and she having her necklace of pearl on, and none but Mercer with
her. Spent the evening in fitting my books, to have the number set upon
each, in order to my having an alphabet of my whole, which will be of
great ease to me. This day Captain Batters come from sea in his fireship
and come to see me, poor man, as his patron, and a poor painful wretch
he is as can be. After supper to bed.

18th. Up, and to the office, where I hear the ill news that poor
Batters, that had been born and bred a seaman, and brought up his ship
from sea but yesterday, was, going down from me to his ship, drowned in
the Thames, which is a sad fortune, and do make me afeard, and will do,
more than ever I was. At noon dined at home, and then by coach to my
Lord Bellasses, but not at home. So to Westminster Hall, where the Lords
are sitting still, I to see Mrs. Martin, who is very well, and intends
to go abroad to-morrow after her childbed. She do tell me that this
child did come is 'meme jour that it ought to hazer after my avoir ete
con elle before her marid did venir home.... Thence to the Swan, and
there I sent for Sarah, and mighty merry we were.... So to Sir Robert
Viner's about my plate, and carried home another dozen of plates, which
makes my stock of plates up 2 1/2 dozen, and at home find Mr. Thomas
Andrews, with whom I staid and talked a little and invited him to dine
with me at Christmas, and then I to the office, and there late doing
business, and so home and to bed. Sorry for poor Batters.

19th. Up, and by water down to White Hall, and there with the.Duke of
York did our usual business, but nothing but complaints of want of money
[without] success, and Sir W. Coventry's complaint of the defects of our
office (indeed Sir J. Minnes's) without any amendment, and he tells us
so plainly of the Committee of Parliament's resolution to enquire home
into all our managements that it makes me resolve to be wary, and to
do all things betimes to be ready for them. Thence going away met Mr.
Hingston the organist (my old acquaintance) in the Court, and I took him
to the Dog Taverne and got him to set me a bass to my "It is decreed,"
which I think will go well, but he commends the song not knowing the
words, but says the ayre is good, and believes the words are plainly
expressed. He is of my mind against having of 8ths unnecessarily in
composition. This did all please me mightily. Then to talk of the King's
family. He says many of the musique are ready to starve, they being five
years behindhand for their wages; nay, Evens, the famous man upon the
Harp having not his equal in the world, did the other day die for mere
want, and was fain to be buried at the almes of the parish, and carried
to his grave in the dark at night without one linke, but that Mr.
Hingston met it by chance, and did give 12d. to buy two or three links.
He says all must come to ruin at this rate, and I believe him. Thence I
up to the Lords' House to enquire for Lord Bellasses; and there hear how
at a conference this morning between the two Houses about the business
of the Canary Company, my Lord Buckingham leaning rudely over my Lord
Marquis Dorchester, my Lord Dorchester removed his elbow. Duke of
Buckingham asked him whether he was uneasy; Dorchester replied, yes, and
that he durst not do this were he any where else: Buckingham replied,
yes he would, and that he was a better man than himself; Dorchester
answered that he lyed. With this Buckingham struck off his hat, and
took him by his periwigg, and pulled it aside, and held him. My Lord
Chamberlain and others interposed, and, upon coming into the House,
the Lords did order them both to the Tower, whither they are to go this
afternoon. I down into the Hall, and there the Lieutenant of the Tower
took me with him, and would have me to the Tower to dinner; where
I dined at the head of his table, next his lady,' who is comely and
seeming sober and stately, but very proud and very cunning, or I am
mistaken, and wanton, too. This day's work will bring the Lieutenant of
the Tower L350. But a strange, conceited, vain man he is that ever I met
withal, in his own praise, as I have heretofore observed of him. Thence
home, and upon Tower Hill saw about 3 or 400 seamen get together;
and one, standing upon a pile of bricks, made his sign, with his
handkercher, upon his stick, and called all the rest to him, and several
shouts they gave. This made me afeard; so I got home as fast as I could.
And hearing of no present hurt did go to Sir Robert Viner's about my
plate again, and coming home do hear of 1000 seamen said in the streets
to be in armes. So in great fear home, expecting to find a tumult about
my house, and was doubtful of my riches there. But I thank God I found
all well. But by and by Sir W. Batten and Sir R. Ford do tell me, that
the seamen have been at some prisons, to release some seamen, and the
Duke of Albemarle is in armes, and all the Guards at the other end of
the town; and the Duke of Albemarle is gone with some forces to Wapping,
to quell the seamen; which is a thing of infinite disgrace to us. I sat
long talking with them; and, among other things, Sir R. Ford did make me
understand how the House of Commons is a beast not to be understood,
it being impossible to know beforehand the success almost of any small
plain thing, there being so many to think and speak to any business, and
they of so uncertain minds and interests and passions. He did tell me,
and so did Sir W. Batten, how Sir Allen Brodericke and Sir Allen Apsly
did come drunk the other day into the House, and did both speak for half
an hour together, and could not be either laughed, or pulled, or bid
to sit down and hold their peace, to the great contempt of the King's
servants and cause; which I am grieved at with all my heart. We were
full in discourse of the sad state of our times, and the horrid shame
brought on the King's service by the just clamours of the poor seamen,
and that we must be undone in a little time. Home full of trouble on
these considerations, and, among other things, I to my chamber, and
there to ticket a good part of my books, in order to the numbering of
them for my easy finding them to read as I have occasion. So to supper
and to bed, with my heart full of trouble.

20th. Up, and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and here
among other things come Captain Cocke, and I did get him to sign me a
note for the L100 to pay for the plate he do present me with, which I am
very glad of. At noon home to dinner, where was Balty come, who is well
again, and the most recovered in his countenance that ever I did see.
Here dined with me also Mrs. Batters, poor woman! now left a sad widow
by the drowning of her husband the other day. I pity her, and will do
her what kindness I can; yet I observe something of ill-nature in myself
more than should be, that I am colder towards her in my charity than I
should be to one so painful as he and she have been and full of kindness
to their power to my wife and I. After dinner out with Balty, setting
him down at the Maypole in the Strand, and then I to my Lord Bellasses,
and there spoke with Mr. Moone about some business, and so away home
to my business at the office, and then home to supper and to bed,
after having finished the putting of little papers upon my books to be
numbered hereafter.

21st. Lay long, and when up find Mrs. Clerk of Greenwich and her
daughter Daniel, their business among other things was a request her
daughter was to make, so I took her into my chamber, and there it was to
help her husband to the command of a little new pleasure boat building,
which I promised to assist in. And here I had opportunity 'para baiser
elle, and toucher ses mamailles'.... Then to the office, and there did
a little business, and then to the 'Change and did the like. So home
to dinner, and spent all the afternoon in putting some things, pictures
especially, in order, and pasting my Lady Castlemayne's print on a
frame, which I have made handsome, and is a fine piece. So to the
office in the evening to marshall my papers of accounts presented to the
Parliament, against any future occasion to recur to them, which I did do
to my great content. So home and did some Tangier work, and so to bed.

22nd. At the office all the morning, and there come news from Hogg that
our shipp hath brought in a Lubecker to Portsmouth, likely to prove
prize, of deals, which joys us. At noon home to dinner, and then Sir W.
Pen, Sir R. Ford, and I met at Sir W. Batten's to examine our papers,
and have great hopes to prove her prize, and Sir R. Ford I find a
mighty yare--[Quick or ready, a naval term frequently used by
Shakespeare.]--man in this business, making exceeding good observations
from the papers on our behalf. Hereupon concluded what to write to Hogg
and Middleton, which I did, and also with Mr. Oviatt (Sir R. Ford's son,
who is to be our solicitor), to fee some counsel in the Admiralty, but
none in town. So home again, and after writing letters by the post,
I with all my clerks and Carcasse and Whitfield to the ticket-office,
there to be informed in the method and disorder of the office, which I
find infinite great, of infinite concernment to be mended, and did
spend till 12 at night to my great satisfaction, it being a point of our
office I was wholly unacquainted in. So with great content home and to
bed.

23rd (Lord's day). Up and alone to church, and meeting Nan Wright at the
gate had opportunity to take two or three 'baisers', and so to church,
where a vain fellow with a periwigg preached, Chaplain, as by his prayer
appeared, to the Earl of Carlisle? Home, and there dined with us Betty
Michell and her husband. After dinner to White Hall by coach, and took
them with me. And in the way I would have taken 'su main' as I did the
last time, but she did in a manner withhold it. So set them down at
White Hall, and I to the Chapel to find Dr. Gibbons, and from him to the
Harp and Ball to transcribe the treble which I would have him to set
a bass to. But this took me so much time, and it growing night, I was
fearful of missing a coach, and therefore took a coach and to rights
to call Michell and his wife at their father Howlett's, and so home, it
being cold, and the ground all snow.... They gone I to my chamber, and
with my brother and wife did number all my books in my closet, and took
a list of their names, which pleases me mightily, and is a jobb I wanted
much to have done. Then to supper and to bed.

24th. Up, and to the office, where Lord Bruncker, [Sir] J. Mimics, [Sir]
W. Yen, and myself met, and there I did use my notes I took on Saturday
night about tickets, and did come to a good settlement in the business
of that office, if it be kept to, this morning being a meeting on
purpose. At noon to prevent my Lord Bruncker's dining here I walked as
if upon business with him, it being frost and dry, as far as Paul's,
and so back again through the City by Guildhall, observing the ruines
thereabouts, till I did truly lose myself, and so home to dinner. I do
truly find that I have overwrought my eyes, so that now they are become
weak and apt to be tired, and all excess of light makes them sore, so
that now to the candlelight I am forced to sit by, adding, the snow
upon the ground all day, my eyes are very bad, and will be worse if not
helped, so my Lord Bruncker do advise as a certain cure to use greene
spectacles, which I will do. So to dinner, where Mercer with us, and
very merry. After dinner she goes and fetches a little son of Mr.
Backeworth's, the wittiest child and of the most spirit that ever I saw
in my life for discourse of all kind, and so ready and to the purpose,
not above four years old. Thence to Sir Robert Viner's, and there paid
for the plate I have bought to the value of L94, with the L100 Captain
Cocke did give me to that purpose, and received the rest in money. I
this evening did buy me a pair of green spectacles, to see whether
they will help my eyes or no. So to the 'Change, and went to the Upper
'Change, which is almost as good as the old one; only shops are but on
one side. Then home to the office, and did business till my eyes began
to be bad, and so home to supper. My people busy making mince pies, and
so to bed. No newes yet of our Gottenburgh fleete; which makes [us] have
some fears, it being of mighty concernment to have our supply of masts
safe. I met with Mr. Cade to-night, my stationer; and he tells me that
he hears for certain that the Queene-Mother is about and hath near
finished a peace with France, which, as a Presbyterian, he do not like,
but seems to fear it will be a means to introduce Popery.

25th (Christmas day). Lay pretty long in bed, and then rose, leaving my
wife desirous to sleep, having sat up till four this morning seeing her
mayds make mince-pies. I to church, where our parson Mills made a good
sermon. Then home, and dined well on some good ribbs of beef roasted and
mince pies; only my wife, brother, and Barker, and plenty of good wine
of my owne, and my heart full of true joy; and thanks to God Almighty
for the goodness of my condition at this day. After dinner, I begun
to teach my wife and Barker my song, "It is decreed," which pleases me
mightily as now I have Mr. Hinxton's base. Then out and walked alone on
foot to the Temple, it being a fine frost, thinking to have seen a play
all alone; but there, missing of any bills, concluded there was none,
and so back home; and there with my brother reducing the names of all
my books to an alphabet, which kept us till 7 or 8 at night, and then
to supper, W. Hewer with us, and pretty merry, and then to my chamber
to enter this day's journal only, and then to bed. My head a little
thoughtfull how to behave myself in the business of the victualling,
which I think will be prudence to offer my service in doing something in
passing the pursers' accounts, thereby to serve the King, get honour to
myself, and confirm me in my place in the victualling, which at present
yields not work enough to deserve my wages.

26th. Up, and walked all the way (it being a most fine frost), to White
Hall, to Sir W. Coventry's chamber, and thence with him up to the
Duke of York, where among other things at our meeting I did offer my
assistance to Sir J. Minnes to do the business of his office, relating
to the Pursers' accounts, which was well accepted by the Duke of York,
and I think I have and shall do myself good in it, if it be taken, for
it will confirm me in the business of the victualling office, which I do
now very little for. Thence home, carrying a barrel of oysters with me.
Anon comes Mr. John Andrews and his wife by invitation from Bow to dine
with me, and young Batelier and his wife with her great belly, which has
spoiled her looks mightily already. Here was also Mercer and Creed,
whom I met coming home, who tells me of a most bitter lampoone now out
against the Court and the management of State from head to foot, mighty
witty and mighty severe. By and by to dinner, a very good one, and
merry. After dinner I put the women into a coach, and they to the Duke's
house, to a play which was acted, "The--------." It was indifferently
done, but was not pleased with the song, Gosnell not singing, but a new
wench, that sings naughtily. Thence home, all by coach, and there Mr.
Andrews to the vyall, who plays most excellently on it, which I did
not know before. Then to dance, here being Pembleton come, by my wife's
direction, and a fiddler; and we got, also, the elder Batelier to-night,
and Nan Wright, and mighty merry we were, and I danced; and so till
twelve at night, and to supper, and then to cross purposes, mighty
merry, and then to bed, my eyes being sore. Creed lay here in Barker's
bed.

27th. Up; and called up by the King's trumpets, which cost me 10s. So
to the office, where we sat all the morning. At noon, by invitation, my
wife, who had not been there these to months, I think, and I, to meet
all our families at Sir W. Batten's at dinner, whither neither a great
dinner for so much company nor anything good or handsome. In the middle
of dinner I rose, and my wife, and by coach to the King's playhouse,
and meeting Creed took him up, and there saw "The Scornfull Lady" well
acted; Doll Common doing Abigail most excellently, and Knipp the widow
very well, and will be an excellent actor, I think. In other parts the
play not so well done as used to be, by the old actors. Anon to White
Hall by coach, thinking to have seen a play there to-night, but found
it a mistake, so back again, and missed our coach[man], who was gone,
thinking to come time enough three hours hence, and we could not blame
him. So forced to get another coach, and all three home to my house, and
there to Sir W. Batten's, and eat a bit of cold chine of beef, and
then staid and talked, and then home and sat and talked a little by the
fireside with my wife and Creed, and so to bed, my left eye being very
sore. No business publick or private minded all these two days. This
day a house or two was blown up with powder in the Minorys, and several
people spoiled, and many dug out from under the rubbish.

28th. Up, and Creed and I walked (a very fine walk in the frost) to my
Lord Bellasses, but missing him did find him at White Hall, and there
spoke with him about some Tangier business. That done, we to Creed's
lodgings, which are very pretty, but he is going from them. So we to
Lincoln's Inne Fields, he to Ned Pickering's, who it seems lives there,
keeping a good house, and I to my Lord Crew's, where I dined, and hear
the newes how my Lord's brother, Mr. Nathaniel Crew, hath an estate of 6
or L700 per annum, left him by the death of an old acquaintance of his,
but not akin to him at all. And this man is dead without will, but had,
above ten years since, made over his estate to this Mr. Crew, to him and
his heirs for ever, and given Mr. Crew the keeping of the deeds in
his own hand all this time; by which, if he would, he might have taken
present possession of the estate, for he knew what they were. This is as
great an act of confident friendship as this latter age, I believe,
can shew. From hence to the Duke's house, and there saw "Macbeth" most
excellently acted, and a most excellent play for variety. I had sent for
my wife to meet me there, who did come, and after the play was done, I
out so soon to meet her at the other door that I left my cloake in the
playhouse, and while I returned to get it, she was gone out and missed
me, and with W. Hewer away home. I not sorry for it much did go to White
Hall, and got my Lord Bellasses to get me into the playhouse; and
there, after all staying above an hour for the players, the King and all
waiting, which was absurd, saw "Henry the Fifth" well done by the Duke's
people, and in most excellent habits, all new vests, being put on but
this night. But I sat so high and far off, that I missed most of the
words, and sat with a wind coming into my back and neck, which did much
trouble me. The play continued till twelve at night; and then up, and a
most horrid cold night it was, and frosty, and moonshine. But the worst
was, I had left my cloak at Sir G. Carteret's, and they being abed I was
forced to go home without it. So by chance got a coach and to the Golden
Lion Taverne in the Strand, and there drank some mulled sack, and so
home, where find my poor wife staying for me, and then to bed mighty
cold.

29th. Up, called up with newes from Sir W. Batten that Hogg hath brought
in two prizes more: and so I thither, and hear the particulars, which
are good; one of them, if prize, being worth L4,000: for which God be
thanked! Then to the office, and have the newes brought us of Captain
Robinson's coming with his fleete from Gottenburgh: dispersed, though,
by foul weather. But he hath light of five Dutch men-of-war, and taken
three, whereof one is sunk; which is very good newes to close up the
year with, and most of our merchantmen already heard of to be safely
come home, though after long lookings-for, and now to several ports,
as they could make them. At noon home to dinner, where Balty is and
now well recovered. Then to the office to do business, and at night, it
being very cold, home to my chamber, and there late writing, but my
left eye still very sore. I write by spectacles all this night, then to
supper and to bed. This day's good news making me very lively, only the
arrears of much business on my hands and my accounts to be settled for
the whole year past do lie as a weight on my mind.

30th (Lord's day). Lay long, however up and to church, where Mills made
a good sermon. Here was a collection for the sexton; but it come into my
head why we should be more bold in making the collection while the
psalm is singing, than in the sermon or prayer. Home, and, without
any strangers, to dinner, and then all the afternoon and evening in my
chamber preparing all my accounts in good condition against to-morrow,
to state them for the whole year past, to which God give me a good issue
when I come to close them! So to supper and to bed.

31st. Rising this day with a full design to mind nothing else but to
make up my accounts for the year past, I did take money, and walk forth
to several places in the towne as far as the New Exchange, to pay all
my debts, it being still a very great frost and good walking. I staid at
the Fleece Tavern in Covent Garden while my boy Tom went to W. Joyce's
to pay what I owed for candles there. Thence to the New Exchange to
clear my wife's score, and so going back again I met Doll Lane (Mrs.
Martin's sister), with another young woman of the Hall, one Scott, and
took them to the Half Moon Taverne and there drank some burnt wine with
them, without more pleasure, and so away home by coach, and there to
dinner, and then to my accounts, wherein, at last, I find them clear and
right; but, to my great discontent, do find that my gettings this year
have been L573 less than my last: it being this year in all but L2,986;
whereas, the last, I got L3,560. And then again my spendings this year
have exceeded my spendings the last by L644: my whole spendings last
year being but L509; whereas this year, it appears, I have spent L1154,
which is a sum not fit to be said that ever I should spend in one year,
before I am master of a better estate than I am. Yet, blessed be God!
and I pray God make me thankful for it, I do find myself worth in money,
all good, above L6,200; which is above L1800 more than I was the last
year. This, I trust in God, will make me thankfull for what I have,
and carefull to make up by care next year what by my negligence and
prodigality I have lost and spent this year. The doing of this, and
entering of it fair, with the sorting of all my expenses, to see how
and in what points I have exceeded, did make it late work, till my eyes
become very sore and ill, and then did give over, and supper, and to
bed. Thus ends this year of publick wonder and mischief to this nation,
and, therefore, generally wished by all people to have an end. Myself
and family well, having four mayds and one clerk, Tom, in my house, and
my brother, now with me, to spend time in order to his preferment.
Our healths all well, only my eyes with overworking them are sore as
candlelight comes to them, and not else; publick matters in a most sad
condition; seamen discouraged for want of pay, and are become not to be
governed: nor, as matters are now, can any fleete go out next year.
Our enemies, French and Dutch, great, and grow more by our poverty. The
Parliament backward in raising, because jealous of the spending of
the money; the City less and less likely to be built again, every body
settling elsewhere, and nobody encouraged to trade. A sad, vicious,
negligent Court, and all sober men there fearful of the ruin of the
whole kingdom this next year; from which, good God deliver us! One thing
I reckon remarkable in my owne condition is, that I am come to abound in
good plate, so as at all entertainments to be served wholly with silver
plates, having two dozen and a half.

     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS, PEPY'S DIARY, 1966 N.S., COMPLETE:

     A cat will be a cat still
     About the nature of sounds
     About my new closet, for my mind is full of nothing but that
     After a harsh word or two my wife and I good friends
     All the innocent pleasure in the world
     Amending of bad blood by borrowing from a better body
     And if ever I fall on it again, I deserve to be undone
     And for his beef, says he, "Look how fat it is"
     Angry, and so continued till bed, and did not sleep friends
     Apprehension of the King of France's invading us
     As very a gossip speaking of her neighbours as any body
     Ashamed at myself for this losse of time
     Baited at Islington, and so late home about 11 at night
     Beare-garden
     Begun to write idle and from the purpose
     Being there, and seeming to do something, while we do not
     Being examined at Allgate, whether we were husbands and wives
     Being five years behindhand for their wages (court musicians)
     Better the musique, the more sicke it makes him
     Bill against importing Irish cattle
     Bringing over one discontented man, you raise up three
     But pretty!  how I took another pretty woman for her
     But fit she should live where he hath a mind
     But how many years I cannot tell; but my wife says ten
     By and by met at her chamber, and there did what I would
     Called at a little ale-house, and had an eele pye
     Catholiques are everywhere and bold
     Checking her last night in the coach in her long stories
     Contempt of the ceremoniousnesse of the King of Spayne
     Counterfeit mirthe and pleasure with them, but had but little
     Did tumble them all the afternoon as I pleased
     Did drink of the College beer, which is very good
     Did dig another, and put our wine in it; and I my Parmazan cheese
     Discoursing upon the sad condition of the times
     Do bury still of the plague seven or eight in a day
     Driven down again with a stinke by Sir W. Pen's shying of a pot
     Durst not ask any body how it was with us
     Evelyn, who cries out against it, and calls it bitchering
     Exceeding kind to me, more than usual, which makes me afeard
     Fashion, the King says; he will never change
     Fire grow; and, as it grew darker, appeared more and more
     First their apes, that they may be afterwards their slaves
     For a land-tax and against a general excise
     Foretelling the draught of water of a ship before she be launche
     Gladder to have just now received it (than a promise)
     Good sport of the bull's tossing of the dogs
     Got her upon my knee (the coach being full) and played with her
     Great fire they saw in the City
     Great deale of tittle tattle discourse to little purpose
     Great newes of the Swedes declaring for us against the Dutch
     He is such innocent company
     He has been inconvenienced by being too free in discourse
     Here I first saw oranges grow
     Horrid malicious bloody flame
     I to bed even by daylight
     I do not value her, or mind her as I ought
     I did what I would, and might have done anything else
     I never did observe so much of myself in my life
     I had six noble dishes for them, dressed by a man-cook
     In opposition to France, had made us throw off their fashion
     King hath lost his power, by submitting himself to this way
     King be desired to put all Catholiques out of employment
     Lady Duchesse the veryest slut and drudge
     Last act of friendship in telling me of my faults also
     Listening to no reasoning for it, be it good or bad
     Long petticoat dragging under their men's coats
     Magnifying the graces of the nobility and prelates
     Many women now-a-days of mean sort in the streets, but no men
     Mass, and some of their musique, which is not so contemptible
     Mightily pleased with myself for the business that I have done
     Mightily vexed at my being abroad with these women
     Milke, which I drank to take away, my heartburne
     Most homely widow, but young, and pretty rich, and good natured
     Never fought with worse officers in his life
     No Parliament can, as he says, be kept long good
     No manner of means used to quench the fire
     No money to do it with, nor anybody to trust us without it
     Not being well pleased with her over free and loose company
     Not permit her begin to do so, lest worse should follow
     Now very big, and within a fortnight of lying down
     Offered to stop the fire near his house for such a reward
     Origin in the use of a plane against the grain of the wood
     Out also to and fro, to see and be seen
     Pain to ride in a coach with them, for fear of being seen
     Peace with France, which, as a Presbyterian, he do not like
     Play on the harpsicon, till she tired everybody
     Plot in it, and that the French had done it
     Providing against a foule day to get as much money into my hands
     Put up with too much care, that I have forgot where they are
     Rather hear a cat mew, than the best musique in the world
     Reading over my dear "Faber fortunae," of my Lord Bacon's
     Reading to my wife and brother something in Chaucer
     Rejoiced over head and ears in this good newes
     Removing goods from one burned house to another
     Requisite I be prepared against the man's friendship
     Sad sight it was: the whole City almost on fire
     Said that there hath been a design to poison the King
     Sang till about twelve at night, with mighty pleasure
     Says, of all places, if there be hell, it is here
     Scotch song of "Barbary Allen"
     Send up and down for a nurse to take the girle home
     Shy of any warr hereafter, or to prepare better for it
     So home to supper, and to bed, it being my wedding night
     So back again home to supper and to bed with great pleasure
     So to bed in some little discontent, but no words from me
     So home and to supper with beans and bacon and to bed
     Staying out late, and painting in the absence of her husband
     Tax the same man in three or four several capacities
     That I may have nothing by me but what is worth keeping
     That I may look as a man minding business
     The gentlemen captains will undo us
     The very rum man must have L200
     Thence to Mrs. Martin's, and did what I would with her
     There did what 'je voudrais avec' her....
     There did 'tout ce que je voudrais avec' her
     There I did lay the beginnings of a future 'amour con elle'
     There did what I would with her
     Think that we are beaten in every respect
     This is the use we make of our fathers
     This unhappinesse of ours do give them heart
     Through want of money and good conduct
     Time spending, and no money to set anything in hand
     To bed, after washing my legs and feet with warm water
     Too late for them to enjoy it with any pleasure
     Too much ill newes true, to afflict ourselves with uncertain
     Took him home the money, and, though much to my grief
     Tooke my wife well dressed into the Hall to see and be seen
     Tooth-ake made him no company, and spoilt ours
     Unless my too-much addiction to pleasure undo me
     Venison-pasty that we have for supper to-night to the cook's
     Weary of the following of my pleasure
     What I had writ foule in short hand
     What itching desire I did endeavour to see Bagwell's wife
     Wherewith to give every body something for their pains
     Who must except against every thing and remedy nothing
     With a shower of hail as big as walnuts
     World sees now the use of them for shelter of men (fore-castles)
     Ye pulling down of houses, in ye way of ye fire
     Young man play the foole upon the doctrine of purgatory







End of Project Gutenberg's Diary of Samuel Pepys, 1666, by Samuel Pepys

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, 1666 ***

***** This file should be named 4171.txt or 4171.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/1/7/4171/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
