Project Gutenberg's Diary of Samuel Pepys, January 1966/67, by Samuel Pepys

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Diary of Samuel Pepys, January 1966/67

Author: Samuel Pepys

Release Date: December 1, 2004 [EBook #4172]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***




Produced by David Widger





                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A. F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.

                                1667 N.S.

                                 JANUARY
                                1666-1667

January 1st.  Lay long, being a bitter, cold, frosty day, the frost being
now grown old, and the Thames covered with ice.  Up, and to the office,
where all the morning busy.  At noon to the 'Change a little, where Mr.
James Houblon and I walked a good while speaking of our ill condition in
not being able to set out a fleet (we doubt) this year, and the certain
ill effect that must bring, which is lamentable.  Home to dinner, where
the best powdered goose that ever I eat.  Then to the office again, and to
Sir W. Batten's to examine the Commission going down to Portsmouth to
examine witnesses about our prizes, of which God give a good issue! and
then to the office again, where late, and so home, my eyes sore.  To
supper and to bed.

2nd.  Up, I, and walked to White Hall to attend the Duke of York, as
usual.  My wife up, and with Mrs. Pen to walk in the fields to frost-bite
themselves.  I find the Court full of great apprehensions of the French,
who have certainly shipped landsmen, great numbers, at Brest; and most of
our people here guess his design for Ireland.  We have orders to send all
the ships we can possible to the Downes.  God have mercy on us! for we can
send forth no ships without men, nor will men go without money, every day
bringing us news of new mutinies among the seamen; so that our condition
is like to be very miserable.  Thence to Westminster Hall, and there met
all the Houblons, who do laugh at this discourse of the French, and say
they are verily of opinion it is nothing but to send to their plantation
in the West Indys, and that we at Court do blow up a design of invading
us, only to make the Parliament make more haste in the money matters, and
perhaps it may be so, but I do not believe we have any such plot in our
heads.  After them, I, with several people, among others Mr. George
Montagu, whom I have not seen long, he mighty kind.  He tells me all is
like to go ill, the King displeasing the House of Commons by evading their
Bill for examining Accounts, and putting it into a Commission, though
therein he hath left out Coventry and I and named all the rest the
Parliament named, and all country Lords, not one Courtier: this do not
please them.  He tells me he finds the enmity almost over for my Lord
Sandwich, and that now all is upon the Vice-Chamberlain, who bears up well
and stands upon his vindication, which he seems to like well, and the
others do construe well also.  Thence up to the Painted Chamber, and there
heard a conference between the House of Lords and Commons about the Wine
Patent; which I was exceeding glad to be at, because of my hearing
exceeding good discourses, but especially from the Commons; among others,
Mr. Swinfen, and a young man, one Sir Thomas Meres:  and do outdo the
Lords infinitely.  So down to the Hall and to the Rose Taverne, while Doll
Lane come to me, and we did 'biber a good deal de vino, et je did give
elle twelve soldis para comprare elle some gans' for a new anno's gift
.  .  .  . Thence to the Hall again, and with Sir W. Pen by coach to the
Temple, and there 'light and eat a bit at an ordinary by, and then alone
to the King's House, and there saw "The Custome of the Country," the
second time of its being acted, wherein Knipp does the Widow well; but, of
all the plays that ever I did see, the worst-having neither plot,
language, nor anything in the earth that is acceptable; only Knipp sings a
little song admirably.  But fully the worst play that ever I saw or I
believe shall see.  So away home, much displeased for the loss of so much
time, and disobliging my wife by being there without her.  So, by link,
walked home, it being mighty cold but dry, yet bad walking because very
slippery with the frost and treading. Home and to my chamber to set down
my journal, and then to thinking upon establishing my vows against the
next year, and so to supper and to bed.

3rd.  Up, and to the office, where we sat all the morning.  At noon by
invitation to dinner to Sir W. Pen's, where my Lord Bruncker, Sir W.
Batten, and his lady, myself, and wife, Sir J. Minnes, and Mr. Turner and
his wife.  Indifferent merry, to which I contributed the most, but a mean
dinner, and in a mean manner.  In the evening a little to the office, and
then to them, where I found them at cards, myself very ill with a cold
(the frost continuing hard), so eat but little at supper, but very merry,
and late home to bed, not much pleased with the manner of our
entertainment, though to myself more civil than to any.  This day, I hear,
hath been a conference between the two Houses about the Bill for examining
Accounts, wherein the House of Lords their proceedings in petitioning the
King for doing it by Commission is, in great heat, voted by the Commons,
after the conference, unparliamentary.  The issue whereof, God knows.

4th.  Up, and seeing things put in order for a dinner at my house to-day,
I to the office awhile, and about noon home, and there saw all things in
good order.  Anon comes our company; my Lord Bruncker, Sir W. Pen, his
lady, and Pegg, and her servant, Mr. Lowther, my Lady Batten (Sir W.
Batten being forced to dine at Sir K. Ford's, being invited), Mr. Turner
and his wife.  Here I had good room for ten, and no more would my table
have held well, had Sir J. Minnes, who was fallen lame, and his sister,
and niece, and Sir W. Batten come, which was a great content to me to be
without them.  I did make them all gaze to see themselves served so nobly
in plate, and a neat dinner, indeed, though but of seven dishes.  Mighty
merry I was and made them all, and they mightily pleased.  My Lord
Bruncker went away after dinner to the ticket-office, the rest staid, only
my Lady Batten home, her ague-fit coming on her at table.  The rest merry,
and to cards, and then to sing and talk, and at night to sup, and then to
cards; and, last of all, to have a flaggon of ale and apples, drunk out of
a wood cupp,

     [A mazer or drinking-bowl turned out of some kind of wood, by
     preference of maple, and especially the spotted or speckled variety
     called "bird's-eye maple" (see W. H. St. John Hope's paper, "On the
     English Mediaeval Drinking-bowls called Mazers," "Archaeologia,"
     vol.  50, pp. 129,93).]

as a Christmas draught, made all merry; and they full of admiration at my
plate, particularly my flaggons (which, indeed, are noble), and so late
home, all with great mirth and satisfaction to them, as I thought, and to
myself to see all I have and do so much outdo for neatness and plenty
anything done by any of them.  They gone, I to bed, much pleased, and do
observe Mr. Lowther to be a pretty gentleman, and, I think, too good for
Peg; and, by the way, Peg Pen seems mightily to be kind to me, and I
believe by her father's advice, who is also himself so; but I believe not
a little troubled to see my plenty, and was much troubled to hear the song
I sung, "The New Droll"--it touching him home.  So to bed.

5th.  At the office all the morning, thinking at noon to have been taken
home, and my wife (according to appointment yesterday), by my Lord
Bruncker, to dinner and then to a play, but he had forgot it, at which I
was glad, being glad of avoyding the occasion of inviting him again, and
being forced to invite his doxy, Mrs. Williams.  So home, and took a small
snap of victuals, and away, with my wife, to the Duke's house, and there
saw "Mustapha," a most excellent play for words and design as ever I did
see.  I had seen it before but forgot it, so it was wholly new to me,
which is the pleasure of my not committing these things to my memory.
Home, and a little to the office, and then to bed, where I lay with much
pain in my head most of the night, and very unquiet, partly by my drinking
before I went out too great a draught of sack, and partly my eyes being
still very sore.

6th (Lord's day).  Up pretty well in the morning, and then to church,
where a dull doctor, a stranger, made a dull sermon.  Then home, and Betty
Michell and her husband come by invitation to dine with us, and, she I
find the same as ever (which I was afraid of the contrary) .  .  . Here
come also Mr. Howe to dine with me, and we had a good dinner and good
merry discourse with much pleasure, I enjoying myself mightily to have
friends at my table.  After dinner young Michell and I, it being an
excellent frosty day to walk, did walk out, he showing me the baker's
house in Pudding Lane, where the late great fire begun; and thence all
along Thames Street, where I did view several places, and so up by London
Wall, by Blackfriars, to Ludgate; and thence to Bridewell, which I find to
have been heretofore an extraordinary good house, and a fine coming to it,
before the house by the bridge was built; and so to look about St. Bride's
church and my father's house, and so walked home, and there supped
together, and then Michell and Betty home, and I to my closet, there to
read and agree upon my vows for next year, and so to bed and slept mighty
well.

7th.  Lay long in bed.  Then up and to the office, where busy all the
morning.  At noon (my wife being gone to Westminster) I with my Lord
Bruncker by coach as far as the Temple, in the way he telling me that my
Lady Denham is at last dead.  Some suspect her poisoned, but it will be
best known when her body is opened, which will be to-day, she dying
yesterday morning.  The Duke of York is troubled for her; but hath
declared he will never have another public mistress again; which I shall
be glad of, and would the King would do the like.  He tells me how the
Parliament is grown so jealous of the King's being unfayre to them in the
business of the Bill for examining Accounts, Irish Bill, and the business
of the Papists, that they will not pass the business for money till they
see themselves secure that those Bills will pass; which they do observe
the Court to keep off till all the Bills come together, that the King may
accept what he pleases, and what he pleases to reject, which will undo all
our business and the kingdom too.  He tells me how Mr. Henry Howard, of
Norfolke, hath given our Royal Society all his grandfather's library:
which noble gift they value at L1000; and gives them accommodation to meet
in at his house, Arundell House, they being now disturbed at Gresham
College.  Thence 'lighting at the Temple to the ordinary hard by and eat a
bit of meat, and then by coach to fetch my wife from her brother's, and
thence to the Duke's house, and saw "Macbeth," which, though I saw it
lately, yet appears a most excellent play in all respects, but especially
in divertisement, though it be a deep tragedy; which is a strange
perfection in a tragedy, it being most proper here, and suitable.  So
home, it being the last play now I am to see till a fortnight hence, I
being from the last night entered into my vowes for the year coming on.
Here I met with the good newes of Hogg's bringing in two prizes more to
Plymouth, which if they prove but any part of them, I hope, at least, we
shall be no losers by them.  So home from the office, to write over fair
my vowes for this year, and then to supper, and to bed.  In great peace of
mind having now done it, and brought myself into order again and a
resolution of keeping it, and having entered my journall to this night, so
to bed, my eyes failing me with writing.

8th.  Up, and to the office, where we sat all the morning.  At noon home
to dinner, where my uncle Thomas with me to receive his quarterage.  He
tells me his son Thomas is set up in Smithfield, where he hath a shop--I
suppose, a booth.  Presently after dinner to the office, and there set
close to my business and did a great deal before night, and am resolved to
stand to it, having been a truant too long.  At night to Sir W. Batten's
to consider some things about our prizes, and then to other talk, and
among other things he tells me that he hears for certain that Sir W.
Coventry hath resigned to the King his place of Commissioner of the Navy,
the thing he bath often told me that he had a mind to do, but I am
surprised to think that he hath done it, and am full of thoughts all this
evening after I heard it what may be the consequences of it to me. So home
and to supper, and then saw the catalogue of my books, which my brother
had wrote out, now perfectly alphabeticall, and so to bed.  Sir Richard
Ford did this evening at Sir W. Batten's tell us that upon opening the
body of my Lady Denham it is said that they found a vessel about her
matrix which had never been broke by her husband, that caused all pains in
her body.  Which if true is excellent invention to clear both the Duchesse
from poison or the Duke from lying with her.

9th.  Up, and with Sir W. Batten and Sir W. Pen in a hackney-coach to
White Hall, the way being most horribly bad upon the breaking up of the
frost, so as not to be passed almost.  There did our usual [business] with
the Duke of York, and here I do hear, by my Lord Bruncker, that for
certain Sir W. Coventry hath resigned his place of Commissioner; which I
believe he hath done upon good grounds of security to himself, from all
the blame which must attend our office this next year; but I fear the King
will suffer by it.  Thence to Westminster Hall, and there to the
conference of the Houses about the word "Nuisance,"

     [In the "Bill against importing Cattle from Ireland and other parts
     beyond the Seas," the Lords proposed to insert "Detriment and
     Mischief" in place of "Nuisance," but the Commons stood to their
     word, and gained their way.  The Lords finally consented that
     "Nuisance" should stand in the Bill.]

which the Commons would have, and the Lords will not, in the Irish Bill.
The Commons do it professedly to prevent the King's dispensing with it;
which Sir Robert Howard and others did expressly repeat often: viz., "the
King nor any King ever could do any thing which was hurtful to their
people."  Now the Lords did argue, that it was an ill precedent, and that
which will ever hereafter be used as a way of preventing the King's
dispensation with acts; and therefore rather advise to pass the Bill
without that word, and let it go, accompanied with a petition, to the
King, that he will not dispense with it; this being a more civil way to
the King.  They answered well, that this do imply that the King should
pass their Bill, and yet with design to dispense with it; which is to
suppose the King guilty of abusing them.  And more, they produce
precedents for it; namely, that against new buildings and about leather,
wherein the word "Nuisance" is used to the purpose: and further, that they
do not rob the King of any right he ever had, for he never had a power to
do hurt to his people, nor would exercise it; and therefore there is no
danger, in the passing this Bill, of imposing on his prerogative; and
concluded, that they think they ought to do this, so as the people may
really have the benefit of it when it is passed, for never any people
could expect so reasonably to be indulged something from a King, they
having already given him so much money, and are likely to give more.  Thus
they broke up, both adhering to their opinions; but the Commons seemed
much more full of judgment and reason than the Lords. Then the Commons
made their Report to the Lords of their vote, that their Lordships'
proceedings in the Bill for examining Accounts were unparliamentary; they
having, while a Bill was sent up to them from the Commons about the
business, petitioned his Majesty that he would do the same thing by his
Commission.  They did give their reasons: viz., that it had no precedent;
that the King ought not to be informed of anything passing in the Houses
till it comes to a Bill; that it will wholly break off all correspondence
between the two Houses, and in the issue wholly infringe the very use and
being of Parliaments.  Having left their arguments with the Lords they all
broke up, and I by coach to the ordinary by the Temple, and there dined
alone on a rabbit, and read a book I brought home from Mrs. Michell's, of
the proceedings of the Parliament in the 3rd and 4th year of the late
King, a very good book for speeches and for arguments of law.  Thence to
Faythorne, and bought a head or two; one of them my Lord of Ormond's, the
best I ever saw, and then to Arundell House, where first the Royall
Society meet, by the favour of Mr. Harry Howard, who was there, and has
given us his grandfather's library, a noble gift, and a noble favour and
undertaking it is for him to make his house the seat for this college.
Here was an experiment shown about improving the use of powder for
creating of force in winding up of springs and other uses of great worth.
And here was a great meeting of worthy noble persons; but my Lord
Bruncker, who pretended to make a congratulatory speech upon their coming
hither, and in thanks to Mr. Howard, do it in the worst manner in the
world, being the worst speaker, so as I do wonder at his parts and the
unhappiness of his speaking.  Thence home by coach and to the office, and
then home to supper, Mercer and her sister there, and to cards, and then
to bed.  Mr. Cowling did this day in the House-lobby tell me of the many
complaints among people against Mr. Townsend in the Wardrobe, and advises
me to think of my Lord Sandwich's concernment there under his care.  He
did also tell me upon my demanding it, that he do believe there are some
things on foot for a peace between France and us, but that we shall be
foiled in it.

10th.  Up, and at the office all the morning.  At noon home and, there
being business to do in the afternoon, took my Lord Bruncker home with me,
who dined with me.  His discourse and mine about the bad performances of
the Controller's and Surveyor's places by the hands they are now in, and
the shame to the service and loss the King suffers by it.  Then after
dinner to the office, where we and some of the chief of the Trinity House
met to examine the occasion of the loss of The Prince Royall,  the master
and mates being examined, which I took and keep, and so broke up, and I to
my letters by the post, and so home and to supper with my mind at pretty
good ease, being entered upon minding my business, and so to bed. This
noon Mrs. Burroughs come to me about business, whom I did baiser . .  .  .

11th.  Up, being troubled at my being found abed a-days by all sorts of
people, I having got a trick of sitting up later than I need, never
supping, or very seldom, before 12 at night.  Then to the office, there
busy all the morning, and among other things comes Sir W. Warren and
walked with me awhile, whose discourse I love, he being a very wise man
and full of good counsel, and his own practices for wisdom much to be
observed, and among other things he tells me how he is fallen in with my
Lord Bruncker, who has promised him most particular inward friendship and
yet not to appear at the board to do so, and he tells me how my Lord
Bruncker should take notice of the two flaggons he saw at my house at
dinner, at my late feast, and merrily, yet I know enviously, said, I could
not come honestly by them.  This I am glad to hear, though vexed to see
his ignoble soul, but I shall beware of him, and yet it is fit he should
see I am no mean fellow, but can live in the world, and have something.
At noon home to dinner, and then to the office with my people and very
busy, and did dispatch to my great satisfaction abundance of business, and
do resolve, by the grace of God, to stick to it till I have cleared my
heart of most things wherein I am in arrear in public and private matters.
At night, home to supper and to bed.  This day ill news of my father's
being very ill of his old grief the rupture, which troubles me.

12th.  Up, still lying long in bed; then to the office, where sat very
long.  Then home to dinner, and so to the office again, mighty busy, and
did to the joy of my soul dispatch much business, which do make my heart
light, and will enable me to recover all the ground I have lost (if I have
by my late minding my pleasures lost any) and assert myself.  So home to
supper, and then to read a little in Moore's "Antidote against Atheisme,"
a pretty book, and so to bed.

13th (Lord's day).  Up, and to church, where young Lowther come to church
with Sir W. Pen and his Lady and daughter, and my wife tells me that
either they are married or the match is quite perfected, which I am apt to
believe, because all the peoples' eyes in the church were much fixed upon
them.  At noon sent for Mercer, who dined with us, and very merry, and so
I, after dinner, walked to the Old Swan, thinking to have got a boat to
White Hall, but could not, nor was there anybody at home at Michell's,
where I thought to have sat with her .  .  .  .  So home, to church, a
dull sermon, and then home at my chamber all the evening.  So to supper
and to bed.

14th.  Up, and to the office, where busy getting beforehand with my
business as fast as I can.  At noon home to dinner, and presently
afterward at my office again.  I understand my father is pretty well
again, blessed be God! and would have my Br[other] John comedown to him
for a little while.  Busy till night, pleasing myself mightily to see what
a deal of business goes off of a man's hands when he stays by it, and
then, at night, before it was late (yet much business done) home to
supper, discourse with my wife, and to bed.  Sir W. Batten tells me the
Lords do agree at last with the Commons about the word "Nuisance" in the
Irish Bill, and do desire a good correspondence between the two Houses;
and that the King do intend to prorogue them the last of this month.

15th.  Up, and to the office, where busy all the morning.  Here my Lord
Bruncker would have made me promise to go with him to a play this
afternoon, where Knipp acts Mrs. Weaver's great part in "The Indian
Emperour," and he says is coming on to be a great actor.  But I am so fell
to my business, that I, though against my inclination, will not go. At
noon, dined with my wife and were pleasant, and then to the office, where
I got Mrs. Burroughs 'sola cum ego, and did toucher ses mamailles' .  .  .
She gone, I to my business and did much, and among other things
to-night we were all mightily troubled how to prevent the sale of a great
deal of hemp, and timber-deals, and other good goods to-morrow at the
candle by the Prize Office, where it will be sold for little, and we shall
be found to want the same goods and buy at extraordinary prices, and
perhaps the very same goods now sold, which is a most horrid evil and a
shame.  At night home to supper and to bed with my mind mighty light to
see the fruits of my diligence in having my business go off my hand so
merrily.

16th.  Up, and by coach to White Hall, and there to the Duke of York as
usual.  Here Sir W. Coventry come to me aside in the Duke's chamber, to
tell that he had not answered part of a late letter of mine, because
'littera scripta manet'.  About his leaving the office, he tells me, [it
is] because he finds that his business at Court will not permit him to
attend it; and then he confesses that he seldom of late could come from it
with satisfaction, and therefore would not take the King's money for
nothing.  I professed my sorrow for it, and prayed the continuance of his
favour; which he promised.  I do believe he hath [done] like a very wise
man in reference to himself; but I doubt it will prove ill for the King,
and for the office.  Prince Rupert, I hear to-day, is very ill; yesterday
given over, but better to-day.  This day, before the Duke of York, the
business of the Muster-Masters was reported, and Balty found the best of
the whole number, so as the Duke enquired who he was, and whether he was a
stranger by his two names, both strange, and offered that he and one more,
who hath done next best, should have not only their owne, but part of the
others' salary, but that I having said he was my brother-in-law, he did
stop, but they two are ordered their pay, which I am glad of, and some of
the rest will lose their pay, and others be laid by the heels. I was very
glad of this being ended so well.  I did also, this morning, move in a
business wherein Mr. Hater hath concerned me, about getting a ship, laden
with salt from France, permitted to unload, coming in after the King's
declaration was out, which I have hopes by some dexterity to get done.
Then with the Duke of York to the King, to receive his commands for
stopping the sale this day of some prize-goods at the Prize-Office, goods
fit for the Navy; and received the King's commands, and carried them to
the Lords' House, to my Lord Ashly, who was angry much thereat, and I am
sorry it fell to me to carry the order, but I cannot help it.  So, against
his will, he signed a note I writ to the Commissioners of Prizes, which I
carried and delivered to Kingdone, at their new office in Aldersgate
Streete.  Thence a little to the Exchange, where it was hot that the
Prince was dead, but I did rectify it.  So home to dinner, and found
Balty, told him the good news, and then after dinner away, I presently to
White Hall, and did give the Duke of York a memorial of the salt business,
against the Council, and did wait all the Council for answer, walking a
good while with Sir Stephen Fox, who, among other things, told me his
whole mystery in the business of the interest he pays as Treasurer for the
Army.  They give him 12d. per pound quite through the Army, with condition
to be paid weekly.  This he undertakes upon his own private credit, and to
be paid by the King at the end of every four months.  If the King pay him
not at the end of the four months, then, for all the time he stays longer,
my Lord Treasurer, by agreement, allows him eight per cent. per annum for
the forbearance.  So that, in fine, he hath about twelve per cent. from
the King and the Army, for fifteen or sixteen months' interest; out of
which he gains soundly, his expense being about L130,000 per annum; and
hath no trouble in it, compared, as I told him, to the trouble I must have
to bring in an account of interest.  I was, however, glad of being thus
enlightened, and so away to the other council door, and there got in and
hear a piece of a cause, heard before the King, about a ship deserted by
her fellows (who were bound mutually to defend each other), in their way
to Virginy, and taken by the enemy, but it was but meanly pleaded.  Then
all withdrew, and by and by the Council rose, and I spoke with the Duke of
York, and he told me my business was done, which I found accordingly in
Sir Edward Walker's books.  And so away, mightily satisfied, to Arundell
House, and there heard a little good discourse, and so home, and there to
Sir W. Batten, where I heard the examinations in two of our prizes, which
do make but little for us, so that I do begin to doubt their proving
prize, which troubled me.  So home to supper with my wife, and after
supper my wife told me how she had moved to W. Hewer the business of my
sister for a wife to him, which he received with mighty acknowledgements,
as she says, above anything; but says he hath no intention to alter his
condition: so that I am in some measure sorry she ever moved it; but I
hope he will think it only come from her.  So after supper a little to the
office, to enter my journall, and then home to bed.  Talk there is of a
letter to come from Holland, desiring a place of treaty; but I do doubt
it.  This day I observe still, in many places, the smoking remains of the
late fire: the ways mighty bad and dirty.  This night Sir R. Ford told me
how this day, at Christ Church Hospital, they have given a living over
L200 per annum to Mr. Sanchy, my old acquaintance, which I wonder at, he
commending him mightily; but am glad of it.  He tells me, too, how the
famous Stillingfleete was a Bluecoat boy.  The children at this day are
provided for in the country by the House, which I am glad also to hear.

17th.  Up, and to the office, where all the morning sitting.  At noon home
to dinner, and then to the office busy also till very late, my heart joyed
with the effects of my following my business, by easing my head of cares,
and so home to supper and to bed.

18th.  Up, and most of the morning finishing my entry of my journall
during the late fire out of loose papers into this book, which did please
me mightily when done, I, writing till my eyes were almost blind therewith
to make an end of it.  Then all the rest of the morning, and, after a
mouthful of dinner, all the afternoon in my closet till night, sorting all
my papers, which have lain unsorted for all the time we were at Greenwich
during the plague, which did please me also, I drawing on to put my office
into a good posture, though much is behind.  This morning come Captain.
Cocke to me, and tells me that the King comes to the House this day to
pass the poll Bill and the Irish Bill; he tells me too that, though the
Faction is very froward in the House, yet all will end well there.  But he
says that one had got a Bill ready to present in the House against Sir W.
Coventry, for selling of places, and says he is certain of it, and how he
was withheld from doing it.  He says, that the Vice-chamberlaine is now
one of the greatest men in England again, and was he that did prevail with
the King to let the Irish Bill go with the word "Nuisance."  He told me,
that Sir G. Carteret's declaration of giving double to any man that will
prove that any of his people have demanded or taken any thing for
forwarding the payment of the wages of any man (of which he sent us a copy
yesterday, which we approved of) is set up, among other places, upon the
House of Lords' door.  I do not know how wisely this is done.  This
morning, also, there come to the office a letter from the Duke of York,
commanding our payment of no wages to any of the muster-masters of the
fleete the last year, but only two, my brother Balty, taking notice that
he had taken pains therein, and one Ward, who, though he had not taken so
much as the other, yet had done more than the rest.  This I was exceeding
glad of for my own sake and his.  At night I, by appointment, home, where
W. Batelier and his sister Mary, and the two Mercers, to play at cards and
sup, and did cut our great cake lately given us by Russell: a very good
one.  Here very merry late.  Sir W. Pen told me this night how the King
did make them a very sharp speech in the House of Lords to-day, saying
that he did expect to have had more Bills;

     [On this day "An Act for raising Money by a Poll and otherwise
     towards the maintenance of the present War," and "An Act prohibiting
     the Importation of Cattle from Ireland and other parts beyond the
     Sea, and Fish taken by Foreigners," were passed.  The king.
     complained of the insufficient supply, and said, "'Tis high time for
     you to make good your promises, and 'tis high time for you to be in
     the country" ("Journals of the House of Lords," vol  xii., p. 81).]

that he purposes to prorogue them on Monday come se'nnight; that whereas
they have unjustly conceived some jealousys of his making a peace, he
declares he knows of no such thing or treaty: and so left them.  But with
so little effect, that as soon as he come into the House, Sir W. Coventry
moved, that now the King hath declared his intention of proroguing them,
it would be loss of time to go on with the thing they were upon, when they
were called to the King, which was the calling over the defaults of
Members appearing in the House; for that, before any person could now come
or be brought to town, the House would be up.  Yet the Faction did desire
to delay time, and contend so as to come to a division of the House;
where, however, it was carried, by a few voices, that the debate should be
laid by.  But this shews that they are not pleased, or that they have not
any awe over them from the King's displeasure.  The company being gone, to
bed.

19th.  Up, and at the office all the morning.  Sir W. Batten tells me to
my wonder that at his coming to my Lord Ashly, yesterday morning, to tell
him what prize-goods he would have saved for the Navy, and not sold,
according to the King's order on the 17th, he fell quite out with him in
high terms; and he says, too, that they did go on to the sale yesterday,
even of the very hempe, and other things, at which I am astonished, and
will never wonder at the ruine of the King's affairs, if this be suffered.
At noon dined, and Mr. Pierce come to see me, he newly come from keeping
his Christmas in the country.  So to the office, where very busy, but with
great pleasure till late at night, and then home to supper and to bed.

20th (Lord's day).  Up betimes and down to the Old Swan, there called on
Michell and his wife, which in her night linen appeared as pretty almost
as ever to my thinking I saw woman.  Here I drank some burnt brandy. They
shewed me their house, which, poor people, they have built, and is very
pretty.  I invited them to dine with me, and so away to White Hall to Sir
W. Coventry, with whom I have not been alone a good while, and very kind
he is, and tells me how the business is now ordered by order of council
for my Lord Bruncker to assist Sir J. Minnes in all matters of accounts
relating to the Treasurer, and Sir W. Pen in all matters relating to the
victuallers' and pursers' accounts, which I am very glad of, and the more
for that I think it will not do me any hurt at all. Other discourse, much
especially about the heat the House was in yesterday about the ill
management of the Navy, which I was sorry to hear; though I think they
were well answered, both by Sir G. Carteret and [Sir] W. Coventry, as he
informs me the substance of their speeches. Having done with him, home
mightily satisfied with my being with him, and coming home I to church,
and there, beyond expectation, find our seat, and all the church crammed,
by twice as many people as used to be: and to my great joy find Mr.
Frampton in the pulpit; so to my great joy I hear him preach, and I think
the best sermon, for goodness and oratory, without affectation or study,
that ever I heard in my life.  The truth is, he preaches the most like an
apostle that ever I heard man; and it was much the best time that ever I
spent in my life at church.  His text, Ecclesiastes xi., verse 8th--the
words, "But if a man live many years, and rejoice in them all, yet let him
remember the days of darkness, for they shall be many. All that cometh is
vanity."  He done, I home, and there Michell and his wife, and we dined
and mighty merry, I mightily taken more and more with her.  After dinner I
with my brother away by water to White Hall, and there walked in the
Parke, and a little to my Lord Chancellor's, where the King and Cabinet
met, and there met Mr. Brisband, with whom good discourse, to White Hall
towards night, and there he did lend me "The Third Advice to a Paynter," a
bitter satyre upon the service of the Duke of Albemarle the last year.  I
took it home with me, and will copy it, having the former, being also
mightily pleased with it.  So after reading it, I to Sir W. Pen to
discourse a little with him about the business of our prizes, and so home
to supper and to bed.

21st.  Up betimes, and with, Sir W. Batten, [Sir] W. Pen, [Sir] R. Ford,
by coach to the Swede's Resident's in the Piatza, to discourse with him
about two of our prizes, wherein he puts in his concernment as for his
countrymen.  We had no satisfaction, nor did give him any, but I find him
a cunning fellow.  He lives in one of the great houses there, but
ill-furnished; and come to us out of bed in his furred mittens and furred
cap.  Thence to Exeter House to the Doctors Commons, and there with our
Proctors to Dr. Walker, who was not very well, but, however, did hear our
matters, and after a dull seeming hearing of them read, did discourse most
understandingly of them, as well as ever I heard man, telling us all our
grounds of pretence to the prize would do no good, and made it appear but
thus, and thus, it may be, but yet did give us but little reason to expect
it would prove, which troubled us, but I was mightily taken to hear his
manner of discourse.  Thence with them to Westminster Hall, they setting
me down at White Hall, where I missed of finding Sir G. Carteret, up to
the Lords' House, and there come mighty seasonably to hear the Solicitor
about my Lord Buckingham's pretence to the title of Lord Rosse. Mr.
Atturny Montagu is also a good man, and so is old Sir P. Ball; but the
Solicitor and Scroggs after him are excellent men.  Here spoke with my
Lord Bellasses about getting some money for Tangier, which he doubts we
shall not be able to do out of the Poll Bill, it being so strictly tied
for the Navy.  He tells me the Lords have passed the Bill for the accounts
with some little amendments.  So down to the Hall, and thence with our
company to Exeter House, and then did the business I have said before, we
doing nothing the first time of going, it being too early. At home find
Lovett, to whom I did give my Lady Castlemayne's head to do. He is talking
of going into Spayne to get money by his art, but I doubt he will do no
good, he being a man of an unsettled head.  Thence by water down to
Deptford, the first time I have been by water a great while, and there did
some little business and walked home, and there come into my company three
drunken seamen, but one especially, who told me such stories, calling me
Captain, as made me mighty merry, and they would leap and skip, and kiss
what mayds they met all the way.  I did at first give them money to drink,
lest they should know who I was, and so become troublesome to me.  Parted
at Redriffe, and there home and to the office, where did much business,
and then to Sir W. Batten's, where [Sir] W. Pen, [Sir] R. Ford, and I to
hear a proposition [Sir] R. Ford was to acquaint us with from the Swedes
Embassador, in manner of saying, that for money he might be got to our
side and relinquish the trouble he may give us. Sir W. Pen did make a long
simple declaration of his resolution to give nothing to deceive any poor
man of what was his right by law, but ended in doing whatever any body
else would, and we did commission Sir R. Ford to give promise of not
beyond L350 to him and his Secretary, in case they did not oppose us in
the Phoenix (the net profits of which, as [Sir] R. Ford cast up before us,
the Admiral's tenths, and ship's thirds, and other charges all cleared,
will amount to L3,000) and that we did gain her.  [Sir] R. Ford did pray
for a curse upon his family, if he was privy to anything more than he told
us (which I believe he is a knave in), yet we all concluded him the most
fit man for it and very honest, and so left it wholly to him to manage as
he pleased.  Thence to the office a little while longer, and so home,
where W. Hewer's mother was, and Mrs. Turner, our neighbour, and supped
with us.  His mother a well-favoured old little woman, and a good woman, I
believe.  After we had supped, and merry, we parted late, Mrs. Turner
having staid behind to talk a little about her lodgings, which now my Lord
Bruncker upon Sir W. Coventry's surrendering do claim, but I cannot think
he will come to live in them so as to need to put them out.  She gone, we
to bed all.  This night, at supper, comes from Sir W. Coventry the Order
of Councill for my Lord Bruncker to do all the Comptroller's part relating
to the Treasurer's accounts, and Sir W. Pen, all relating to the
Victualler's, and Sir J. Minnes to do the rest. This, I hope, will do much
better for the King than now, and, I think, will give neither of them
ground to over-top me, as I feared they would; which pleases me mightily.
This evening, Mr. Wren and Captain Cocke called upon me at the office, and
there told me how the House was in better temper to-day, and hath passed
the Bill for the remainder of the money, but not to be passed finally till
they have done some other things which they will have passed with it;
wherein they are very open, what their meaning is, which was but doubted
before, for they do in all respects doubt the King's pleasing them.

22nd.  Up, and there come to me Darnell the fiddler, one of the Duke's
house, and brought me a set of lessons, all three parts, I heard them play
to the Duke of York after Christmas at his lodgings, and bid him get me
them.  I did give him a crowne for them, and did enquire after the musique
of the "Siege of Rhodes," which, he tells me, he can get me, which I am
mighty glad of.  So to the office, where among other things I read the
Councill's order about my Lord Bruncker and Sir W. Pen to be assistants to
the Comptroller, which quietly went down with Sir J. Minnes, poor man,
seeming a little as if he would be thought to have desired it, but yet
apparently to his discontent; and, I fear, as the order runs, it will
hardly do much good.  At noon to dinner, and there comes a letter from
Mrs. Pierce, telling me she will come and dine with us on Thursday next,
with some of the players, Knipp, &c., which I was glad of, but my wife
vexed, which vexed me; but I seemed merry, but know not how to order the
matter, whether they shall come or no.  After dinner to the office, and
there late doing much business, and so home to supper, and to bed.

23rd.  Up, and with Sir W. Batten and Sir W. Pen to White Hall, and there
to the Duke of York, and did our usual business.  Having done there, I to
St. James's, to see the organ Mrs. Turner told me of the other night, of
my late Lord Aubigney's; and I took my Lord Bruncker with me, he being
acquainted with my present Lord Almoner, Mr. Howard, brother to the Duke
of Norfolke; so he and I thither and did see the organ, but I do not like
it, it being but a bauble, with a virginal! joining to it: so I shall not
meddle with it.  Here we sat and talked with him a good while, and he
seems a good-natured gentleman: here I observed the deske which he hath,
[made] to remove, and is fastened to one of the armes of his chayre.  I do
also observe the counterfeit windows there was, in the form of doors with
looking-glasses instead of windows, which makes the room seem both bigger
and lighter, I think; and I have some thoughts to have the like in one of
my rooms.  He discoursed much of the goodness of the musique in Rome, but
could not tell me how long musique had been in any perfection in that
church, which I would be glad to know.  He speaks much of the great
buildings that this Pope,

     [Fabio Chigi, of Siena, succeeded Innocent X. in 1655 as Alexander
     VII.  He died May, 1667, and was succeeded by Clement IX.]

whom, in mirth to us, he calls Antichrist, hath done in his time.  Having
done with the discourse, we away, and my Lord and I walking into the Park
back again, I did observe the new buildings: and my Lord, seeing I had a
desire to see them, they being the place for the priests and fryers, he
took me back to my Lord Almoner; and he took us quite through the whole
house and chapel, and the new monastery, showing me most excellent pieces
in wax-worke: a crucifix given by a Pope to Mary Queen of Scotts, where a
piece of the Cross is;

     [Pieces of "the Cross" were formerly held in such veneration, and
     were so common, that it has been often said enough existed to build
     a ship.  Most readers will remember the distinction which Sir W.
     Scott represents Louis XI. (with great appreciation of that
     monarch's character), as drawing between an oath taken on a false
     piece and one taken on a piece of the true cross.  Sir Thomas More,
     a very devout believer in relics, says ("Works," p. 119), that
     Luther wished, in a sermon of his, that he had in his hand all the
     pieces of the Holy Cross; and said that if he so had, he would throw
     them there as never sun should shine on them:--and for what
     worshipful reason would the wretch do such villainy to the cross of
     Christ?  Because, as he saith, that there is so much gold now
     bestowed about the garnishing of the pieces of the Cross, that there
     is none left for poore folke.  Is not this a high reason?  As though
     all the gold that is now bestowed about the pieces of the Holy Cross
     would not have failed to have been given to poor men, if they had
     not been bestowed about the garnishing of the Cross! and as though
     there were nothing lost, but what is bestowed about Christ's Cross!"
     "Wolsey, says Cavendish, on his fall, gave to Norris, who brought
     him a ring of gold as a token of good will from Henry, "a little
     chaine of gold, made like a bottle chain, with a cross of gold,
     wherein was a piece of the Holy Cross, which he continually wore
     about his neck, next his body; and said, furthermore, 'Master
     Norris, I assure you, when I was in prosperity, although it seem but
     small in value, yet I would not gladly have departed with the same
     for a thousand pounds.'" Life, ed.  1852, p. 167.  Evelyn mentions,
     "Diary," November 17th, 1664, that he saw in one of the chapels in
     St. Peter's a crucifix with a piece of the true cross in it.
     Amongst the jewels of Mary Queen of Scots was a cross of gold, which
     had been pledged to Hume of Blackadder for L1000 (Chalmers's "Life,"
     vol. i., p. 31 ).--B.]

two bits set in the manner of a cross in the foot of the crucifix: several
fine pictures, but especially very good prints of holy pictures. I saw the
dortoire--[dormitory]--and the cells of the priests, and we went into one;
a very pretty little room, very clean, hung with pictures, set with books.
The Priest was in his cell, with his hair clothes to his skin,
bare-legged, with a sandal! only on, and his little bed without sheets,
and no feather bed; but yet, I thought, soft enough.  His cord about his
middle; but in so good company, living with ease, I thought it a very good
life.  A pretty library they have.  And I was in the refectoire, where
every man his napkin, knife, cup of earth, and basin of the same; and a
place for one to sit and read while the rest are at meals.  And into the
kitchen I went, where a good neck of mutton at the fire, and other
victuals boiling.  I do not think they fared very hard.  Their windows all
looking into a fine garden and the Park; and mighty pretty rooms all.  I
wished myself one of the Capuchins.  Having seen what we could here, and
all with mighty pleasure, so away with the Almoner in his coach, talking
merrily about the difference in our religions, to White Hall, and there we
left him.  I in my Lord Bruncker's coach, he carried me to the Savoy, and
there we parted.  I to the Castle Tavern, where was and did come all our
company, Sir W. Batten, [Sir] W. Pen, [Sir] R. Ford, and our Counsel Sir
Ellis Layton, Walt Walker, Dr. Budd, Mr. Holder, and several others, and
here we had a bad dinner of our preparing, and did discourse something of
our business of our prizes, which was the work of the day.  I staid till
dinner was over, and there being no use of me I away after dinner without
taking leave, and to the New Exchange, there to take up my wife and
Mercer, and to Temple Bar to the Ordinary, and had a dish of meat for
them, they having not dined, and thence to the King's house, and there saw
"The Numerous Lieutenant," a silly play, I think; only the Spirit in it
that grows very tall, and then sinks again to nothing, having two heads
breeding upon one, and then Knipp's singing, did please us.  Here, in a
box above, we spied Mrs. Pierce; and, going out, they called us, and so we
staid for them; and Knipp took us all in, and brought to us Nelly; a most
pretty woman, who acted the great part of Coelia to-day very fine, and did
it pretty well: I kissed her, and so did my wife; and a mighty pretty soul
she is.  We also saw Mrs. Halls which is my little Roman-nose black girl,
that is mighty pretty: she is usually called Betty.  Knipp made us stay in
a box and see the dancing preparatory to to-morrow for "The Goblins," a
play of Suckling's, not acted these twenty-five years; which was pretty;
and so away thence, pleased with this sight also, and specially kissing of
Nell. We away, Mr. Pierce and I, on foot to his house, the women by coach.
In our way we find the Guards of horse in the street, and hear the
occasion to be news that the seamen are in a mutiny, which put me into a
great fright; so away with my wife and Mercer home preparing against
to-morrow night to have Mrs. Pierce and Knipp and a great deal more
company to dance; and, when I come home, hear of no disturbance there of
the seamen, but that one of them, being arrested to-day, others do go and
rescue him. So to the office a little, and then home to supper, and to my
chamber awhile, and then to bed.

24th.  Up, and to the office, full of thoughts how to order the business
of our merry meeting to-night.  So to the office, where busy all the
morning.  [While we were sitting in the morning at the office, we were
frighted with news of fire at Sir W. Batten's by a chimney taking fire,
and it put me into much fear and trouble, but with a great many hands and
pains it was soon stopped.]  At noon home to dinner, and presently to the
office to despatch my business, and also we sat all the afternoon to
examine the loss of The Bredagh, which was done by as plain negligence as
ever ship was.  We being rose, I entering my letters and getting the
office swept and a good fire made and abundance of candles lighted, I
home, where most of my company come of this end of the town-Mercer and her
sister, Mr. Batelier and Pembleton (my Lady Pen, and Pegg, and Mr.
Lowther, but did not stay long, and I believe it was by Sir W. Pen's
order; for they had a great mind to have staid), and also Captain Rolt.
And, anon, at about seven or eight o'clock, comes Mr. Harris, of the
Duke's playhouse, and brings Mrs. Pierce with him, and also one dressed
like a country-mayde with a straw hat on; which, at first, I could not
tell who it was, though I expected Knipp: but it was she coming off the
stage just as she acted this day in "The Goblins;" a merry jade.  Now my
house is full, and four fiddlers that play well.  Harris I first took to
my closet; and I find him a very curious and understanding person in all
pictures and other things, and a man of fine conversation; and so is Rolt.
So away with all my company down to the office, and there fell to dancing,
and continued at it an hour or two, there coming Mrs. Anne Jones, a
merchant's daughter hard by, who dances well, and all in mighty good
humour, and danced with great pleasure; and then sung and then danced, and
then sung many things of three voices--both Harris and Rolt singing their
parts excellently.  Among other things, Harris sung his Irish song--the
strangest in itself, and the prettiest sung by him, that ever I heard.
Then to supper in the office, a cold, good supper, and wondrous merry.
Here was Mrs. Turner also, but the poor woman sad about her lodgings, and
Mrs. Markham: after supper to dancing again and singing, and so continued
till almost three in the morning, and then, with extraordinary pleasure,
broke up only towards morning, Knipp fell a little ill, and so my wife
home with her to put her to bed, and we continued dancing and singing;
and, among other things, our Mercer unexpectedly did happen to sing an
Italian song I know not, of which they two sung the other two parts to,
that did almost ravish me, and made me in love with her more than ever
with her singing.  As late as it was, yet Rolt and Harris would go home
to-night, and walked it, though I had a bed for them; and it proved dark,
and a misly night, and very windy.  The company being all gone to their
homes, I up with Mrs. Pierce to Knipp, who was in bed; and we waked her,
and there I handled her breasts and did 'baiser la', and sing a song,
lying by her on the bed, and then left my wife to see Mrs. Pierce in bed
to her, in our best chamber, and so to bed myself, my mind mightily
satisfied with all this evening's work, and thinking it to be one of the
merriest enjoyment I must look for in the world, and did content myself
therefore with the thoughts of it, and so to bed; only the musique did not
please me, they not being contented with less than 30s.

25th.  Lay pretty long, then to the office, where Lord Bruncker and Sir J.
Minnes and I did meet, and sat private all the morning about dividing the
Controller's work according to the late order of Council, between them two
and Sir W. Pen, and it troubled me to see the poor honest man, Sir J.
Minnes, troubled at it, and yet the King's work cannot be done without it.
It was at last friendlily ended, and so up and home to dinner with my
wife.  This afternoon I saw the Poll Bill, now printed; wherein I do fear
I shall be very deeply concerned, being to be taxed for all my offices,
and then for my money that I have, and my title, as well as my head.  It
is a very great tax; but yet I do think it is so perplexed, it will hardly
ever be collected duly.  The late invention of Sir G. Downing's is
continued of bringing all the money into the Exchequer; and Sir G.
Carteret's three pence is turned for all the money of this act into but a
penny per pound, which I am sorry for.  After dinner to the office again,
where Lord Bruncker, [Sir] W. Batten, and [Sir] W. Pen and I met to talk
again about the Controller's office, and there [Sir] W. Pen would have a
piece of the great office cut out to make an office for him, which I
opposed to the making him very angry, but I think I shall carry it against
him, and then I care not.  So a little troubled at this fray, I away by
coach with my wife, and left her at the New Exchange, and I to my Lord
Chancellor's, and then back, taking up my wife to my Lord Bellasses, and
there spoke with Mr. Moone, who tells me that the peace between us and
Spayne is, as he hears, concluded on, which I should be glad of, and so
home, and after a little at my office, home to finish my journall for
yesterday and to-day, and then a little supper and to bed.  This day the
House hath passed the Bill for the Assessment, which I am glad of; and
also our little Bill, for giving any one of us in the office the power of
justice of peace, is done as I would have it.

26th.  Up, and at the office.  Sat all the morning, where among other
things I did the first unkind [thing] that ever I did design to Sir W.
Warren, but I did it now to some purpose, to make him sensible how little
any man's friendship shall avail him if he wants money.  I perceive he do
nowadays court much my Lord Bruncker's favour, who never did any man much
courtesy at the board, nor ever will be able, at least so much as myself.
Besides, my Lord would do him a kindness in concurrence with me, but he
would have the danger of the thing to be done lie upon me, if there be any
danger in it (in drawing up a letter to Sir W. Warren's advantage), which
I do not like, nor will endure.  I was, I confess, very angry, and will
venture the loss of Sir W. Warren's kindnesses rather than he shall have
any man's friendship in greater esteem than mine.  At noon home to dinner,
and after dinner to the office again, and there all the afternoon, and at
night poor Mrs. Turner come and walked in the garden for my advice about
her husband and her relating to my Lord Bruncker's late proceedings with
them.  I do give her the best I can, but yet can lay aside some ends of my
own in what advice I do give her.  So she being gone I to make an end of
my letters, and so home to supper and to bed, Balty lodging here with my
brother, he being newly returned from mustering in the river.

27th (Lord's day).  Up betimes, and leaving my wife to go by coach to hear
Mr. Frampton preach, which I had a mighty desire she should, I down to the
Old Swan, and there to Michell and staid while he and she dressed
themselves, and here had a 'baiser' or two of her, whom I love mightily;
and then took them in a sculler (being by some means or other disappointed
of my own boat) to White Hall, and so with them to Westminster, Sir W.
Coventry, Bruncker and I all the morning together discoursing of the
office business, and glad of the Controller's business being likely to be
put into better order than formerly, and did discourse of many good
things, but especially of having something done to bringing the Surveyor's
matters into order also.  Thence I up to the King's closet, and there
heard a good Anthem, and discoursed with several people here about
business, among others with Lord Bellasses, and so from one to another
after sermon till the King had almost dined, and then home with Sir G.
Carteret and dined with him, being mightily ashamed of my not having seen
my Lady Jemimah so long, and my wife not at all yet since she come, but
she shall soon do it.  I thence to Sir Philip Warwicke, by appointment, to
meet Lord Bellasses, and up to his chamber, but find him unwilling to
discourse of business on Sundays; so did not enlarge, but took leave, and
went down and sat in a low room, reading Erasmus "de scribendis
epistolis," a very good book, especially one letter of advice to a
courtier most true and good, which made me once resolve to tear out the
two leaves that it was writ in, but I forebore it.  By and by comes Lord
Bellasses, and then he and I up again to Sir P. Warwicke and had much
discourse of our Tangier business, but no hopes of getting any money.
Thence I through the garden into the Park, and there met with Roger Pepys,
and he and I to walk in the Pell Mell.  I find by him that the House of
Parliament continues full of ill humours, and he seems to dislike those
that are troublesome more than needs, and do say how, in their late Poll
Bill, which cost so much time, the yeomanry, and indeed two-thirds of the
nation, are left out to be taxed, that there is not effectual provision
enough made for collecting of the money; and then, that after a man his
goods are distrained and sold, and the overplus returned, I am to have ten
days to make my complaints of being over-rated if there be cause, when my
goods are sold, and that is too late.  These things they are resolved to
look into again, and mend them before they rise, which they expect at
furthest on Thursday next.  Here we met with Mr. May, and he and we to
talk of several things, of building, and such like matters; and so walked
to White Hall, and there I skewed my cozen Roger the Duchesse of York
sitting in state, while her own mother stands by her; he had a desire, and
I shewed him my Lady Castlemayne, whom he approves to be very handsome,
and wonders that she cannot be as good within as she is fair without.  Her
little black boy came by him; and, a dog being in his way, the little boy
called to the dog: "Pox of this dog!"--"Now," says he, blessing himself,
"would I whip this child till the blood come, if it were my child!"  and I
believe he would.  But he do by no means like the liberty of the Court,
and did come with expectation of finding them playing at cards to-night,
though Sunday; for such stories he is told, but how true I know not.

     [There is little reason to doubt that it was such as Evelyn
     describes it at a later time.  "I can never forget the inexpressible
     luxury and prophaneness, gaming, and all dissoluteness, and, as it
     were, total forgetfulness of God (it being Sunday evening) which
     this day se'nnight I was witness of; the King sitting and toying
     with his concubines, Portsmouth, Cleveland, Mazarin, &c.  A French
     boy singing love songs in that glorious gallery, whilst about twenty
     of the great courtiers and other dissolute persons were at basset
     round a large table, a bank of at least L2,000 in gold before them;
     upon which two gentlemen who were with me made reflexions with
     astonishment.  Six days after was all in the dust."--Diary,
     February, 1685.--B.]

After walking up and down the Court with him, it being now dark and past
six at night, I walked to the Swan in the Palace yard and there with much
ado did get a waterman, and so I sent for the Michells, and they come, and
their father Howlett and his wife with them, and there we drank, and so
into the boat, poor Betty's head aching.  We home by water, a fine
moonshine and warm night, it having been also a very summer's day for
warmth.  I did get her hand to me under my cloak .  .  .  .  So there we
parted at their house, and he walked almost home with me, and then I home
and to supper, and to read a little and to bed.  My wife tells me Mr.
Frampton is gone to sea, and so she lost her labour to-day in thinking to
hear him preach, which I am sorry for.

28th.  Up, and down to the Old Swan, and there drank at Michell's and saw
Betty, and so took boat and to the Temple, and thence to my tailor's and
other places about business in my way to Westminster, where I spent the
morning at the Lords' House door, to hear the conference between the two
Houses about my Lord Mordaunt, of which there was great expectation, many
hundreds of people coming to hear it.  But, when they come, the Lords did
insist upon my Lord Mordaunt's having leave to sit upon a stool uncovered
within their burr, and that he should have counsel, which the Commons
would not suffer, but desired leave to report their Lordships' resolution
to the House of Commons; and so parted for this day, which troubled me, I
having by this means lost the whole day.  Here I hear from Mr. Hayes that
Prince Rupert is very bad still, and so bad, that he do now yield to be
trepanned.  It seems, as Dr. Clerke also tells me, it is a clap of the pox
which he got about twelve years ago, and hath eaten to his head and come
through his scull, so his scull must be opened, and there is great fear of
him.  Much work I find there is to do in the two Houses in a little time,
and much difference there is between the two Houses in many things to be
reconciled; as in the Bill for examining our accounts; Lord Mordaunt's
Bill for building the City, and several others.  A little before noon I
went to the Swan and eat a bit of meat, thinking I should have had
occasion to have stayed long at the house, but I did not, but so home by
coach, calling at Broad Street and taking the goldsmith home with me, and
paid him L15 15s. for my silver standish.  He tells me gold holds up its
price still, and did desire me to let him have what old 20s. pieces I
have, and he would give me 3s. 2d.  change for each.  He gone, I to the
office, where business all the afternoon, and at night comes Mr. Gawden at
my desire to me, and to-morrow I shall pay him some money, and shall see
what present he will make me, the hopes of which do make me to part with
my money out of my chest, which I should not otherwise do, but lest this
alteration in the Controller's office should occasion my losing my
concernment in the Victualling, and so he have no more need of me. He
gone, I to the office again, having come thence home with him to talk, and
so after a little more business I to supper.  I then sent for Mercer, and
began to teach her "It is decreed," which will please me well, and so
after supper and reading a little, and my wife's cutting off my hair
short, which is grown too long upon my crown of my head, I to bed.  I met
this day in Westminster Hall Sir W. Batten and [Sir] W. Pen, and the
latter since our falling out the other day do look mighty reservedly upon
me, and still he shall do so for me, for I will be hanged before I seek to
him, unless I see I need it.

29th.  Up to the office all the morning, where Sir W. Pen and I look much
askewe one upon another, though afterward business made us speak friendly
enough, but yet we hate one another.  At noon home to dinner, and then to
the office, where all the afternoon expecting Mr. Gawden to come for some
money I am to pay him, but he comes not, which makes me think he is
considering whether it be necessary to make the present he hath promised,
it being possible this alteration in the Controller's duty may make my
place in the Victualling unnecessary, so that I am a little troubled at
it.  Busy till late at night at the office, and Sir W. Batten come to me,
and tells me that there is newes upon the Exchange to-day, that my Lord
Sandwich's coach and the French Embassador's at Madrid, meeting and
contending for the way, they shot my Lord's postilion and another man
dead; and that we have killed 25 of theirs, and that my Lord is well. How
true this is I cannot tell, there being no newes of it at all at Court, as
I am told late by one come thence, so that I hope it is not so. By and by
comes Mrs. Turner to me, to make her complaint of her sad usage she
receives from my Lord Bruncker, that he thinks much she hath not already
got another house, though he himself hath employed her night and day ever
since his first mention of the matter, to make part of her house ready for
him, as he ordered, and promised she should stay till she had fitted
herself; by which and what discourse I do remember he had of the business
before Sir W. Coventry on Sunday last I perceive he is a rotten-hearted,
false man as any else I know, even as Sir W. Pen himself, and, therefore,
I must beware of him accordingly, and I hope I shall.  I did pity the
woman with all my heart, and gave her the best council I could; and so,
falling to other discourse, I made her laugh and merry, as sad as she came
to me; so that I perceive no passion in a woman can be lasting long; and
so parted and I home, and there teaching my girle Barker part of my song
"It is decreed," which she will sing prettily, and so after supper to bed.

30th.  Fast-day for the King's death.  I all the morning at my chamber
making up my month's accounts, which I did before dinner to my thorough
content, and find myself but a small gainer this month, having no manner
of profits, but just my salary, but, blessed be God! that I am able to
save out of that, living as I do.  So to dinner, then to my chamber all
the afternoon, and in the evening my wife and I and Mercer and Barker to
little Michell's, walked, with some neats' tongues and cake and wine, and
there sat with the little couple with great pleasure, and talked and eat
and drank, and saw their little house, which is very pretty; and I much
pleased therewith, and so walked home, about eight at night, it being a
little moonshine and fair weather, and so into the garden, and, with
Mercer, sang till my wife put me in mind of its being a fast day; and so I
was sorry for it, and stopped, and home to cards awhile, and had
opportunity 'para baiser' Mercer several times, and so to bed.

31st.  Up, and to the office, where we met and sat all the morning.  At
noon home to dinner, and by and by Mr. Osborne comes from Mr. Gawden, and
takes money and notes for L4000, and leaves me acknowledgment for L4000
and odd; implying as if D. Gawden would give the L800 between Povy and
myself, but how he will divide it I know-not, till I speak with him, so
that my content is not yet full in the business.  In the evening stept out
to Sir Robert Viner's to get the money ready upon my notes to D. Gawden,
and there hear that Mr. Temple is very ill.  I met on the 'Change with
Captain Cocke, who tells me that he hears new certainty of the business of
Madrid, how our Embassador and the French met, and says that two or three
of my Lord's men, and twenty one of the French men are killed, but nothing
at Court of it. He fears the next year's service through the badness of
our counsels at White Hall, but that if they were wise, and the King would
mind his business, he might do what he would yet.  The Parliament is not
yet up, being finishing some bills.  So home and to the office, and late
home to supper, and to talk with my wife, with pleasure, and to bed.  I
met this evening at Sir R. Viner's our Mr. Turner, who I find in a
melancholy condition about his being removed out of his house, but I find
him so silly and so false that I dare not tell how to trust any advice to
him, and therefore did speak only generally to him, but I doubt his
condition is very miserable, and do pity his family. Thus the month ends:
myself in very good health and content of mind in my family.  All our
heads full in the office at this dividing of the Comptroller's duty, so
that I am in some doubt how it may prove to intrench upon my benefits, but
it cannot be much.  The Parliament, upon breaking up, having given the
King money with much ado, and great heats, and neither side pleased,
neither King nor them.  The imperfection of the Poll Bill, which must be
mended before they rise, there being several horrible oversights to the
prejudice of the King, is a certain sign of the care anybody hath of the
King's business.  Prince Rupert very ill, and to be trepanned on Saturday
next.  Nobody knows who commands the fleete next year, or, indeed, whether
we shall have a fleete or no. Great preparations in Holland and France,
and the French have lately taken Antego

     [Antigua, one of the West India Islands (Leeward Islands),
     discovered by Columbus in 1493, who is said to have named it after a
     church at Seville called Santa Maria la Antigua.  It was first
     settled by a few English families in 1632, and in 1663 another
     settlement was made under Lord Willoughby, to whom the entire island
     was granted by Charles II.  In 1666 it was invaded by a French
     force, which laid waste all the settlement.  It was reconquered by
     the English, and formally restored to them by the treaty of Breda.]

from us, which vexes us.  I am in a little care through my at last putting
a great deal of money out of my hands again into the King's upon tallies
for Tangier, but the interest which I wholly lost while in my trunk is a
temptation while things look safe, as they do in some measure for six
months, I think, and I would venture but little longer.




     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     Baker's house in Pudding Lane, where the late great fire begun
     Bill against importing Cattle from Ireland
     But my wife vexed, which vexed me
     Clap of the pox which he got about twelve years ago
     Come to us out of bed in his furred mittens and furred cap
     Court full of great apprehensions of the French
     Declared he will never have another public mistress again
     Desk fastened to one of the armes of his chayre
     Do outdo the Lords infinitely (debates in the Commons)
     Enough existed to build a ship (Pieces of the true Cross)
     Enviously, said, I could not come honestly by them
     Erasmus "de scribendis epistolis"
     For I will be hanged before I seek to him, unless I see I need
     Gold holds up its price still
     Have not any awe over them from the King's displeasure (Commons)
     He will do no good, he being a man of an unsettled head
     I did get her hand to me under my cloak
     I perceive no passion in a woman can be lasting long
     Mazer or drinking-bowl turned out of some kind of wood
     Mirrors which makes the room seem both bigger and lighter
     Outdo for neatness and plenty anything done by any of them
     Poll Bill
     Saying, that for money he might be got to our side
     Sermon without affectation or study
     Some ends of my own in what advice I do give her
     The pleasure of my not committing these things to my memory
     Very great tax; but yet I do think it is so perplexed
     Where a piece of the Cross is
     Whip this child till the blood come, if it were my child!
     Whom, in mirth to us, he calls Antichrist
     Wonders that she cannot be as good within as she is fair without
     Yet let him remember the days of darkness





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Diary of Samuel Pepys, January 1966/67
by Samuel Pepys

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***

***** This file should be named 4172.txt or 4172.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/4/1/7/4172/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
