Project Gutenberg's Diary of Samuel Pepys, March 1966/67, by Samuel Pepys

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Diary of Samuel Pepys, March 1966/67

Author: Samuel Pepys

Release Date: December 1, 2004 [EBook #4174]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, MARCH ***




Produced by David Widger





                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A. F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                  MARCH
                                1666-1667

March 1st.  Up, it being very cold weather again after a good deal of warm
summer weather, and to the office, where I settled to do much business
to-day.  By and by sent for to Sir G. Carteret to discourse of the
business of the Navy, and our wants, and the best way of bestowing the
little money we have, which is about L30,000, but, God knows, we have need
of ten times as much, which do make my life uncomfortable, I confess, on
the King's behalf, though it is well enough as to my own particular, but
the King's service is undone by it.  Having done with him, back again to
the office, and in the streets, in Mark Lane, I do observe, it being St.
David's day, the picture of a man dressed like a Welchman, hanging by the
neck upon one of the poles that stand out at the top of one of the
merchants' houses, in full proportion, and very handsomely done; which is
one of the oddest sights I have seen a good while, for it was so like a
man that one would have thought it was indeed a man.

     [From "Poor Robin's Almanack" for 1757 it appears that, in former
     times in England, a Welshman was burnt in effigy on this
     anniversary.  Mr. W. C. Hazlitt, in his edition of Brand's "Popular
     Antiquities," adds "The practice to which Pepys refers .  .  .  was
     very common at one time; and till very lately bakers made
     gingerbread Welshmen, called taffies, on St. David's day, which were
     made to represent a man skewered" (vol. i., pp. 60,61).]

Being returned home, I find Greeting, the flageolet-master, come, and
teaching my wife; and I do think my wife will take pleasure in it, and it
will be easy for her, and pleasant.  So I, as I am well content with the
charge it will occasion me.  So to the office till dinner-time, and then
home to dinner, and before dinner making my wife to sing.  Poor wretch!
her ear is so bad that it made me angry, till the poor wretch cried to see
me so vexed at her, that I think I shall not discourage her so much again,
but will endeavour to make her understand sounds, and do her good that
way; for she hath a great mind to learn, only to please me; and,
therefore, I am mighty unjust to her in discouraging her so much, but we
were good friends, and to dinner, and had she not been ill with those and
that it were not Friday (on which in Lent there are no plays) I had
carried her to a play, but she not being fit to go abroad, I to the
office, where all the afternoon close examining the collection of my
papers of the accounts of the Navy since this war to my great content, and
so at night home to talk and sing with my-wife, and then to supper and so
to bed with great pleasure.  But I cannot but remember that just before
dinner one of my people come up to me, and told me a man come from
Huntingdon would speak with me, how my heart come into my mouth doubting
that my father, who has been long sicke, was dead.  It put me into a
trembling, but, blessed be [God]! it was no such thing, but a countryman
come about ordinary business to me, to receive L50 paid to my father in
the country for the Perkins's for their legacy, upon the death of their
mother, by my uncle's will.  So though I get nothing at present, at least
by the estate, I am fain to pay this money rather than rob my father, and
much good may it do them that I may have no more further trouble from
them.  I hear to-day that Tom Woodall, the known chyrurgeon, is killed at
Somerset House by a Frenchman, but the occasion Sir W. Batten could not
tell me.

2nd.  Up, and to the office, where sitting all the morning, and among
other things did agree upon a distribution of L30,000 and odd, which is
the only sum we hear of like to come out of all the Poll Bill for the use
of this office for buying of goods.  I did herein some few courtesies for
particular friends I wished well to, and for the King's service also, and
was therefore well pleased with what was done.  Sir W. Pen this day did
bring an order from the Duke of York for our receiving from him a small
vessel for a fireship, and taking away a better of the King's for it, it
being expressed for his great service to the King.  This I am glad of, not
for his sake, but that it will give me a better ground, I believe, to ask
something for myself of this kind, which I was fearful to begin. This do
make Sir W. Pen the most kind to me that can be.  I suppose it is this,
lest it should find any opposition from me, but I will not oppose, but
promote it.  After dinner, with my wife, to the King's house to see "The
Mayden Queene," a new play of Dryden's, mightily commended for the
regularity of it, and the strain and wit; and, the truth is, there is a
comical part done by Nell,

     ["Her skill increasing with her years, other poets sought to obtain
     recommendations of her wit and beauty to the success of their
     writings.   I have said that Dryden was one of the principal
     supporters of the King's house, and ere long in one of his new plays
     a principal character was set apart for the popular comedian.  The
     drama was a tragi-comedy called 'Secret Love, or the Maiden Queen,'
     and an additional interest was attached to its production from the
     king having suggested the plot to its author, and calling it 'his
     play.'"--Cunningham's Story of Nell Gwyn, ed: 1892, pp. 38,39.]

which is Florimell, that I never can hope ever to see the like done again,
by man or woman.  The King and Duke of York were at the play.  But so
great performance of a comical part was never, I believe, in the world
before as Nell do this, both as a mad girle, then most and best of all
when she comes in like a young gallant; and hath the notions and carriage
of a spark the most that ever I saw any man have.  It makes me, I confess,
admire her.  Thence home and to the office, where busy a while, and then
home to read the lives of Henry 5th and 6th, very fine, in Speede, and to
bed.  This day I did pay a bill of L50 from my father, being so much out
of my own purse gone to pay my uncle Robert's legacy to my aunt Perkins's
child.

3rd (Lord's day).  Lay long, merrily talking with my wife, and then up and
to church, where a dull sermon of Mr. Mills touching Original Sin, and
then home, and there find little Michell and his wife, whom I love
mightily.  Mightily contented I was in their company, for I love her much;
and so after dinner I left them and by water from the Old Swan to White
Hall, where, walking in the galleries, I in the first place met Mr.
Pierce, who tells me the story of Tom Woodall, the surgeon, killed in a
drunken quarrel, and how the Duke of York hath a mind to get him [Pierce]
one of his places in St. Thomas's Hospitall.  Then comes Mr. Hayward, the
Duke of York's servant, and tells us that the Swede's Embassador hath been
here to-day with news that it is believed that the Dutch will yield to
have the treaty at London or Dover, neither of which will get our King any
credit, we having already consented to have it at The Hague; which, it
seems, De Witt opposed, as a thing wherein the King of England must needs
have some profound design, which in my conscience he hath not. They do
also tell me that newes is this day come to the King, that the King of
France is come with his army to the frontiers of Flanders, demanding leave
to pass through their country towards Poland, but is denied, and thereupon
that he is gone into the country.  How true this is I dare not believe
till I hear more.  From them I walked into the Parke, it being a fine but
very cold day; and there took two or three turns the length of the Pell
Mell: and there I met Serjeant Bearcroft, who was sent for the Duke of
Buckingham, to have brought him prisoner to the Tower. He come to towne
this day, and brings word that, being overtaken and outrid by the Duchesse
of Buckingham within a few miles of the Duke's house of Westhorp,  he
believes she got thither about a quarter of an hour before him, and so had
time to consider; so that, when he come, the doors were kept shut against
him.  The next day, coming with officers of the neighbour market-town to
force open the doors, they were open for him, but the Duke gone; so he
took horse presently, and heard upon the road that the Duke of Buckingham
was gone before him for London: so that he believes he is this day also
come to towne before him; but no newes is yet heard of him.  This is all
he brings.  Thence to my Lord Chancellor's, and there, meeting Sir H.
Cholmly, he and I walked in my Lord's garden, and talked; among other
things, of the treaty: and he says there will certainly be a peace, but I
cannot believe it.  He tells me that the Duke of Buckingham his crimes, as
far as he knows, are his being of a caball with some discontented persons
of the late House of Commons, and opposing the desires of the King in all
his matters in that House; and endeavouring to become popular, and
advising how the Commons' House should proceed, and how he would order the
House of Lords.  And that he hath been endeavouring to have the King's
nativity calculated; which was done, and the fellow now in the Tower about
it; which itself hath heretofore, as he says, been held treason, and
people died for it; but by the Statute of Treasons, in Queen Mary's times
and since, it hath been left out.  He tells me that this silly Lord hath
provoked, by his ill-carriage, the Duke of York, my Lord Chancellor, and
all the great persons; and therefore, most likely, will die.  He tells me,
too, many practices of treachery against this King; as betraying him in
Scotland, and giving Oliver an account of the King's private councils;
which the King knows very well, and hath yet pardoned him.

     [Two of our greatest poets have drawn the character of the Duke of
     Buckingham in brilliant verse, and both have condemned him to
     infamy. There is enough in Pepys's reports to corroborate the main
     features of Dryden's magnificent portrait of Zimri in "Absolom and
     Achitophel":

               "In the first rank of these did Zimri stand;
               A man so various that he seemed to be
               Not one, but all mankind's epitome;
               Stiff in opinions, always in the wrong;
               Was everything by starts, and nothing long,

               But, in the course of one revolving moon,
               Was chymist, fiddler, statesman, and buffoon;
               Then all for women, painting, rhyming, drinking,
               Besides ten thousand freaks that died in thinking,
                    *   *   *   *   *   *   *
               He laughed himself from Court, then sought relief
               By forming parties, but could ne'er be chief."

     Pope's facts are not correct, and hence the effect of his picture is
     impaired.  In spite of the duke's constant visits to the Tower,
     Charles II. still continued his friend; but on the death of the
     king, expecting little from James, he retired to his estate at
     Helmsley, in Yorkshire, to nurse his property and to restore his
     constitution.  He died on April 16th, 1687, at Kirkby Moorside,
     after a few days' illness, caused by sitting on the damp grass when
     heated from a fox chase.  The scene of his death was the house of a
     tenant, not "the worst inn's worst room" ("Moral Essays," epist.
     iii.).  He was buried in Westminster Abbey.]

Here I passed away a little time more talking with him and Creed, whom I
met there, and so away, Creed walking with me to White Hall, and there I
took water and stayed at Michell's to drink.  I home, and there to read
very good things in Fuller's "Church History," and "Worthies," and so to
supper, and after supper had much good discourse with W. Hewer, who supped
with us, about the ticket office and the knaveries and extortions every
day used there, and particularly of the business of Mr. Carcasse, whom I
fear I shall find a very rogue.  So parted with him, and then to bed.

4th.  Up, and with Sir J. Minnes and [Sir] W. Batten by barge to Deptford
by eight in the morning, where to the King's yard a little to look after
business there, and then to a private storehouse to look upon some cordage
of Sir W. Batten's, and there being a hole formerly made for a drain for
tarr to run into, wherein the barrel stood still, full of stinking water,
Sir W. Batten did fall with one leg into it, which might have been very
bad to him by breaking a leg or other hurt, but, thanks be to God, he only
sprained his foot a little.  So after his shifting his stockings at a
strong water shop close by, we took barge again, and so to Woolwich, where
our business was chiefly to look upon the ballast wharfe there, which is
offered us for the King's use to hire, but we do not think it worth the
laying out much money upon, unless we could buy the fee-simple of it,
which cannot be sold us, so we wholly flung it off: So to the Dockyard,
and there staid a while talking about business of the yard, and thence to
the Rope-yard, and so to the White Hart and there dined, and Captain Cocke
with us, whom we found at the Rope-yard, and very merry at dinner, and
many pretty tales of Sir J. Minnes, which I have entered in my tale book.
But by this time Sir W. Batten was come to be in much pain in his foot, so
as he was forced to be carried down in a chair to the barge again, and so
away to Deptford, and there I a little in the yard, and then to Bagwell's,
where I find his wife washing, and also I did 'hazer tout que je voudrais
con' her, and then sent for her husband, and discoursed of his going to
Harwich this week to his charge of the new ship building there, which I
have got him, and so away, walked to Redriffe, and there took boat and
away home, and upon Tower Hill, near the ticket office, meeting with my
old acquaintance Mr. Chaplin, the cheesemonger, and there fell to talk of
news, and he tells me that for certain the King of France is denied
passage with his army through Flanders, and that he hears that the Dutch
do stand upon high terms with us, and will have a promise of not being
obliged to strike the flag to us before they will treat with us, and other
high things, which I am ashamed of and do hope will never be yielded to.
That they do make all imaginable preparations, but that he believes they
will be in mighty want of men; that the King of France do court us
mightily.  He tells me too that our Lord-Treasurer is going to lay down,
and that Lord Arlington is to be Lord Treasurer, but I believe nothing of
it, for he is not yet of estate visible enough to have the charge I
suppose upon him.  So being parted from him I home to the office, and
after having done business there I home to supper, and there mightily
pleased with my wife's beginning the flagellette, believing that she will
come to very well thereon.  This day in the barge I took Berckenshaw's
translation of Alsted his Templum, but the most ridiculous book, as he has
translated it, that ever I saw in my life, I declaring that I understood
not three lines together from one end of the book to the other.

5th.  Up, and to the office, where met and sat all the morning, doing
little for want of money, but only bear the countenance of an office.  At
noon home to dinner, and then to the office again, and there comes Martin
my purser, and I walked with him awhile in the garden, I giving him good
advice to beware of coming any more with high demands for supernumeraries
or other things, for now Sir W. Pen is come to mind the business, the
passing of his accounts will not be so easy as the last.  He tells me he
will never need it again, it being as easy, and to as much purpose to do
the same thing otherwise, and how he do keep his Captain's table, and by
that means hath the command of his Captains, and do not fear in a 5th-rate
ship constantly employed to get a L1000 in five years time, and this year,
besides all his spendings, which are I fear high, he hath got at this day
clear above L150 in a voyage of about five or six months, which is a brave
trade.  He gone I to the office, and there all the afternoon late doing
much business, and then to see Sir W. Batten, whose leg is all but better
than it was, and like to do well.  I by discourse do perceive he and his
Lady are to their hearts out with my Lord Bruncker and Mrs. Williams, to
which I added something, but, I think, did not venture too far with them.
But, Lord! to see to what a poor content any acquaintance among these
people, or the people of the world, as they now-adays go, is worth; for my
part I and my wife will keep to one another and let the world go hang, for
there is nothing but falseness in it.  So home to supper and hear my wife
and girle sing a little, and then to bed with much content of mind.

6th.  Up, and with [Sir] W. Pen to White Hall by coach, and by the way
agreed to acquaint [Sir] W. Coventry with the business of Mr. Carcasse,
and he and I spoke to Sir W. Coventry that we might move it to the Duke of
York, which I did in a very indifferent, that is, impartial manner, but
vexed I believe Lord Bruncker.  Here the Duke of York did acquaint us, and
the King did the like also, afterwards coming in, with his resolution of
altering the manner of the war this year; that is, we shall keep what
fleete we have abroad in several squadrons: so that now all is come out;
but we are to keep it as close as we can, without hindering the work that
is to be done in preparation to this.  Great preparations there are to
fortify Sheernesse and the yard at Portsmouth, and forces are drawing down
to both those places, and elsewhere by the seaside; so that we have some
fear of an invasion; and the Duke of York himself did declare his
expectation of the enemy's blocking us up here in the River, and therefore
directed that we should send away all the ships that we have to fit out
hence.  Sir W. Pen told me, going with me this morning to White Hall, that
for certain the Duke of Buckingham is brought into the Tower, and that he
hath had an hour's private conference with the King before he was sent
thither.  To Westminster Hall.  There bought some news books, and, as
every where else, hear every body complain of the dearness of coals, being
at L4 per chaldron, the weather, too, being become most bitter cold, the
King saying to-day that it was the coldest day he ever knew in England.
Thence by coach to my Lord Crew's, where very welcome. Here I find they
are in doubt where the Duke of Buckingham is; which makes me mightily
reflect on the uncertainty of all history, when, in a business of this
moment, and of this day's growth, we cannot tell the truth.  Here dined my
old acquaintance, Mr. Borfett, that was my Lord Sandwich's chaplain, and
my Lady Wright and Dr. Boreman, who is preacher at St. Gyles's in the
Fields, who, after dinner, did give my Lord an account of two papist women
lately converted, whereof one wrote her recantation, which he shewed under
her own hand mighty well drawn, so as my Lord desired a copy of it, after
he had satisfied himself from the Doctor, that to his knowledge she was
not a woman under any necessity. Thence by coach home and staid a very
little, and then by water to Redriffe, and walked to Bagwell's, where 'la
moher' was 'defro, sed' would not have me 'demeurer' there 'parce que'
Mrs. Batters and one of my 'ancillas', I believe Jane (for she was gone
abroad to-day), was in the town, and coming thither; so I away presently,
esteeming it a great escape.  So to the yard and spoke a word or two, and
then by water home, wondrous cold, and reading a ridiculous ballad made in
praise of the Duke of Albemarle, to the tune of St. George, the tune being
printed, too; and I observe that people have some great encouragement to
make ballads of him of this kind.  There are so many, that hereafter he
will sound like Guy of Warwicke.  Then abroad with my wife, leaving her at
the 'Change, while I to Sir H. Cholmly's, a pretty house, and a fine,
worthy, well-disposed gentleman he is.  He and I to Sir Ph.  Warwicke's,
about money for Tangier, but to little purpose.  H. Cholmley tells me,
among other things, that he hears of little hopes of a peace, their
demands being so high as we shall never grant, and could tell me that we
shall keep no fleete abroad this year, but only squadrons.  And, among
other things, that my Lord Bellasses, he believes, will lose his command
of Tangier by his corrupt covetous ways of .endeavouring to sell his
command, which I am glad [of], for he is a man of no worth in the world
but compliment. So to the 'Change, and there bought 32s. worth of things
for Mrs. Knipp, my Valentine, which is pretty to see how my wife is come
to convention with me, that, whatever I do give to anybody else, I shall
give her as much, which I am not much displeased with.  So home and to the
office and Sir W. Batten, to tell him what I had done to-day about
Carcasse's business, and God forgive me I am not without design to give a
blow to Sir W. Batten by it.  So home, where Mr. Batelier supped with us
and talked away the evening pretty late, and so he gone and we to bed.

7th.  So up, and to the office, my head full of Carcasse's business; then
hearing that Knipp is at my house, I home, and it was about a ticket for a
friend of hers.  I do love the humour of the jade very well.  So to the
office again, not being able to stay, and there about noon my Lord
Bruncker did begin to talk of Carcasse's business.  Only Commissioner
Pett, my Lord, and I there, and it was pretty to see how Pett hugged the
occasion of having anything against Sir W. Batten, which I am not much
troubled at, for I love him not neither.  Though I did really endeavour to
quash it all I could, because I would prevent their malice taking effect.
My Lord I see is fully resolved to vindicate Carcasse, though to the
undoing of Sir W. Batten, but I believe he will find himself in a mistake,
and do himself no good, and that I shall be glad of, for though I love the
treason I hate the traitor.  But he is vexed at my moving it to the Duke
of York yesterday, which I answered well, so as I think he could not
answer.  But, Lord! it is pretty to see how Pett hugs this business, and
how he favours my Lord Bruncker; who to my knowledge hates him, and has
said more to his disadvantage, in my presence, to the King and Duke of
York than any man in England, and so let them thrive one with another by
cheating one another, for that is all I observe among them. Thence home
late, and find my wife hath dined, and she and Mrs. Hewer going to a play.
Here was Creed, and he and I to Devonshire House, to a burial of a kinsman
of Sir R. Viner's; and there I received a ring, and so away presently to
Creed, who staid for me at an alehouse hard by, and thence to the Duke's
playhouse, where he parted, and I in and find my wife and Mrs. Hewer, and
sat by them and saw "The English Princesse, or Richard the Third;" a most
sad, melancholy play, and pretty good; but nothing eminent in it, as some
tragedys are; only little Mis. Davis did dance a jig after the end of the
play, and there telling the next day's play; so that it come in by force
only to please the company to see her dance in boy's 'clothes; and, the
truth is, there is no comparison between Nell's dancing the other day at
the King's house in boy's clothes and this, this being infinitely beyond
the other.  Mere was Mr. Clerke and Pierce, to whom one word only of "How
do you," and so away home, Mrs: Hewer with us, and I to the office and so
to [Sir] W. Batten's, and there talked privately with him and [Sir] W. Pen
about business of Carcasse against tomorrow, wherein I think I did give
them proof enough of my ability as well as friendship to [Sir] W. Batten,
and the honour of the office, in my sense of the rogue's business.  So
back to finish my office business, and then home to supper, and to bed.
This day, Commissioner Taylor come to me for advice, and would force me to
take ten pieces in gold of him, which I had no mind to, he being become
one of our number at the Board.  This day was reckoned by all people the
coldest day that ever was remembered in England; and, God knows! coals at
a very great price.

8th.  Up, and to the Old Swan, where drank at Michell's, but not seeing
her whom I love I by water to White Hall, and there acquainted Sir G.
Carteret betimes what I had to say this day before the Duke of York in the
business of Carcasse, which he likes well of, being a great enemy to him,
and then I being too early here to go to Sir W. Coventry's chamber, having
nothing to say to him, and being able to give him but a bad account of the
business of the office (which is a shame to me, and that which I shall rue
if I do not recover), to the Exchequer about getting a certificate of Mr.
Lanyon's entered at Sir R. Longs office, and strange it is to see what
horrid delays there are at this day in the business of money, there being
nothing yet come from my Lord Treasurer to set the business of money in
action since the Parliament broke off, notwithstanding the greatness and
number of the King's occasions for it. So to the Swan, and there had three
or four baisers of the little ancilla there, and so to Westminster Hall,
where I saw Mr. Martin, the purser, come through with a picture in his
hand, which he had bought, and observed how all the people of the Hall did
fleer and laugh upon him, crying, "There is plenty grown upon a sudden;"
and, the truth is, I was a little troubled that my favour should fall on
so vain a fellow as he, and the more because, methought, the people do
gaze upon me as the man that had raised him, and as if they guessed whence
my kindness to him springs. So thence to White Hall, where I find all met
at the Duke of York's chamber; and, by and by, the Duke of York comes, and
Carcasse is called in, and I read the depositions and his answers, and he
added with great confidence and good words, even almost to persuasion,
what to say; and my Lord Bruncker, like a very silly solicitor, argued
against me and us all for him; and, being asked first by the Duke of York
his opinion, did give it for his being excused.  I next did answer the
contrary very plainly, and had, in this dispute, which vexed and will
never be forgot by my Lord, many occasions of speaking severely, and did,
against his bad practices.  Commissioner Pett, like a fawning rogue, sided
with my Lord, but to no purpose; and [Sir] W. Pen, like a cunning rogue,
spoke mighty indifferently, and said nothing in all the fray, like a knave
as he is. But [Sir] W. Batten spoke out, and did come off himself by the
Duke's kindness very well; and then Sir G. Carteret, and Sir W. Coventry,
and the Duke of York himself, flatly as I said; and so he was declared
unfit to continue in, and therefore to be presently discharged the office;
which, among other good effects, I hope, will make my Lord Bruncker not
'alloquer' so high, when he shall consider he hath had such a publick
foyle as this is.  So home with [Sir] W. Batten, and [Sir] W. Pen, by
coach, and there met at the office, and my Lord Bruncker presently after
us, and there did give order to Mr. Stevens for securing the tickets in
Carcasses hands, which my Lord against his will could not refuse to sign,
and then home to dinner, and so away with my wife by coach, she to Mrs.
Pierce's and I to my Lord Bellasses, and with him to [my] Lord
Treasurer's, where by agreement we met with Sir H. Cholmly, and there sat
and talked all the afternoon almost about one thing or other, expecting
Sir Philip Warwicke's coming, but he come not, so we away towards night,
Sir H. Cholmly and I to the Temple, and there parted, telling me of my
Lord Bellasses's want of generosity, and that he [Bellasses] will
certainly be turned out of his government, and he thinks himself stands
fair for it.  So home, and there found, as I expected, Mrs. Pierce and Mr.
Batelier; he went for Mrs. Jones, but no Mrs. Knipp come, which vexed me,
nor any other company.  So with one fidler we danced away the evening, but
I was not well contented with the littleness of the room, and my wife's
want of preparing things ready, as they should be, for supper, and bad.
So not very merry, though very well pleased.  So after supper to bed, my
wife and Mrs. Pierce, and her boy James and I. Yesterday I began to make
this mark (V) stand instead of three pricks, which therefore I must
observe every where, it being a mark more easy to make.

9th.  Up, and to the office, where sat all the morning busy.  At noon home
to dinner, where Mrs. Pierce did continue with us and her boy (who I still
find every day more and more witty beyond his age), and did dine with us,
and by and by comes in her husband and a brother-in-law of his, a parson,
one of the tallest biggest men that ever I saw in my life.  So to the
office, where a meeting extraordinary about settling the number and wages
of my Lord Bruncker's clerks for his new work upon the Treasurer's
accounts, but this did put us upon running into the business of yesterday
about Carcasse, wherein I perceive he is most dissatisfied with me, and I
am not sorry for it, having all the world but him of my side therein, for
it will let him know another time that he is not to expect our submitting
to him in every thing, as I think he did heretofore expect.  He did speak
many severe words to me, and I returned as many to him, so that I do think
there cannot for a great while, be, any right peace between us, and I care
not a fart for it; but however, I must look about me and mind my business,
for I perceive by his threats and enquiries he is and will endeavour to
find out something against me or mine.  Breaking up here somewhat brokenly
I home, and carried Mrs. Pierce and wife to the New Exchange, and there
did give her and myself a pair of gloves, and then set her down at home,
and so back again straight home and thereto do business, and then to Sir
W. Batten's, where [Sir] W. Pen and others, and mighty merry, only I have
got a great cold, and the scolding this day at the office with my Lord
Bruncker hath made it worse, that I am not able to speak.  But, Lord! to
see how kind Sir W. Batten and his Lady are to me upon this business of my
standing by [Sir] W. Batten against Carcasse, and I am glad of it.
Captain Cocke, who was here to-night, did tell us that he is certain that
yesterday a proclamation was voted at the Council, touching the
proclaiming of my Lord Duke of Buckingham a traytor, and that it will be
out on Monday. So home late, and drank some buttered ale, and so to bed
and to sleep. This cold did most certainly come by my staying a little too
long bare-legged yesterday morning when I rose while I looked out fresh
socks and thread stockings, yesterday's having in the night, lying near
the window, been covered with snow within the window, which made me I
durst not put them on.

10th (Lord's day).  Having my cold still grown more upon me, so as I am
not able to speak, I lay in bed till noon, and then up and to my chamber
with a good fire, and there spent an hour on Morly's Introduction to
Musique, a very good but unmethodical book.  Then to dinner, my wife and
I, and then all the afternoon alone in my chamber preparing a letter for
Commissioner Taylor to the City about getting his accounts for The Loyal
London,

     [The "Loyal London" was the ship given to the king by the City.  It
     was launched at Deptford on June 10th, 1666]

by him built for them, stated and discharged, they owing him still about
L4000.  Towards the evening comes Mr. Spong to see me, whose discourse
about several things I proposed to him was very good, better than I have
had with any body a good while.  He gone, I to my business again, and anon
comes my Lady Pen and her son-in law and daughter, and there we talked all
the evening away, and then to supper; and after supper comes Sir W. Pen,
and there we talked together, and then broke up, and so to bed.  He tells
me that our Mr. Turner has seen the proclamation against the Duke of
Buckingham, and that therefore it is true what we heard last night.
Yesterday and to-day I have been troubled with a hoarseness through cold
that I could not almost speak.

11th.  Up, and with my cold still upon me and hoarseness, but I was forced
to rise and to the office, where all the morning busy, and among other
things Sir W. Warren come to me, to whom of late I have been very strange,
partly from my indifference how more than heretofore to get money, but
most from my finding that he is become great with my Lord Bruncker, and so
I dare not trust him as I used to do, for I will not be inward with him
that is open to another.  By and by comes Sir H. Cholmly to me about
Tangier business, and then talking of news he tells me how yesterday the
King did publiquely talk of the King of France's dealing with all the
Princes of Christendome.  As to the States of Holland, he [the King of
France] hath advised them, on good grounds, to refuse to treat with us at
the Hague, because of having opportunity of spies, by reason of our
interest in the House of Orange; and then, it being a town in one
particular province, it would not be fit to have it, but in a town wherein
the provinces have equal interest, as at Mastricht, and other places
named.  That he advises them to offer no terms, nor accept of any, without
his privity and consent, according to agreement; and tells them, if not
so, he hath in his power to be even with them, the King of England being
come to offer him any terms he pleases; and that my Lord St. Albans is now
at Paris, Plenipotentiary, to make what peace he pleases; and so he can
make it, and exclude them, the Dutch, if he sees fit.  A copy of this
letter of the King of France's the Spanish Ambassador here gets, and comes
and tells all to our King; which our King denies, and says the King of
France only uses his power of saying anything.  At the same time, the King
of France writes to the Emperor, that he is resolved to do all things to
express affection to the Emperor, having it now in his power to make what
peace he pleases between the King of England and him, and the States of
the United Provinces; and, therefore, that he would not have him to
concern himself in a friendship with us; and assures him that, on that
regard, he will not offer anything to his disturbance, in his interest in
Flanders, or elsewhere.  He writes, at the same time, to Spayne, to tell
him that he wonders to hear of a league almost ended between the Crown of
Spayne and England, by my Lord Sandwich, and all without his privity,
while he was making a peace upon what terms he pleased with England: that
he is a great lover of the Crown of Spayne, and would take the King and
his affairs, during his minority, into his protection, nor would offer to
set his foot in Flanders, or any where else, to disturb him; and,
therefore, would not have him to trouble himself to make peace with any
body; only he hath a desire to offer an exchange, which he thinks may be
of moment to both sides: that is, that he [France] will enstate the King
of Spayne in the kingdom of Portugall, and he and the Dutch will put him
into possession of Lisbon; and, that being done, he [France] may have
Flanders: and this, they say; do mightily take in Spayne, which is
sensible of the fruitless expence Flanders, so far off, gives them; and
how much better it would be for them to be master of Portugall; and the
King of France offers, for security herein, that the King of England shall
be bond for him, and that he will countersecure the King of England with
Amsterdam; and, it seems, hath assured our King, that if he will make a
league with him, he will make a peace exclusive to the Hollander.  These
things are almost romantique, but yet true, as Sir H. Cholmly tells me the
King himself did relate it all yesterday; and it seems as if the King of
France did think other princes fit for nothing but to make sport for him:
but simple princes they are, that are forced to suffer this from him.  So
at noon with Sir W. Pen by coach to the Sun in Leadenhall Streete, where
Sir R. Ford, Sir W. Batten, and Commissioner Taylor (whose feast it was)
were, and we dined and had a very good dinner.  Among other discourses Sir
R. Ford did tell me that he do verily believe that the city will in few
years be built again in all the greatest streets, and answered the
objections I did give to it.  Here we had the proclamation this day come
out against the Duke of Buckingham, commanding him to come in to one of
the Secretaries, or to the Lieutenant of the Tower.  A silly, vain man to
bring himself to this: and there be many hard circumstances in the
proclamation of the causes of this proceeding of the King's, which speak
great displeasure of the King's, and crimes of his.  Then to discourse of
the business of the day, that is, to see Commissioner Taylor's accounts
for his ship he built, The Loyall London, and it is pretty to see how
dully this old fellow makes his demands, and yet plaguy wise sayings will
come from the man sometimes, and also how Sir R. Ford and [Sir] W. Batten
did with seeming reliance advise him what to do, and how to come prepared
to answer objections to the Common Council.  Thence away to the office,
where late busy, and then home to supper, mightily pleased with my wife's
trill, and so to bed.  This night Mr. Carcasse did come to me again to
desire favour, and that I would mediate that he might be restored, but I
did give him no kind answer at all, but was very angry, and I confess a
good deal of it from my Lord Bruncker's simplicity and passion.

12th.  Up, and to the office, where all-the morning, and my Lord Bruncker
mighty quiet, and no words all day, which I wonder at, expecting that he
would have fallen again upon the business of Carcasse, and the more for
that here happened that Perkins, who was the greatest witness of all
against him, was brought in by Sir W. Batten to prove that he did really
belong to The Prince, but being examined was found rather a fool than
anything, as not being able to give any account when he come in nor when
he come out of her, more than that he was taken by the Dutch in her, but
did agree in earnest to Sir W. Pen's saying that she lay up all, the
winter before at Lambeth.  This I confess did make me begin to doubt the
truth of his evidence, but not to doubt the faults of Carcasse, for he was
condemned by, many other better evidences than his, besides the whole
world's report.  At noon home, and there find Mr. Goodgroome, whose
teaching of my wife only by singing over and over again to her, and
letting her sing with him, not by herself, to correct her faults, I do not
like at all, but was angry at it; but have this content, that I do think
she will come to sing pretty well, and to trill in time, which pleases me
well.  He dined with us, and then to the office, when we had a sorry
meeting to little purpose, and then broke up, and I to my office, and busy
late to good purpose, and so home to supper and to bed.  This day a poor
seaman, almost starved for want of food, lay in our yard a-dying.  I sent
him half-a-crown, and we ordered his ticket to be paid.

13th.  Up, and with [Sir] W. Batten to the Duke of York to our usual
attendance, where I did fear my Lord Bruncker might move something in
revenge that might trouble me, but he did not, but contrarily had the
content to hear Sir G. Carteret fall foul on him in the Duke of York's bed
chamber for his directing people with tickets and petitions to him,
bidding him mind his Controller's place and not his, for if he did he
should be too hard for him, and made high words, which I was glad of.
Having done our usual business with the Duke of York, I away; and meeting
Mr. D. Gawden in the presence-chamber, he and I to talk; and among other
things he tells me, and I do find every where else, also, that our masters
do begin not to like of their councils in fitting out no fleete, but only
squadrons, and are finding out excuses for it; and, among others, he tells
me a Privy-Councillor did tell him that it was said in Council that a
fleete could not be set out this year, for want of victuals, which gives
him and me a great alarme, but me especially for had it been so, I ought
to have represented it; and therefore it puts me in policy presently to
prepare myself to answer this objection, if ever it should come about, by
drawing up a state of the Victualler's stores, which I will presently do.
So to Westminster Hall, and there staid and talked, and then to Sir G.
Carteret's, where I dined with the ladies, he not at home, and very well
used I am among them, so that I am heartily ashamed that my wife hath not
been there to see them; but she shall very shortly.  So home by water, and
stepped into Michell's, and there did baiser my Betty, 'que aegrotat' a
little.  At home find Mr. Holliard, and made him eat a bit of victuals.
Here I find Mr. Greeten, who teaches my wife on the flageolet, and I think
she will come to something on it.  Mr. Holliard advises me to have my
father come up to town, for he doubts else in the country he will never
find ease, for, poor man, his grief is now grown so great upon him that he
is never at ease, so I will have him up at Easter.  By and by by coach,
set down Mr. Holliard near his house at Hatton Garden and myself to Lord
Treasurer's, and sent my wife to the New Exchange.  I staid not here, but
to Westminster Hall, and thence to Martin's, where he and she both within,
and with them the little widow that was once there with her when I was
there, that dissembled so well to be grieved at hearing a tune that her,
late husband liked, but there being so much company, I had no pleasure
here, and so away to the Hall again, and there met Doll Lane coming out,
and 'par contrat did hazer bargain para aller to the cabaret de vin',
called the Rose, and 'ibi' I staid two hours, 'sed' she did not 'venir',
'lequel' troubled me, and so away by coach and took up my wife, and away
home, and so to Sir W. Batten's, where I am told that it is intended by
Mr. Carcasse to pray me to be godfather with Lord Bruncker to-morrow to
his child, which I suppose they tell me in mirth, but if he should ask me
I know not whether I should refuse it or no.  Late at my office preparing
a speech against to-morrow morning, before the King, at my Lord
Treasurer's, and the truth is it run in my head all night.  So home to
supper and to bed.  The Duke of Buckingham is concluded gone over sea,
and, it is thought, to France.

14th.  Up, and with Sir W. Batten and [Sir] W. Pen to my Lord Treasurer's,
where we met with my Lord Bruncker an hour before the King come, and had
time to talk a little of our business.  Then come much company, among
others Sir H. Cholmly, who tells me that undoubtedly my Lord Bellasses
will go no more as Governor to Tangier, and that he do put in fair for it,
and believes he shall have it, and proposes how it may conduce to his
account and mine in the business of money.  Here we fell into talk with
Sir Stephen Fox, and, among other things, of the Spanish manner of
walking, when three together, and shewed me how, which was pretty, to
prevent differences.  By and by comes the King and Duke of York, and
presently the officers of the Ordnance were called; my Lord Berkeley, Sir
John Duncomb, and Mr. Chichly; then we, my Lord Bruncker, [Sir] W. Batten,
[Sir] W. Pen, and myself; where we find only the King and Duke of York,
and my Lord Treasurer, and Sir G. Carteret; where I only did speak, laying
down the state of our wants, which the King and Duke of York seemed very
well pleased with, and we did get what we asked, L500,000, assigned upon
the eleven months' tax: but that is not so much ready money, or what will
raise L40,000 per week, which we desired, and the business will want.  Yet
are we fain to come away answered, when, God knows, it will undo the
King's business to have matters of this moment put off in this manner.
The King did prevent my offering anything by and by as Treasurer for
Tangier, telling me that he had ordered us L30,000 on the same tax; but
that is not what we would have to bring our payments to come within a
year.  So we gone out, in went others; viz., one after another, Sir
Stephen Fox for the army, Captain Cocke for sick and wounded, Mr.
Ashburnham for the household.  Thence [Sir] W. Batten, [Sir] W. Pen, and
I, back again; I mightily pleased with what I had said and done, and the
success thereof.  But, it being a fine clear day, I did, 'en gayete de
coeur', propose going to Bow for ayre sake, and dine there, which they
embraced, and so [Sir] W. Batten and I (setting [Sir] W. Pen down at Mark
Lane end) straight to Bow, to the Queen's Head, and there bespoke our
dinner, carrying meat with us from London; and anon comes [Sir] W. Pen
with my wife and Lady Batten, and then Mr. Lowder with his mother and
wife.  While [Sir] W. Batten and I were alone, we had much friendly
discourse, though I will never trust him far; but we do propose getting
"The Flying Greyhound," our privateer, to us and [Sir] W. Pen at the end
of the year when we call her home, by begging her of the King, and I do
not think we shall be denied her.  They being come, we to oysters and so
to talk, very pleasant I was all day, and anon to dinner, and I made very
good company.  Here till the evening, so as it was dark almost before we
got home (back again in the same method, I think, we went), and spent the
night talking at Sir W. Batten's, only a little at my office, to look over
the Victualler's contract, and draw up some arguments for him to plead for
his charges in transportation of goods beyond the ports which the letter
of one article in his contract do lay upon him.  This done I home to
supper and to bed.  Troubled a little at my fear that my Lord Bruncker
should tell Sir W. Coventry of our neglecting the office this afternoon
(which was intended) to look after our pleasures, but nothing will fall
upon me alone about this.

15th.  Up, and pleased at Tom's teaching of Barker something to sing a 3rd
part to a song, which will please mightily.  So I to the office all the
morning, and at noon to the 'Change, where I do hear that letters this day
come to Court do tell us that we are likely not to agree, the Dutch
demanding high terms, and the King of France the like, in a most braving
manner.  The merchants do give themselves over for lost, no man knowing
what to do, whether to sell or buy, not knowing whether peace or war to
expect, and I am told that could that be now known a man might get L20,000
in a week's time by buying up of goods in case there should be war.
Thence home and dined well, and then with my wife, set her at Unthanke's
and I to Sir G. Carteret, where talked with the ladies a while, and my
Lady Carteret talks nothing but sorrow and afflictions coming on us, and
indeed I do fear the same.  So away and met Dr. Fuller, Bishop of
Limricke, and walked an hour with him in the Court talking of newes only,
and he do think that matters will be bad with us.  Then to Westminster
Hall, and there spent an hour or two walking up and down, thinking 'para
avoir' got out Doll Lane, 'sed je ne' could do it, having no opportunity
'de hazer le, ainsi lost the tota' afternoon, and so away and called my
wife and home, where a little at the office, and then home to my closet to
enter my journalls, and so to supper and to bed.  This noon come little
Mis. Tooker, who is grown a little woman; ego had opportunity 'para baiser
her .  .  .  .  This morning I was called up by Sir John Winter, poor man!
come in his sedan from the other end of the town, before I was up, and
merely about the King's business, which is a worthy thing of him, and I
believe him to be a worthy good man, and I will do him the right to tell
the Duke of it, who did speak well of him the other day.  It was about
helping the King in the business of bringing down his timber to the
sea-side, in the Forest of Deane.

16th.  Up, and to the office, where all the morning; at noon home to
dinner, and then to the office again in the afternoon, and there all day
very busy till night, and then, having done much business, home to supper,
and so to bed.  This afternoon come home Sir J. Minnes, who has been down,
but with little purpose, to pay the ships below at the Nore. This evening,
having done my letters, I did write out the heads of what I had prepared
to speak to the King the other day at my Lord Treasurer's, which I do
think convenient to keep by me for future use.  The weather is now grown
warm again, after much cold; and it is observable that within these eight
days I did see smoke remaining, coming out of some cellars, from the late
great fire, now above six months since.  There was this day at the office
(as he is most days) Sir W. Warren, against whom I did manifestly plead,
and heartily too, God forgive me!  But the reason is because I do find
that he do now wholly rely almost upon my Lord Bruncker, though I confess
I have no greater ground of my leaving him than the confidence which I
perceive he hath got in my Lord Bruncker, whose seeming favours only do
obtain of him as much compensation as, I believe (for he do know well the
way of using his bounties), as mine more real.  Besides, my Lord and I
being become antagonistic, I do not think it safe for me to trust myself
in the hands of one whom I know to be a knave, and using all means to
become gracious there.

17th (Lord's day).  Up betime with my wife, and by coach with Sir W. Pen
and Sir Thomas Allen to White Hall, there my wife and I the first time
that ever we went to my Lady Jemimah's chamber at Sir Edward Carteret's
lodgings.  I confess I have been much to blame and much ashamed of our not
visiting her sooner, but better now than never.  Here we took her before
she was up, which I was sorry for, so only saw her, and away to chapel,
leaving further visit till after sermon.  I put my wife into the pew
below, but it was pretty to see, myself being but in a plain band, and
every way else ordinary, how the verger took me for her man, I think, and
I was fain to tell him she was a kinswoman of my Lord Sandwich's, he
saying that none under knights-baronets' ladies are to go into that pew.
So she being there, I to the Duke of York's lodging, where in his
dressing-chamber he talking of his journey to-morrow or next day to
Harwich, to prepare some fortifications there; so that we are wholly upon
the defensive part this year, only we have some expectations that we may
by our squadrons annoy them in their trade by the North of Scotland and to
the Westward.  Here Sir W. Pen did show the Duke of York a letter of
Hogg's about a prize he drove in within the Sound at Plymouth, where the
Vice-Admiral claims her.  Sir W. Pen would have me speak to the latter,
which I did, and I think without any offence, but afterwards I was sorry
for it, and Sir W. Pen did plainly say that he had no mind to speak to the
Duke of York about it, so that he put me upon it, but it shall be, the
last time that I will do such another thing, though I think no manner of
hurt done by it to me at all.  That done I to walk in the Parke, where to
the Queene's Chapel, and there heard a fryer preach with his cord about
his middle, in Portuguese, something I could understand, showing that God
did respect the meek and humble, as well as the high and rich. He was full
of action, but very decent and good, I thought, and his manner of delivery
very good.  Then I went back to White Hall, and there up to the closet,
and spoke with several people till sermon was ended, which was preached by
the Bishop of Hereford, an old good man, that they say made an excellent
sermon.  He was by birth a Catholique, and a great gallant, having L1500
per annum, patrimony, and is a Knight Barronet; was turned from his
persuasion by the late Archbishop Laud.  He and the Bishop of Exeter, Dr.
Ward, are the two Bishops that the King do say he cannot have bad sermons
from.  Here I met with Sir H. Cholmly, who tells me, that undoubtedly my
Lord Bellasses do go no more to Tangier, and that he do believe he do
stand in a likely way to go Governor; though he says, and showed me, a
young silly Lord, one Lord Allington, who hath offered a great sum of
money to go, and will put hard for it, he having a fine lady, and a great
man would be glad to have him out of the way.  After Chapel I down and
took out my wife from the pew, where she was talking with a lady whom I
knew not till I was gone.  It was Mrs. Ashfield of Brampton, who had with
much civility been, it seems, at our house to see her.  I am sorry I did
not show her any more respect.  With my wife to Sir G. Carteret's, where
we dined and mightily made of, and most extraordinary people they are to
continue friendship with for goodness, virtue, and nobleness and interest.
After dinner he and I alone awhile and did joy ourselves in my Lord
Sandwich's being out of the way all this time.  He concurs that we are in
a way of ruin by thus being forced to keep only small squadrons out, but
do tell me that it was not choice, but only force, that we could not keep
out the whole fleete.  He tells me that the King is very kind to my Lord
Sandwich, and did himself observe to him (Sir G. Carteret), how those very
people, meaning the Prince and Duke of Albemarle, are punished in the same
kind as they did seek to abuse my Lord Sandwich.  Thence away, and got a
hackney coach and carried my wife home, and there only drank, and myself
back again to my Lord Treasurer's, where the King, Duke of York, and Sir
G. Carteret and Lord Arlington were and none else, so I staid not, but to
White Hall, and there meeting nobody I would speak with, walked into the
Park and took two or three turns all alone, and then took coach and home,
where I find Mercer, who I was glad to see, but durst [not] shew so, my
wife being displeased with her, and indeed I fear she is grown a very
gossip.  I to my chamber, and there fitted my arguments which I had
promised Mr. Gawden in his behalf in some pretences to allowance of the
King, and then to supper, and so to my chamber a little again, and then to
bed.  Duke of Buckingham not heard of yet.

18th.  Up betimes, and to the office to write fair my paper for D. Gawden
against anon, and then to other business, where all the morning. D. Gawden
by and by comes, and I did read over and give him the paper, which I think
I have much obliged him in.  A little before noon comes my old good
friend, Mr. Richard Cumberland,--[Richard Cumberland, afterwards Bishop of
Peterborough]--to see me, being newly come to town, whom I have not seen
almost, if not quite, these seven years.  In his plain country-parson's
dress.  I could not spend much time with him, but prayed him come with his
brother, who was with him, to dine with me to-day; which he did do and I
had a great deal of his good company; and a most excellent person he is as
any I know, and one that I am sorry should be lost and buried in a little
country town, and would be glad to remove him thence; and the truth is, if
he would accept of my sister's fortune, I should give L100 more with him
than to a man able to settle her four times as much as, I fear, he is able
to do; and I will think of it, and a way how to move it, he having in
discourse said he was not against marrying, nor yet engaged.  I shewed him
my closet, and did give him some very good musique, Mr. Caesar being here
upon his lute.  They gone I to the office, where all the afternoon very
busy, and among other things comes Captain Jenifer to me, a great servant
of my Lord Sandwich's, who tells me that he do hear for certain, though I
do not yet believe it, that Sir W. Coventry is to be Secretary of State,
and my Lord Arlington Lord Treasurer.  I only wish that the latter were as
fit for the latter office as the former is for the former, and more fit
than my Lord Arlington. Anon Sir W. Pen come and talked with me in the
garden, and tells me that for certain the Duke of Richmond is to marry
Mrs. Stewart, he having this day brought in an account of his estate and
debts to the King on that account.  At night home to supper and so to bed.
My father's letter this day do tell me of his own continued illness, and
that my mother grows so much worse, that he fears she cannot long
continue, which troubles me very much.  This day, Mr. Caesar told me a
pretty experiment of his, of angling with a minikin, a gut-string
varnished over, which keeps it from swelling, and is beyond any hair for
strength and smallness.  The secret I like mightily.

19th.  Up, and to the office, where we sat all the morning.  At noon dined
at home very pleasantly with my wife, and after dinner with a great deal
of pleasure had her sing, which she begins to do with some pleasure to me,
more than I expected.  Then to the office again, where all the afternoon
close, and at night home to supper and to bed.  It comes in my mind this
night to set down how a house was the other day in Bishopsgate Street
blowed up with powder; a house that was untenanted, and between a flax
shop and a-----------, both bad for fire; but, thanks be to God, it did no
more hurt; and all do conclude it a plot.  I would also remember to my
shame how I was pleased yesterday, to find the righteous maid of Magister
Griffin sweeping of 'nostra' office, 'elle con the Roman nariz and bonne'
body which I did heretofore like, and do still refresh me to think 'que
elle' is come to us, that I may 'voir her aliquando'. This afternoon I am
told again that the town do talk of my Lord Arlington's being to be Lord
Treasurer, and Sir W. Coventry to be Secretary of State; and that for
certain the match is concluded between the Duke of Richmond and Mrs.
Stewart, which I am well enough pleased with; and it is pretty to consider
how his quality will allay people's talk; whereas, had a meaner person
married her, he would for certain have been reckoned a cuckold at
first-dash.

20th.  Up pretty betimes, and to the Old Swan, and there drank at
Michell's, but his wife is not there, but gone to her mother's, who is
ill, and so hath staid there since Sunday.  Thence to Westminster Hall and
drank at the Swan, and 'baiserais the petite misse'; and so to Mrs.
Martin's.  .  .  .  I sent for some burnt wine, and drank and then away,
not pleased with my folly, and so to the Hall again, and there staid a
little, and so home by water again, where, after speaking with my wife, I
with Sir W. Batten and [Sir] J. Minnes to our church to the vestry, to be
assessed by the late Poll Bill, where I am rated as an Esquire, and for my
office, all will come to about L50.  But not more than I expected, nor so
much by a great deal as I ought to be, for all my offices.  So shall be
glad to escape so.  Thence by water again to White Hall, and there up into
the house, and do hear that newes is come now that the enemy do incline
again to a peace, but could hear no particulars, so do not believe it.  I
had a great mind to have spoke with the King, about a business proper
enough for me, about the French prize man-of-war, how he would have her
altered, only out of a desire to show myself mindful of business, but my
linen was so dirty and my clothes mean, that I neither thought it fit to
do that, nor go to other persons at the Court, with whom I had business,
which did vex me, and I must remedy [it].  Here I hear that the Duke of
Richmond and Mrs. Stewart were betrothed last night.  Thence to
Westminster Hall again, and there saw Betty Michell, and bought a pair of
gloves of her, she being fain to keep shop there, her mother being sick,
and her father gathering of the tax.  I 'aimais her de toute my corazon'.
Thence, my mind wandering all this day upon 'mauvaises amours' which I be
merry for.  So home by water again, where I find my wife gone abroad, so I
to Sir W. Batten to dinner, and had a good dinner of ling and herring pie,
very good meat, best of the kind that ever I had.  Having dined, I by
coach to the Temple, and there did buy a little book or two, and it is
strange how "Rycaut's Discourse of Turky," which before the fire I was
asked but 8s. for, there being all but twenty-two or thereabouts burned, I
did now offer 20s., and he demands 50s., and I think I shall give it him,
though it be only as a monument of the fire.  So to the New Exchange,
where I find my wife, and so took her to Unthanke's, and left her there,
and I to White Hall, and thence to Westminster, only out of idleness, and
to get some little pleasure to my 'mauvais flammes', but sped not, so back
and took up my wife; and to Polichinelli at Charing Crosse, which is
prettier and prettier, and so full of variety that it is extraordinary
good entertainment.  Thence by coach home, that is, my wife home, and I to
the Exchange, and there met with Fenn, who tells me they have yet no
orders out of the Exchequer for money upon the Acts, which is a thing not
to be borne by any Prince of understanding or care, for no money can be
got advanced upon the Acts only from the weight of orders in form out of
the Exchequer so long time after the passing of the Acts.  So home to the
office a little, where I met with a sad letter from my brother, who tells
me my mother is declared by the doctors to be past recovery, and that my
father is also very ill every hour: so that I fear we shall see a sudden
change there.  God fit them and us for it!  So to Sir W. Pen's, where my
wife was, and supped with a little, but yet little mirth, and a bad, nasty
supper, which makes me not love the family, they do all things so meanly,
to make a little bad show upon their backs.  Thence home and to bed, very
much troubled about my father's and my mother's illness.

21st.  Up, and to the office, where sat all the morning.  At noon home to
dinner, and had some melancholy discourse with my wife about my mother's
being so ill and my father, and after dinner to cheer myself, I having the
opportunity of Sir W. Coventry and the Duke of York's being out of town, I
alone out and to the Duke of York's play-house, where unexpectedly I come
to see only the young men and women of the house act; they having liberty
to act for their own profit on Wednesdays and Fridays this Lent: and the
play they did yesterday, being Wednesday, was so well-taken, that they
thought fit to venture it publickly to-day; a play of my Lord Falkland's'
called "The Wedding Night," a kind of a tragedy, and some things very good
in it, but the whole together, I thought, not so. I confess I was well
enough pleased with my seeing it: and the people did do better, without
the great actors, than I did expect, but yet far short of what they do
when they are there, which I was glad to find the difference of.  Thence
to rights home, and there to the office to my business hard, being sorry
to have made this scape without my wife, but I have a good salvo to my
oath in doing it.  By and by, in the evening, comes Sir W. Batten's Mingo
to me to pray me to come to his master and Sir Richard Ford, who have very
ill news to tell me.  I knew what it was, it was about our trial for a
good prize to-day, "The Phoenix,"

     [There are references to the "Phoenix," a Dutch ship taken as a
     prize, among the State Papers (see "Calendar," 1666-67, p. 404).
     Pepys appears to have got into trouble at a later date in respect to
     this same ship, for among the Rawlinson MSS. (A. 170) are "Papers
     relating to the charge brought against him in the House of Commons
     in 1689 with reference to the ship Phoenix and the East India
     Company in 1681-86."]

a worth two or L3000.  I went to them, where they told me with much
trouble how they had sped, being cast and sentenced to make great
reparation for what we had embezzled, and they did it so well that I was
much troubled at it, when by and by Sir W. Batten asked me whether I was
mortified enough, and told me we had got the day, which was mighty welcome
news to me and us all.  But it is pretty to see what money will do.
Yesterday, Walker was mighty cold on our behalf, till Sir W. Batten
promised him, if we sped in this business of the goods, a coach; and if at
the next trial we sped for the ship, we would give him a pair of horses.
And he hath strove for us today like a prince, though the Swedes' Agent
was there with all the vehemence he could to save the goods, but yet we
carried it against him.  This put me in mighty good heart, and then we go
to Sir W. Pen, who is come back to-night from Chatham, and did put him
into the same condition, and then comforted him. So back to my office, and
wrote an affectionate and sad letter to my father about his and my
mother's illness, and so home to supper and to bed late.

22nd.  Up and by coach to Sir Ph. Warwicke about business for Tangier
about money, and then to Sir Stephen Fox to give him account of a little
service I have done him about money coming to him from our office, and
then to Lovett's and saw a few baubling things of their doing which are
very pretty, but the quality of the people, living only by shifts, do not
please me, that it makes me I do no more care for them, nor shall have
more acquaintance with them after I have got my Lady Castlemayne's picture
home.  So to White Hall, where the King at Chapel, and I would not stay,
but to Westminster to Howlett's, and there, he being not well, I sent for
a quart of claret and burnt it and drank, and had a 'basado' or three or
four of Sarah, whom 'je trouve ici', and so by coach to Sir Robt. Viner's
about my accounts with him, and so to the 'Change, where I hear for
certain that we are going on with our treaty of peace, and that we are to
treat at Bredah.  But this our condescension people do think will undo us,
and I do much fear it.  So home to dinner, where my wife having dressed
herself in a silly dress of a blue petticoat uppermost, and a white satin
waistcoat and whitehood, though I think she did it because her gown is
gone to the tailor's, did, together with my being hungry, which always
makes me peevish, make me angry, but when my belly was full were friends
again, and dined and then by water down to Greenwich and thence walked to
Woolwich, all the way reading Playford's "Introduction to Musique,"
wherein are some things very pretty.  At Woolwich I did much business,
taking an account of the state of the ships there under hand, thence to
Blackwall, and did the like for two ships we have repairing there, and
then to Deptford and did the like there, and so home.  Captain Perriman
with me from Deptford, telling me many particulars how the King's business
is ill ordered, and indeed so they are, God knows!  So home and to the
office, where did business, and so home to my chamber, and then to supper
and to bed.  Landing at the Tower to-night I met on Tower Hill with
Captain Cocke and spent half an hour walking in the dusk of the evening
with him, talking of the sorrowful condition we are in, that we must be
ruined if the Parliament do not come and chastize us, that we are resolved
to make a peace whatever it cost, that the King is disobliging the
Parliament in this interval all that may be, yet his money is gone and he
must have more, and they likely not to give it, without a great deal of
do.  God knows what the issue of it will be.  But the considering that the
Duke of York, instead of being at sea as Admirall, is now going from port
to port, as he is at this day at Harwich, and was the other day with the
King at Sheernesse, and hath ordered at Portsmouth how fortifications
shall be made to oppose the enemy, in case of invasion, [which] is to us a
sad consideration, and as shameful to the nation, especially after so many
proud vaunts as we have made against the Dutch, and all from the folly of
the Duke of Albemarle, who made nothing of beating them, and Sir John
Lawson he always declared that we never did fail to beat them with lesser
numbers than theirs, which did so prevail with the King as to throw us
into this war.

23rd.  At the office all the morning, where Sir W. Pen come, being
returned from Chatham, from considering the means of fortifying the river
Medway, by a chain at the stakes, and ships laid there with guns to keep
the enemy from coming up to burn our ships; all our care now being to
fortify ourselves against their invading us.  At noon home to dinner, and
then to the office all the afternoon again, where Mr. Moore come, who
tells me that there is now no doubt made of a peace being agreed on, the
King having declared this week in Council that they would treat at
Bredagh.  He gone I to my office, where busy late, and so to supper and to
bed.  Vexed with our mayde Luce, our cook-mayde, who is a good drudging
servant in everything else, and pleases us, but that she will be drunk,
and hath been so last night and all this day, that she could not make
clean the house.  My fear is only fire.

24th (Lord's day).  With Sir W. Batten to White Hall, and there I to Sir
G. Carteret, who is mighty cheerful, which makes me think and by some
discourse that there is expectation of a peace, but I did not ask [him].
Here was Sir J. Minnes also: and they did talk of my Lord Bruncker, whose
father, it seems, did give Mr. Ashburnham and the present Lord Digby L1200
to be made an Irish lord, and swore the same day that he had not 12d. left
to pay for his dinner: they make great mirth at this, my Lord Bruncker
having lately given great matter of offence both to them and us all, that
we are at present mightily displeased with him.  By and by to the Duke of
York, where we all met, and there was the King also; and all our discourse
was about fortifying of the Medway and Harwich, which is to be entrenched
quite round, and Portsmouth: and here they advised with Sir Godfry Lloyd
and Sir Bernard de Gum, the two great engineers, and had the plates drawn
before them; and indeed all their care they now take is to fortify
themselves, and are not ashamed of it: for when by and by my Lord
Arlington come in with letters, and seeing the King and Duke of York give
us and the officers of the Ordnance directions in this matter, he did move
that we might do it as privately as we could, that it might not come into
the Dutch Gazette presently, as the King's and Duke of York's going down
the other day to Sheerenesse was, the week after, in the Harlem Gazette.
The King and Duke of York both laughed at it, and made no matter, but
said, "Let us be safe, and let them talk, for there is nothing will
trouble them more, nor will prevent their coming more, than to hear that
we are fortifying ourselves."  And the Duke of York said further, "What
said Marshal Turenne, when some in vanity said that the enemies were
afraid, for they entrenched themselves?  'Well,' says he, 'I would they
were not afraid, for then they would not entrench themselves, and so we
could deal with them the better.'"  Away thence, and met with Sir H.
Cholmly, who tells me that he do believe the government of Tangier is
bought by my Lord Allington for a sum of money to my Lord Arlington, and
something to Lord Bellasses, who (he did tell me particularly how) is as
very a false villain as ever was born, having received money of him here
upon promise and confidence of his return, forcing him to pay it by
advance here, and promising to ask no more there, when at the same time he
was treating with my Lord Allington to sell his command to him, and yet
told Sir H. Cholmly nothing of it, but when Sir H. Cholmly told him what
he had heard, he confessed that my Lord Allington had spoken to him of it,
but that he was a vain man to look after it, for he was nothing fit for
it, and then goes presently to my Lord Allington and drives on the
bargain, yet tells Lord Allington what he himself had said of him, as
[though] Sir H. Cholmly had said them. I am glad I am informed hereof, and
shall know him for a Lord, &c.  Sir H. Cholmly tells me further that he is
confident there will be a peace, and that a great man did tell him that my
Lord Albemarle did tell him the other day at White Hall as a secret that
we should have a peace if any thing the King of France can ask and our
King can give will gain it, which he is it seems mad at.  Thence back with
Sir W. Batten and [Sir] W. Pen home, and heard a piece of sermon, and so
home to dinner, where Balty come, very fine, and dined with us, and after
dinner with me by water to White Hall, and there he and I did walk round
the Park, I giving him my thoughts about the difficulty of getting
employment for him this year, but advised him how to employ himself, and I
would do what I could.  So he and I parted, and I to Martin's, where I
find her within, and 'su hermano' and 'la veuve' Burroughs.  Here I did
'demeurer toda' the afternoon .  .  .  .  By and by come up the mistress
of the house, Crags, a pleasant jolly woman.  I staid all but a little,
and away home by water through bridge, a brave evening, and so home to
read, and anon to supper, W. Hewer with us, and then to read myself to
sleep again, and then to bed, and mightily troubled the most of the night
with fears of fire, which I cannot get out of my head to this day since
the last great fire. I did this night give the waterman who uses to carry
me 10s. at his request, for the painting of his new boat, on which shall
be my arms.

25th.  (Ladyday.) Up, and with Sir W. Batten and [Sir] W. Pen by coach to
Exeter House to our lawyers to have consulted about our trial to-morrow,
but missed them, so parted, and [Sir] W. Pen and I to Mr. Povy's about a
little business of [Sir] W. Pen's, where we went over Mr. Povy's house,
which lies in the same good condition as ever, which is most extraordinary
fine, and he was now at work with a cabinet-maker, making of a new inlaid
table.  Having seen his house, we away, having in our way thither called
at Mr. Lilly's, who was working; and indeed his pictures are without doubt
much beyond Mr. Hales's, I think I may say I am convinced: but a mighty
proud man he is, and full of state.  So home, and to the office, and by
and by to dinner, a poor dinner, my wife and I, at Sir W. Pen's, and then
he and I before to Exeter House, where I do not stay, but to the King's
playhouse; and by and by comes Mr. Lowther and his wife and mine, and into
a box, forsooth, neither of them being dressed, which I was almost ashamed
of.  Sir W. Pen and I in the pit, and here saw "The Mayden Queene" again;
which indeed the more I see the more I like, and is an excellent play, and
so done by Nell, her merry part, as cannot be better done in nature, I
think.  Thence home, and there I find letters from my brother, which tell
me that yesterday when he wrote my mother did rattle in the throat so as
they did expect every moment her death, which though I have a good while
expected did much surprise me, yet was obliged to sup at Sir W. Pen's and
my wife, and there counterfeited some little mirth, but my heart was sad,
and so home after supper and to bed, and much troubled in my sleep of my
being crying by my mother's bedside, laying my head over hers and crying,
she almost dead and dying, and so waked, but what is strange, methought
she had hair over her face, and not the same kind of face as my mother
really hath, but yet did not consider that, but did weep over her as my
mother, whose soul God have mercy of.

26th.  Up with a sad heart in reference to my mother, of whose death I
undoubtedly expect to hear the next post, if not of my father's also, who
by his pain as well as his grief for her is very ill, but on my own behalf
I have cause to be joyful this day, it being my usual feast day, for my
being cut of the stone this day nine years, and through God's blessing am
at this day and have long been in as good condition of health as ever I
was in my life or any man in England is, God make me thankful for it!  But
the condition I am in, in reference to my mother, makes it unfit for me to
keep my usual feast.  Unless it shall please God to send her well (which I
despair wholly of), and then I will make amends for it by observing
another day in its room.  So to the office, and at the office all the
morning, where I had an opportunity to speak to Sir John Harman about my
desire to have my brother Balty go again with him to sea as he did the
last year, which he do seem not only contented but pleased with, which I
was glad of.  So at noon home to dinner, where I find Creed, who dined
with us, but I had not any time to talk with him, my head being busy, and
before I had dined was called away by Sir W. Batten, and both of us in his
coach (which I observe his coachman do always go now from hence towards
White Hall through Tower Street, and it is the best way) to Exeter House,
where the judge was sitting, and after several little causes comes on
ours, and while the several depositions and papers were at large reading
(which they call the preparatory), and being cold by being forced to sit
with my hat off close to a window in the Hall, Sir W. Pen and I to the
Castle Tavern hard by and got a lobster, and he and I staid and eat it,
and drank good wine; I only burnt wine, as my whole custom of late hath
been, as an evasion, God knows, for my drinking of wine (but it is an
evasion which will not serve me now hot weather is coming, that I cannot
pretend, as indeed I really have done, that I drank it for cold), but I
will leave it off, and it is but seldom, as when I am in women's company,
that I must call for wine, for I must be forced to drink to them.  Having
done here then we back again to the Court, and there heard our cause
pleaded; Sir [Edward] Turner, Sir W. Walker, and Sir Ellis Layton being
our counsel against only Sir Robert Wiseman on the other.  The second of
our three counsel was the best, and indeed did speak admirably, and is a
very shrewd man.  Nevertheless, as good as he did make our case, and the
rest, yet when Wiseman come to argue (nay, and though he did begin so
sillily that we laughed in scorn in our sleeves at him), yet he did so
state the case, that the judge did not think fit to decide the cause
to-night, but took to to-morrow, and did stagger us in our hopes, so as to
make us despair of the success.  I am mightily pleased with the judge, who
seems a very rational, learned, and uncorrupt man, and much good reading
and reason there is heard in hearing of this law argued, so that the thing
pleased me, though our success doth shake me.  Thence Sir W. Pen and I
home and to write letters, among others a sad one to my father upon fear
of my mother's death, and so home to supper and to bed.

27th.  [Sir] W. Pen and I to White Hall, and in the coach did begin our
discourse again about Balty, and he promises me to move it this very day.
He and I met my Lord Bruncker at Sir G. Carteret's by appointment, there
to discourse a little business, all being likely to go to rack for lack of
money still.  Thence to the Duke of York's lodgings, and did our usual
business, and Sir W. Pen telling me that he had this morning spoke of
Balty to Sir W. Coventry, and that the thing was done, I did take notice
of it also to [Sir] W. Coventry, who told me that he had both the thing
and the person in his head before to have done it, which is a double
pleasure to me.  Our business with the Duke being done, [Sir] W. Pen and I
towards the Exchequer, and in our way met Sir G. Downing going to chapel,
but we stopped, and he would go with us back to the Exchequer and showed
us in his office his chests full and ground and shelves full of money, and
says that there is L50,000 at this day in his office of people's money,
who may demand it this day, and might have had it away several weeks ago
upon the late Act, but do rather choose to have it continue there than to
put it into the Banker's hands, and I must confess it is more than I
should have believed had I not seen it, and more than ever I could have
expected would have arisen for this new Act in so short a time, and if it
do so now already what would it do if the money was collected upon the Act
and returned into the Exchequer so timely as it ought to be.  But it comes
into my mind here to observe what I have heard from Sir John Bankes,
though I cannot fully conceive the reason of it, that it will be
impossible to make the Exchequer ever a true bank to all intents, unless
the Exchequer stood nearer the Exchange, where merchants might with ease,
while they are going about their business, at all hours, and without
trouble or loss of time, have their satisfaction, which they cannot have
now without much trouble, and loss of half a day, and no certainty of
having the offices open.  By this he means a bank for common practise and
use of merchants, and therein I do agree with him.  Being parted from Sir
W. Pen and [Sir] G. Downing, I to Westminster Hall and there met Balty,
whom I had sent for, and there did break the business of my getting him
the place of going again as Muster-Master with Harman this voyage to the
West Indys, which indeed I do owe to Sir W. Pen.  He is mighty glad of it,
and earnest to fit himself for it, but I do find, poor man, that he is
troubled how to dispose of his wife, and apparently it is out of fear of
her, and his honour, and I believe he hath received some cause of this his
jealousy and care, and I do pity him in it, and will endeavour to find out
some way to do, it for him.  Having put him in a way of preparing himself
for the voyage, I did go to the Swan, and there sent for Jervas, my old
periwig maker, and he did bring me a periwig, but it was full of nits, so
as I was troubled to see it (it being his old fault), and did send him to
make it clean, and in the mean time, having staid for him a good while,
did go away by water to the Castle Taverne, by Exeter House, and there met
Sir W. Batten, [Sir] W. Pen, and several others, among the rest Sir Ellis
Layton, who do apply himself to discourse with me, and I think by his
discourse, out of his opinion of my interest in Sir W. Coventry, the man I
find a wonderful witty, ready man for sudden answers and little tales, and
sayings very extraordinary witty, but in the bottom I doubt he is not so.
Yet he pretends to have studied men, and the truth is in several that I do
know he did give me a very inward account of them.  But above all things
he did give me a full account, upon my demand, of this judge of the
Admiralty, Judge Jenkins; who, he says, is a man never practised in this
Court, but taken merely for his merit and ability's sake from Trinity
Hall, where he had always lived; only by accident the business of the want
of a Judge being proposed to the present Archbishop of Canterbury that now
is, he did think of this man and sent for him up: and here he is, against
the 'gre' and content of the old Doctors, made judge, but is a very
excellent man both for judgment and temper, yet majesty enough, and by all
men's report, not to be corrupted.  After dinner to the Court, where Sir
Ellis Layton did make a very silly motion in our behalf, but did neither
hurt nor good.  After him Walker and Wiseman; and then the judge did
pronounce his sentence; for some part of the goods and ship, and the
freight of the whole, to be free, and returned and paid by us; and the
remaining, which was the greater part, to be ours.  The loss of so much
troubles us, but we have got a pretty good part, thanks be to God!  So we
are not displeased nor yet have cause to triumph, as we did once expect.
Having seen the end of this, I being desirous to be at home to see the
issue of any country letters about my mother, which I expect shall give me
tidings of her death, I directly home and there to the office, where I
find no letter from my father or brother, but by and by the boy tells me
that his mistress sends me word that she hath opened my letter, and that
she is loth to send me any more news.  So I home, and there up to my wife
in our chamber, and there received from my brother the newes of my
mother's dying on Monday, about five or six o'clock in the afternoon, and
that the last time she spoke of her children was on Friday last, and her
last words were, "God bless my poor Sam!" The reading hereof did set me
a-weeping heartily, and so weeping to myself awhile, and my wife also to
herself, I then spoke to my wife respecting myself, and indeed, having
some thoughts how much better both for her and us it is than it might have
been had she outlived my father and me or my happy present condition in
the world, she being helpless, I was the sooner at ease in my mind, and
then found it necessary to go abroad with my wife to look after the
providing mourning to send into the country, some to-morrow, and more
against Sunday, for my family, being resolved to put myself and wife, and
Barker and Jane, W. Hewer and Tom, in mourning, and my two under-mayds, to
give them hoods and scarfs and gloves.  So to my tailor's, and up and
down, and then home and to my office a little, and then to supper and to
bed, my heart sad and afflicted, though my judgment at ease.

28th.  My tailor come to me betimes this morning, and having given him
directions, I to the office and there all the morning.  At noon dined
well.  Balty, who is mighty thoughtful how to dispose of his wife, and
would fain have me provide a place for her, which the thoughts of what I
should do with her if he should miscarry at sea makes me avoid the
offering him that she should be at my house.  I find he is plainly jealous
of her being in any place where she may have ill company, and I do pity
him for it, and would be glad to help him, and will if I can. Having
dined, I down by water with Sir W. Batten, [Sir] W. Pen, and [Sir] R. Ford
to our prize, part of whose goods were condemned yesterday--"The
Lindeboome"--and there we did drink some of her wine, very good. But it
did grate my heart to see the poor master come on board, and look about
into every corner, and find fault that she was not so clean as she used to
be, though methought she was very clean; and to see his new masters come
in, that had nothing to do with her, did trouble me to see him.  Thence to
Blackwall and there to Mr. Johnson's, to see how some works upon some of
our repaired ships go on, and at his house eat and drank and mighty
extraordinary merry (too merry for me whose mother died so lately, but
they know it not, so cannot reproach me therein, though I reproach
myself), and in going home had many good stories of Sir W. Batten and one
of Sir W. Pen, the most tedious and silly and troublesome (he forcing us
to hear him) that ever I heard in my life.  So to the office awhile,
troubled with Sir W. Pen's impertinences, he being half foxed at
Johnson's, and so to bed.

29th.  Lay long talking with my wife about Balty, whom I do wish very well
to, and would be glad to advise him, for he is very sober and willing to
take all pains.  Up and to Sir W. Batten, who I find has had some words
with Sir W. Pen about the employing of a cooper about our prize wines,
[Sir] W. Batten standing and indeed imposing upon us Mr. Morrice, which I
like not, nor do [Sir] W. Pen, and I confess the very thoughts of what our
goods will come to when we have them do discourage me in going any further
in the adventure.  Then to the office till noon, doing business, and then
to the Exchange, and thence to the Sun Taverne and dined with [Sir] W.
Batten, [Sir] R. Ford, and the Swede's Agent to discourse of a composition
about our prizes that are condemned, but did do little, he standing upon
high terms and we doing the like.  I home, and there find Balty and his
wife got thither both by my wife for me to give them good advice, for her
to be with his father and mother all this time of absence, for saving of
money, and did plainly and like a friend tell them my mind of the
necessity of saving money, and that if I did not find they did endeavour
it, I should not think fit to trouble myself for them, but I see she is
utterly against being with his father and mother, and he is fond of her,
and I perceive the differences between the old people and them are too
great to be presently forgot, and so he do propose that it will be cheaper
for him to put her to board at a place he is offered at Lee, and I, seeing
that I am not like to be troubled with the finding a place, and having
given him so much good advice, do leave them to stand and fall as they
please, having discharged myself as a friend, and not likely to be
accountable for her nor be troubled with her, if he should miscarry I
mean, as to her lodging, and so broke up. Then he and I to make a visit to
[Sir] W. Pen, who hath thought fit to show kindness to Balty in this
business, indeed though he be a false rogue, but it was he knew a thing
easy to do.  Thence together to my shoemaker's, cutler's, tailor's, and up
and down about my mourning, and in my way do observe the great streets in
the city are marked out with piles drove into the ground; and if ever it
be built in that form with so fair streets, it will be a noble sight.  So
to the Council chamber, but staid not there, but to a periwigg-maker's of
his acquaintance, and there bought two periwiggs, mighty fine; indeed, too
fine, I thought, for me; but he persuaded me, and I did buy them for L4
10s. the two.  Then to the Exchange and bought gloves, and so to the
Bull-Head Taverne, whither he brought my, French gun; and one Truelocke,
the famous gunsmith, that is a mighty ingenious man, and he did take my
gun in pieces, and made me understand the secrets thereof and upon the
whole I do find it a very good piece of work, and truly wrought; but for
certain not a thing to be used much with safety: and he do find that this
very gun was never yet shot off: I was mighty satisfied with it and him,
and the sight of so much curiosity of this kind.  Here he brought also a
haberdasher at my desire, and I bought a hat of him, and so away and
called away my wife from his house, and so home and to read, and then to
supper and to bed, my head full in behalf of Balty, who tells me strange
stories of his mother.  Among others, how she, in his absence in Ireland,
did pawne all the things that he had got in his service under Oliver, and
run of her own accord, without her husband's leave, into Flanders, and
that his purse, and 4s. a week which his father receives of the French
church, is all the subsistence his father and mother have, and that about
L20 a year maintains them; which, if it please God, I will find one way or
other to provide for them, to remove that scandal away.

30th.  Up, and the French periwigg maker of whom I bought two yesterday
comes with them, and I am very well pleased with them.  So to the office,
where all the morning.  At noon home to dinner, and thence with my wife's
knowledge and leave did by coach go see the silly play of my Lady
Newcastle's,  called "The Humourous Lovers;" the most silly thing that
ever come upon a stage.  I was sick to see it, but yet would not but have
seen it, that I might the better understand her.  Here I spied Knipp and
Betty, of the King's house, and sent Knipp oranges, but, having little
money about me, did not offer to carry them abroad, which otherwise I had,
I fear, been tempted to.  So with [Sir] W. Pen home (he being at the play
also), a most summer evening, and to my office, where, among other things,
a most extraordinary letter to the Duke of York touching the want of money
and the sad state of the King's service thereby, and so to supper and to
bed.

31st (Lord's day).  Up, and my tailor's boy brings my mourning clothes
home, and my wife hers and Barker's, but they go not to church this
morning.  I to church, and with my mourning, very handsome, and new
periwigg, make a great shew.  After church home to dinner, and there come
Betty Michell and her husband.  I do and shall love her, but, poor wretch,
she is now almost ready to lie down.  After dinner Balty (who dined also
with us) and I with Sir J. Minnes in his coach to White Hall, but did
nothing, but by water to Strand Bridge and thence walked to my Lord
Treasurer's, where the King, Duke of York, and the Caball, and much
company without; and a fine day.  Anon come out from the Caball my Lord
Hollis and Mr. H. Coventry, who, it is conceived, have received their
instructions from the King this day; they being to begin their journey
towards their treaty at Bredagh speedily, their passes being come.  Here I
saw the Lady Northumberland and her daughter-in-law, my Lord Treasurer's
daughter, my Lady Piercy, a beautiful lady indeed.  So away back by water,
and left Balty at White Hall and I to Mrs. Martin .  .  . .  and so by
coach home, and there to my chamber, and then to supper and bed, having
not had time to make up my accounts of this month at this very day, but
will in a day or two, and pay my forfeit for not doing it, though business
hath most hindered me.  The month shuts up only with great desires of
peace in all of us, and a belief that we shall have a peace, in most
people, if a peace can be had on any terms, for there is a necessity of
it; for we cannot go on with the war, and our masters are afraid to come
to depend upon the good will of the Parliament any more, as I do hear.




     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     Angling with a minikin, a gut-string varnished over
     Better now than never
     Bring me a periwig, but it was full of nits
     Buying up of goods in case there should be war
     For I will not be inward with him that is open to another
     He is a man of no worth in the world but compliment
     History of this day's growth, we cannot tell the truth
     I love the treason I hate the traitor
     King of France did think other princes fit for nothing
     My wife will keep to one another and let the world go hang
     No man knowing what to do, whether to sell or buy
     Not more than I expected, nor so much by a great deal as I ought
     Now above six months since (smoke from the cellars)
     Reparation for what we had embezzled
     Uncertainty of all history
     Whatever I do give to anybody else, I shall give her





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Diary of Samuel Pepys, March 1966/67
by Samuel Pepys

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, MARCH ***

***** This file should be named 4174.txt or 4174.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/4/1/7/4174/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
