Project Gutenberg's Diary of Samuel Pepys, September 1667, by Samuel Pepys

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Diary of Samuel Pepys, September 1667

Author: Samuel Pepys

Release Date: December 1, 2004 [EBook #4180]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***




Produced by David Widger





                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A. F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                SEPTEMBER
                                   1667

September 1st (Lord's day).  Up, and betimes by water from the Tower, and
called at the Old Swan for a glass of strong water, and sent word to have
little Michell and his wife come and dine with us to-day; and so, taking
in a gentleman and his lady that wanted a boat, I to Westminster. Setting
them on shore at Charing Cross, I to Mrs. Martin's, where I had two pair
of cuffs which I bespoke, and there did sit and talk with her .  .  .  .
and here I did see her little girle my goddaughter, which will be
pretty, and there having staid a little I away to Creed's chamber, and
when he was ready away to White Hall, where I met with several people and
had my fill of talk.  Our new Lord-keeper, Bridgeman, did this day, the
first time, attend the King to chapel with his Seal. Sir H. Cholmly tells
me there are hopes that the women will also have a rout, and particularly
that my Lady Castlemayne is coming to a composition with the King to be
gone; but how true this is, I know not. Blancfort is made Privy-purse to
the Duke of York; the Attorney-general is made Chief justice, in the room
of my Lord Bridgeman; the Solicitor-general is made Attorney-general; and
Sir Edward Turner made Solicitor-general.  It is pretty to see how strange
every body looks, nobody knowing whence this arises; whether from my Lady
Castlemayne, Bab. May, and their faction; or from the Duke of York,
notwithstanding his great appearance of defence of the Chancellor; or from
Sir William Coventry, and some few with him.  But greater changes are yet
expected.  So home and by water to dinner, where comes Pelting and young
Michell and his wife, whom I have not seen a great while, poor girle, and
then comes Mr. Howe, and all dined with me very merry, and spent all the
afternoon, Pelting, Howe, and I, and my boy, singing of Lock's response to
the Ten Commandments, which he hath set very finely, and was a good while
since sung before the King, and spoiled in the performance, which
occasioned his printing them for his vindication, and are excellent good.
They parted, in the evening my wife and I to walk in the garden and there
scolded a little, I being doubtful that she had received a couple of fine
pinners (one of point de Gesne), which I feared she hath from some [one]
or other of a present; but, on the contrary, I find she hath bought them
for me to pay for them, without my knowledge.  This do displease me much;
but yet do so much please me better than if she had received them the
other way, that I was not much angry, but fell to other discourse, and so
to my chamber, and got her to read to me for saving of my eyes, and then,
having got a great cold, I know not how, I to bed and lay ill at ease all
the night.

2nd.  This day is kept in the City as a publick fast for the fire this day
twelve months: but I was not at church, being commanded, with the rest, to
attend the Duke of York; and, therefore, with Sir J. Minnes to St.
James's, where we had much business before the Duke of York, and observed
all things to be very kind between the Duke of York and W. Coventry, which
did mightily joy me.  When we had done, Sir W. Coventry called me down
with him to his chamber, and there told me that he is leaving the Duke of
York's service, which I was amazed at.  But he tells me that it is not
with the least unkindness on the Duke of York's side, though he expects,
and I told him he was in the right, it will be interpreted otherwise,
because done just at this time; "but," says he, "I did desire it a good
while since, and the Duke of York did, with much entreaty, grant it,
desiring that I would say nothing of it, that he might have time and
liberty to choose his successor, without being importuned for others whom
he should not like:" and that he hath chosen Mr. Wren, which I am glad of,
he being a very ingenious man; and so Sir W. Coventry says of him, though
he knows him little; but particularly commends him for the book he writ in
answer to "Harrington's Oceana," which, for that reason, I intend to buy.
He tells me the true reason is, that he, being a man not willing to
undertake more business than he can go through, and being desirous to have
his whole time to spend upon the business of the Treasury, and a little
for his own ease, he did desire this of the Duke of York.  He assures me
that the kindness with which he goes away from the Duke of York is one of
the greatest joys that ever he had in the world.  I used some freedom with
him, telling him how the world hath discoursed of his having offended the
Duke of York, about the late business of the Chancellor.  He do not deny
it, but says that perhaps the Duke of York might have some reason for it,
he opposing him in a thing wherein he was so earnest but tells me, that,
notwithstanding all that, the Duke of York does not now, nor can blame
him; for he tells me that he was the man that did propose the removal of
the Chancellor; and that he did still persist in it, and at this day
publickly owns it, and is glad of it; but that the Duke of York knows that
he did first speak of it to the Duke of York, before he spoke to any
mortal creature besides, which was fair dealing: and the Duke of York was
then of the same mind with him, and did speak of it to the King; though
since, for reasons best known to himself, he was afterwards altered.  I
did then desire to know what was the great matter that grounded his desire
of the Chancellor's removal?  He told me many things not fit to be spoken,
and yet not any thing of his being unfaithful to the King; but, 'instar
omnium', he told me, that while he was so great at the Council-board, and
in the administration of matters, there was no room for any body to
propose any remedy to what was amiss, or to compass any thing, though
never so good for the kingdom, unless approved of by the Chancellor, he
managing all things with that greatness which now will be removed, that
the King may have the benefit of others' advice.  I then told him that the
world hath an opinion that he hath joined himself with my Lady
Castlemayne's faction in this business; he told me, he cannot help it, but
says they are in an errour: but for first he will never, while he lives,
truckle under any body or any faction, but do just as his own reason and
judgment directs; and, when he cannot use that freedom, he will have
nothing to do in public affairs but then he added, that he never was the
man that ever had any discourse with my Lady Castlemayne, or with others
from her, about this or any public business, or ever made her a visit, or
at least not this twelvemonth, or been in her lodgings but when called on
any business to attend the King there, nor hath had any thing to do in
knowing her mind in this business.  He ended all with telling me that he
knows that he that serves a Prince must expect, and be contented to stand,
all fortunes, and be provided to retreat, and that that he is most willing
to do whenever the King shall please.  And so we parted, he setting me
down out of his coach at Charing Cross, and desired me to tell Sir W. Pen
what he had told me of his leaving the Duke of York's service, that his
friends might not be the last that know it. I took a coach and went
homewards; but then turned again, and to White Hall, where I met with many
people; and, among other things, do learn that there is some fear that
Mr. Bruncker is got into the King's favour, and will be cherished there;
which will breed ill will between the King and Duke of York, he lodging at
this time in White Hall since he was put away from the Duke of York: and
he is great with Bab. May, my Lady Castlemayne, and that wicked crew.  But
I find this denied by Sir G. Carteret, who tells me that he is sure he
hath no kindness from the King; that the King at first, indeed, did
endeavour to persuade the Duke of York from putting him away; but when,
besides this business of his ill words concerning his Majesty in the
business of the Chancellor, he told him that he hath had, a long time, a
mind to put him away for his ill offices, done between him and his wife,
the King held his peace, and said no more, but wished him to do what he
pleased with him; which was very noble.  I met with Fenn; and he tells me,
as I do hear from some others, that the business of the Chancellor's had
proceeded from something of a mistake, for the Duke of York did first tell
the King that the Chancellor had a desire to be eased of his great
trouble; and that the King, when the Chancellor come to him, did wonder to
hear him deny it, and the Duke of York was forced to deny to the King that
ever he did tell him so in those terms: but the King did answer that he
was sure that he did say some such thing to him; but, however, since it
had gone so far, did desire him to be contented with it, as a thing very
convenient for him as well as for himself (the King), and so matters
proceeded, as we find. Now it is likely the Chancellor might, some time or
other, in a compliment or vanity, say to the Duke of York, that he was
weary of this burden, and I know not what; and this comes of it.  Some
people, and myself among them, are of good hope from this change that
things are reforming; but there are others that do think but that it is a
hit of chance, as all other our greatest matters are, and that there is no
general plot or contrivance in any number of people what to do next,
though, I believe, Sir W. Coventry may in himself have further designs;
and so that, though other changes may come, yet they shall be accidental
and laid upon [not] good principles of doing good.  Mr. May shewed me the
King's new buildings, in order to their having of some old sails for the
closing of the windows this winter.  I dined with Sir G. Carteret, with
whom dined Mr. Jack Ashburnham and Dr. Creeton, who I observe to be a most
good man and scholar.  In discourse at dinner concerning the change of
men's humours and fashions touching meats, Mr. Ashburnham told us, that he
remembers since the only fruit in request, and eaten by the King and Queen
at table as the best fruit, was the Katharine payre, though they knew at
the time other fruits of France and our own country.  After dinner comes
in Mr. Townsend; and there I was witness of a horrid rateing, which Mr.
Ashburnham, as one of the Grooms of the King's Bedchamber, did give him
for want of linen for the King's person; which he swore was not to be
endured, and that the King would not endure it, and that the King his
father, would have hanged his Wardrobe-man should he have been served so
the King having at this day no handkerchers, and but three bands to his
neck, he swore.  Mr. Townsend answered want of money, and the owing of the
linen-draper L5000; and that he hath of late got many rich things
made--beds, and sheets, and saddles, and all without money, and he can go
no further but still this old man, indeed, like an old loving servant, did
cry out for the King's person to be neglected. But, when he was gone,
Townsend told me that it is the grooms taking away the King's linen at the
quarter's end, as their fees, which makes this great want: for, whether
the King can get it or no, they will run away at the quarter's end with
what he hath had, let the King get more as he can. All the company gone,
Sir G. Carteret and I to talk: and it is pretty to observe how already he
says that he did always look upon the Chancellor indeed as his friend,
though he never did do him any service at all, nor ever got any thing by
him, nor was he a man apt, and that, I think, is true, to do any man any
kindness of his own nature; though I do know that he was believed by all
the world to be the greatest support of Sir G. Carteret with the King of
any man in England: but so little is now made of it!  He observes that my
Lord Sandwich will lose a great friend in him; and I think so too, my Lord
Hinchingbroke being about a match calculated purely out of respect to my
Lord Chancellor's family.  By and by Sir G. Carteret, and Townsend, and I,
to consider of an answer to the Commissioners of the Treasury about my
Lord Sandwich's profits in the Wardrobe; which seem, as we make them, to
be very small, not L1000 a-year; but only the difference in measure at
which he buys and delivers out to the King, and then 6d. in the pound from
the tradesmen for what money he receives for him; but this, it is
believed, these Commissioners will endeavour to take away.  From him I
went to see a great match at tennis, between Prince Rupert and one Captain
Cooke, against Bab. May and the elder Chichly; where the King was, and
Court; and it seems are the best players at tennis in the nation.  But
this puts me in mind of what I observed in the morning, that the King,
playing at tennis, had a steele-yard carried to him, and I was told it was
to weigh him after he had done playing; and at noon Mr. Ashburnham told me
that it is only the King's curiosity, which he usually hath of weighing
himself before and after his play, to see how much he loses in weight by
playing: and this day he lost 4 lbs.  Thence home and took my wife out to
Mile End Green, and there I drank, and so home, having a very fine
evening.  Then home, and I to Sir W. Batten and [Sir] W. Pen, and there
discoursed of Sir W. Coventry's leaving the Duke of York, and Mr. Wren's
succeeding him.  They told me both seriously, that they had long cut me
out for Secretary to the Duke of York, if ever [Sir] W. Coventry left him;
which, agreeing with what I have heard from other hands heretofore, do
make me not only think that something of that kind hath been thought on,
but do comfort me to see that the world hath such an esteem of my
qualities as to think me fit for any such thing.  Though I am glad, with
all my heart, that I am not so; for it would never please me to be forced
to the attendance that that would require, and leave my wife and family to
themselves, as I must do in such a case; thinking myself now in the best
place that ever man was in to please his own mind in, and, therefore, I
will take care to preserve it.  So to bed, my cold remaining though not so
much upon me. This day Nell, an old tall maid, come to live with us, a
cook maid recommended by Mr. Batelier.

3rd.  All the morning, business at the office, dined at home, then in the
afternoon set my wife down at the Exchange, and I to St. James's, and
there attended the Duke of York about the list of ships that we propose to
sell: and here there attended Mr. Wren the first time, who hath not yet, I
think, received the Duke of York's seal and papers.  At our coming hither,
we found the Duke and Duchesse all alone at dinner, methought melancholy;
or else I thought so, from the late occasion of the Chancellor's fall,
who, they say, however, takes it very contentedly. Thence I to White Hall
a little, and so took up my wife at the 'Change, and so home, and at the
office late, and so home to supper and to bed, our boy ill.

4th.  By coach to White Hall to the Council-chamber; and there met with
Sir W. Coventry going in, who took me aside, and told me that he was just
come from delivering up his seal and papers to Mr. Wren; and told me he
must now take his leave of me as a naval man, but that he shall always
bear respect to his friends there, and particularly to myself, with great
kindness; which I returned to him with thanks, and so, with much kindness
parted: and he into, the Council. I met with Sir Samuel Morland, who
chewed me two orders upon the Exchequer, one of L600, and another of L400,
for money assigned to him, which he would have me lend him money upon, and
he would allow 12 per cent.  I would not meddle with them, though they are
very good; and would, had I not so much money out already on public
credit.  But I see by this his condition all trade will be bad.  I staid
and heard Alderman Barker's case of his being abused by the Council of
Ireland, touching his lands there: all I observed there is the silliness
of the King, playing with his dog all the while, and not minding the
business,

     [Lord Rochester wrote

                   "His very dog at council board
                    Sits grave and wise as any lord."

     Poems, 1697; p. 150.--The king's dogs were constantly stolen from
     him, and he advertised for their return.  Some of these amusing
     advertisements are printed in "Notes and Queries" (seventh series,
     vol. vii., p. 26).]

and what he said was mighty weak; but my Lord Keeper I observe to be a
mighty able man.  The business broke off without any end to it, and so I
home, and thence with my wife and W. Hewer to Bartholomew fayre, and there
Polichinelli, where we saw Mrs. Clerke and all her crew; and so to a
private house, and sent for a side of pig, and eat it at an acquaintance
of W. Hewer's, where there was some learned physic and chymical books, and
among others, a natural "Herball" very fine. Here we staid not, but to the
Duke of York's play house, and there saw "Mustapha," which, the more I
see, the more I like; and is a most admirable poem, and bravely acted;
only both Betterton and Harris could not contain from laughing in the
midst of a most serious part from the ridiculous mistake of one of the men
upon the stage; which I did not like.  Thence home, where Batelier and his
sister Mary come to us and sat and talked, and so, they gone, we to supper
and to bed.

5th.  Up, and all the morning at the office, where we sat till noon, and
then I home to dinner, where Mary Batelier and her brother dined with us,
who grows troublesome in his talking so much of his going to Marseilles,
and what commissions he hath to execute as a factor, and a deal of do of
which I am weary.  After dinner, with Sir W. Pen, my wife, and Mary
Batelier to the Duke of York's house, and there saw "Heraclius," which is
a good play; but they did so spoil it with their laughing, and being all
of them out, and with the noise they made within the theatre, that I was
ashamed of it, and resolve not to come thither again a good while,
believing that this negligence, which I never observed before, proceeds
only from their want of company in the pit, that they have no care how
they act.  My wife was ill, and so I was forced to go out of the house
with her to Lincoln's Inn walks, and there in a corner she did her
business, and was by and by well, and so into the house again, but sick of
their ill acting.  So home and to the office, where busy late, then home
to supper and to bed.  This morning was told by Sir W. Batten, that he do
hear from Mr. Grey, who hath good intelligence, that our Queen is to go
into a nunnery, there to spend her days; and that my Lady Castlemayne is
going into France, and is to have a pension of L4000 a-year.  This latter
I do more believe than the other, it being very wise in her to do it, and
save all she hath, besides easing the King and kingdom of a burden and
reproach.

6th.  Up, and to Westminster to the Exchequer, and then into the Hall, and
there bought "Guillim's Heraldry" for my wife, and so to the Swan, and
thither come Doll Lane, and je did toucher her, and drank, and so away, I
took coach and home, where I find my wife gone to Walthamstow by
invitation with Sir W. Batten, and so I followed, taking up Mrs. Turner,
and she and I much discourse all the way touching the baseness of Sir W.
Pen and sluttishness of his family, and how the world do suspect that his
son Lowther, who is sick of a sore mouth, has got the pox.  So we come to
Sir W. Batten's, where Sir W. Pen and his Lady, and we and Mrs. Shipman,
and here we walked and had an indifferent good dinner, the victuals very
good and cleanly dressed and good linen, but no fine meat at all.  After
dinner we went up and down the house, and I do like it very well, being
furnished with a great deal of very good goods.  And here we staid, I
tired with the company, till almost evening, and then took leave, Turner
and I together again, and my wife with [Sir] W. Pen.  At Aldgate I took my
wife into our coach, and so to Bartholomew fair, and there, it being very
dirty, and now night, we saw a poor fellow, whose legs were tied behind
his back, dance upon his hands with his arse above his head, and also
dance upon his crutches, without any legs upon the ground to help him,
which he did with that pain that I was sorry to see it, and did pity him
and give him money after he had done.  Then we to see a piece of
clocke-work made by an Englishman--indeed, very good, wherein all the
several states of man's age, to 100 years old, is shewn very pretty and
solemne; and several other things more cheerful, and so we ended, and took
a link, the women resolving to be dirty, and walked up and down to get a
coach; and my wife, being a little before me, had been like to be taken up
by one, whom we saw to be Sam Hartlib.  My wife had her wizard on: yet we
cannot say that he meant any hurt; for it was as she was just by a
coach-side, which he had, or had a mind to take up; and he asked her,
"Madam, do you go in this coach?" but, soon as he saw a man come to her (I
know not whether he knew me) he departed away apace.  By and by did get a
coach, and so away home, and there to supper, and to bed.

7th.  Up, and to the office, where all the morning.  At noon home to
dinner, where Goodgroome was teaching my wife, and dined with us, and I
did tell him of my intention to learn to trill, which he will not promise
I shall obtain, but he will do what can be done, and I am resolved to
learn.  All the afternoon at the office, and towards night out by coach
with my wife, she to the 'Change, and I to see the price of a copper
cisterne for the table, which is very pretty, and they demand L6 or L7 for
one; but I will have one.  Then called my wife at the 'Change, and bought
a nightgown for my wife: cost but 24s., and so out to Mile End to drink,
and so home to the office to end my letters, and so home to supper and to
bed.

8th (Lord's day).  Up, and walked to St. James's; but there I find Sir W.
Coventry gone from his chamber, and Mr. Wren not yet come thither.  But I
up to the Duke of York, and there, after being ready, my Lord Bruncker and
I had an audience, and thence with my Lord Bruncker to White Hall, and he
told me, in discourse, how that, though it is true that Sir W. Coventry
did long since propose to the Duke of York the leaving his service, as
being unable to fulfill it, as he should do, now he hath so much public
business, and that the Duke of York did bid him to say nothing of it, but
that he would take time to please himself in another to come in his place;
yet the Duke's doing it at this time, declaring that he hath found out
another, and this one of the Chancellor's servants, he cannot but think
was done with some displeasure, and that it could not well be otherwise,
that the Duke of York should keep one in that place, that had so eminently
opposed him in the defence of his father-in-law, nor could the Duchesse
ever endure the sight of him, to be sure.  But he thinks that the Duke of
York and he are parted upon clear terms of friendship.  He tells me he do
believe that my Lady Castlemayne is compounding with the King for a
pension, and to leave the Court; but that her demands are mighty high: but
he believes the King is resolved, and so do every body else I speak with,
to do all possible to please the Parliament; and he do declare that he
will deliver every body up to them to give an account of their actions:
and that last Friday, it seems, there was an Act of Council passed, to put
out all Papists in office, and to keep out any from coming in.  I went to
the King's Chapel to the closet, and there I hear Cresset sing a tenor
part along with the Church musick very handsomely, but so loud that people
did laugh at him, as a thing done for ostentation.  Here I met Sir G.
Downing, who would speak with me, and first to inquire what I paid for my
kid's leather gloves I had on my hand, and shewed me others on his, as
handsome, as good in all points, cost him but 12d. a pair, and mine me 2s.
He told me he had been seven years finding out a man that could dress
English sheepskin as it should be--and, indeed, it is now as good, in all
respects, as kid, and he says will save L100,000 a-year, that goes out to
France for kid's skins.  Thus he labours very worthily to advance our own
trade, but do it with mighty vanity and talking.  But then he told me of
our base condition, in the treaty with Holland and France, about our
prisoners, that whereas before we did clear one another's prisoners, man
for man, and we upon the publication of the peace did release all our's,
300 at Leith, and others in other places for nothing, the Dutch do keep
theirs, and will not discharge them with[out] paying their debts according
to the Treaty.  That his instruments in Holland, writing to our
Embassadors about this to Bredagh, they answer them that they do not know
of any thing that they have done therein, but left it just as it was
before.  To which, when they answer, that by the treaty their Lordships
had [not] bound our countrymen to pay their debts in prison, they answer
they cannot help it, and we must get them off as cheap as we can.  On this
score, they demand L1100 for Sir G. Ascue, and L5000 for the one province
of Zealand, for the prisoners that we have therein.  He says that this is
a piece of shame that never any nation committed, and that our very Lords
here of the Council, when he related this matter to them, did not remember
that they had agreed to this article; and swears that all their articles
are alike, as the giving away Polleroon, and Surinam, and Nova Scotia,
which hath a river 300 miles up the country, with copper mines more than
Swedeland, and Newcastle coals, the only place in America that hath coals
that we know of; and that Cromwell did value those places, and would for
ever have made much of them; but we have given them away for nothing,
besides a debt to the King of Denmarke.  But, which is most of all, they
have discharged those very particular demands of merchants of the Guinny
Company and others, which he, when he was there, had adjusted with the
Dutch, and come to an agreement in writing, and they undertaken to
satisfy, and that this was done in black and white under their hands; and
yet we have forgiven all these, and not so much as sent to Sir G. Downing
to know what he had done, or to confer with him about any one point of the
treaty, but signed to what they would have, and we here signed to whatever
in grosse was brought over by Mr. Coventry.  And [Sir G. Downing] tells
me, just in these words, "My Lord Chancellor had a mind to keep himself
from being questioned by clapping up a peace upon any terms."  When I
answered that there was other privy-councillors to be advised with besides
him, and that, therefore, this whole peace could not be laid to his
charge, he answered that nobody durst say any thing at the council-table
but himself, and that the King was as much afeard of saying any thing
there as the meanest privy-councillor; and says more, that at this day the
King, in familiar talk, do call the Chancellor "the insolent man," and
says that he would not let him speak himself in Council: which is very
high, and do shew that the Chancellor is like to be in a bad state, unless
he can defend himself better than people think.  And yet Creed tells me
that he do hear that my Lord Cornbury do say that his father do long for
the coming of the Parliament, in order to his own vindication, more than
any one of his enemies.  And here it comes into my head to set down what
Mr. Rawlinson, whom I met in Fenchurch Street on Friday last, looking over
his ruines there, told me, that he was told by one of my Lord Chancellor's
gentlemen lately (--------byname), that a grant coming to him to be
sealed, wherein the King hath given her [Lady Castlemaine], or somebody by
her means, a place which he did not like well of, he did stop the grant;
saying, that he thought this woman would sell everything shortly: which
she hearing of, she sent to let him know that she had disposed of this
place, and did not doubt, in a little time, to dispose of his.  This
Rawlinson do tell me my Lord Chancellor's own gentleman did tell him
himself.  Thence, meeting Creed, I with him to the Parke, there to walk a
little, and to the Queen's Chapel and there hear their musique, which I
liked in itself pretty well as to the composition, but their voices are
very harsh and rough that I thought it was some instruments they had that
made them sound so.  So to White Hall, and saw the King and Queen at
dinner; and observed (which I never did before), the formality, but it is
but a formality, of putting a bit of bread wiped upon each dish into the
mouth of every man that brings a dish;  but it should be in the sauce.
Here were some Russes come to see the King at dinner: among others, the
interpreter, a comely Englishman, in the Envoy's own clothes; which the
Envoy, it seems, in vanity did send to show his fine clothes upon this
man's back, which is one, it seems, of a comelier presence than himself:
and yet it is said that none of their clothes are their own, but taken out
of the King's own Wardrobe; and which they dare not bring back dirty or
spotted, but clean, or are in danger of being beaten, as they say:
insomuch that, Sir Charles Cotterell says, when they are to have an
audience they never venture to put on their clothes till he appears to
come to fetch them; and, as soon as ever they come home, put them off
again.  I to Sir G. Carteret's to dinner; where Mr. Cofferer Ashburnham;
who told a good story of a prisoner's being condemned at Salisbury for a
small matter.  While he was on the bench with his father-in-law, judge
Richardson, and while they were considering to transport him to save his
life, the fellow flung a great stone at the judge, that missed him, but
broke through the wainscoat. Upon this, he had his hand cut off, and was
hanged presently!  Here was a gentleman, one Sheres, one come lately from
my Lord Sandwich, with an express; but, Lord!  I was almost ashamed to see
him, lest he should know that I have not yet wrote one letter to my Lord
since his going.  I had no discourse with him, but after dinner Sir G.
Carteret and I to talk about some business of his, and so I to Mrs.
Martin, where was Mrs. Burroughs, and also fine Mrs. Noble, my partner in
the christening of Martin's child, did come to see it, and there we sat
and talked an hour, and then all broke up and I by coach home, and there
find Mr. Pelling and Howe, and we to sing and good musique till late, and
then to supper, and Howe lay at my house, and so after supper to bed with
much content, only my mind a little troubled at my late breach of vowes,
which however I will pay my forfeits, though the badness of my eyes,
making me unfit to read or write long, is my excuse, and do put me upon
other pleasures and employment which I should refrain from in observation
of my vowes.

9th.  Up; and to the office, where all the morning, and at noon comes
Creed to dine with me.  After dinner, he and I and my wife to the
Bear-Garden, to see a prize fought there.  But, coming too soon, I left
them there and went on to White Hall, and there did some business with the
Lords of the Treasury; and here do hear, by Tom Killigrew and Mr. Progers,
that for certain news is come of Harman's having spoiled nineteen of
twenty-two French ships, somewhere about the Barbadoes, I think they said;
but wherever it is, it is a good service, and very welcome.  Here I fell
in talk with Tom Killigrew about musick, and he tells me that he will
bring me to the best musick in England (of which, indeed, he is master),
and that is two Italians and Mrs. Yates, who, he says, is come to sing the
Italian manner as well as ever he heard any: says that Knepp won't take
pains enough, but that she understands her part so well upon the stage,
that no man or woman in the House do the like.  Thence I by water to the
Bear-Garden, where now the yard was full of people, and those most of them
seamen, striving by force to get in, that I was afeard to be seen among
them, but got into the ale-house, and so by a back-way was put into the
bull-house, where I stood a good while all alone among the bulls, and was
afeard I was among the bears, too; but by and by the door opened, and I
got into the common pit; and there, with my cloak about my face, I stood
and saw the prize fought, till one of them, a shoemaker, was so cut in
both his wrists that he could not fight any longer, and then they broke
off: his enemy was a butcher.  The sport very good, and various humours to
be seen among the rabble that is there.  Thence carried Creed to White
Hall, and there my wife and I took coach and home, and both of us to Sir
W. Batten's, to invite them to dinner on Wednesday next, having a whole
buck come from Hampton Court, by the warrant which Sir Stephen Fox did
give me.  And so home to supper and to bed, after a little playing on the
flageolet with my wife, who do outdo therein whatever I expected of her.

10th.  Up, and all the morning at the Office, where little to do but
bemoan ourselves under the want of money; and indeed little is, or can be
done, for want of money, we having not now received one penny for any
service in many weeks, and none in view to receive, saving for paying of
some seamen's wages.  At noon sent to by my Lord Bruncker to speak with
him, and it was to dine with him and his Lady Williams (which I have not
now done in many months at their own table) and Mr. Wren, who is come to
dine with them, the first time he hath been at the office since his being
the Duke of York's Secretary.  Here we sat and eat and talked and of some
matters of the office, but his discourse is as yet but weak in that
matter, and no wonder, he being new in it, but I fear he will not go about
understanding with the impatience that Sir W. Coventry did.  Having dined,
I away, and with my wife and Mercer, set my wife down at the 'Change, and
the other at White Hall, and I to St. James's, where we all met, and did
our usual weekly business with the Duke of York.  But, Lord! methinks both
he and we are mighty flat and dull over what we used to be, when Sir W.
Coventry was among us.  Thence I into St. James's Park, and there met Mr.
Povy; and he and I to walk an hour or more in the Pell Mell, talking of
the times.  He tells me, among other things, that this business of the
Chancellor do breed a kind of inward distance between the King and the
Duke of York, and that it cannot be avoided; for though the latter did at
first move it through his folly, yet he is made to see that he is wounded
by it, and is become much a less man than he was, and so will be: but he
tells me that they are, and have always been, great dissemblers one
towards another; and that their parting heretofore in France is never to
be thoroughly reconciled between them.  He tells me that he believes there
is no such thing like to be, as a composition with my Lady Castlemayne,
and that she shall be got out of the way before the Parliament comes; for
he says she is as high as ever she was, though he believes the King is as
weary of her as is possible, and would give any thing to remove her, but
he is so weak in his passion that he dare not do it; that he do believe
that my Lord Chancellor will be doing some acts in the Parliament which
shall render him popular; and that there are many people now do speak
kindly of him that did not before; but that, if he do do this, it must
provoke the King, and that party that removed him.  He seems to doubt what
the King of France will do, in case an accommodation shall be made between
Spain and him for Flanders, for then he will have nothing more easy to do
with his army than to subdue us.  Parted with him at White Hall, and,
there I took coach and took up my wife and Mercer, and so home and I to
the office, where ended my letters, and then to my chamber with my boy to
lay up some papers and things that lay out of order against to-morrow, to
make it clear against the feast that I am to have.  Here Mr. Pelling come
to sit with us, and talked of musique and the musicians of the town, and
so to bed, after supper.

11th.  Up, and with Mr. Gawden to the Exchequer.  By the way, he tells me
this day he is to be answered whether he must hold Sheriffe or no; for he
would not hold unless he may keep it at his office, which is out of the
city (and so my Lord Mayor must come with his sword down, whenever he
comes thither), which he do, because he cannot get a house fit for him in
the city, or else he will fine for it.  Among others that they have in
nomination for Sheriffe, one is little Chaplin, who was his servant, and a
very young man to undergo that place; but as the city is now, there is no
great honour nor joy to be had, in being a public officer.  At the
Exchequer I looked after my business, and when done went home to the
'Change, and there bought a case of knives for dinner, and a dish of fruit
for 5s., and bespoke other things, and then home, and here I find all
things in good order, and a good dinner towards.  Anon comes Sir W. Batten
and his lady, and Mr. Griffith, their ward, and Sir W. Pen and his lady,
and Mrs. Lowther, who is grown, either through pride or want of manners, a
fool, having not a word to say almost all dinner; and, as a further mark
of a beggarly, proud fool, hath a bracelet of diamonds and rubies about
her wrist, and a sixpenny necklace about her neck, and not one good rag of
clothes upon her back; and Sir John Chichly in their company, and Mrs.
Turner.  Here I had an extraordinary good and handsome dinner for them,
better than any of them deserve or understand, saving Sir John Chichly and
Mrs. Turner, and not much mirth, only what I by discourse made, and that
against my genius.  After dinner I took occasion to break up the company
soon as I could, and all parted, Sir W. Batten and I by water to White
Hall, there to speak with the Commissioners of the Treasury, who are
mighty earnest for our hastening all that may be the paying off of the
Seamen, now there is money, and are considering many other thins for
easing of charge, which I am glad of, but vexed to see that J. Duncomb
should be so pressing in it as if none of us had like care with him.
Having done there, I by coach to the Duke of York's playhouse, and there
saw part of "The Ungratefull Lovers;" and sat by Beck Marshall, who is
very handsome near hand.  Here I met Mrs. Turner and my wife as we agreed,
and together home, and there my wife and I part of the night at the
flageolet, which she plays now any thing upon almost at first sight and in
good time.  But here come Mr. Moore, and sat and discoursed with me of
publique matters: the sum of which is, that he do doubt that there is more
at the bottom than the removal of the Chancellor; that is, he do verily
believe that the King do resolve to declare the Duke of Monmouth
legitimate, and that we shall soon see it. This I do not think the Duke of
York will endure without blows; but his poverty, and being lessened by
having the Chancellor fallen and [Sir] W. Coventry gone from him, will
disable him from being able to do any thing almost, he being himself
almost lost in the esteem of people; and will be more and more, unless my
Lord Chancellor, who is already begun to be pitied by some people, and to
be better thought of than was expected, do recover himself in Parliament.
He would seem to fear that this difference about the Crowne (if there be
nothing else) will undo us.  He do say that, that is very true; that my
Lord [Chancellor] did lately make some stop of some grants of L2000 a-year
to my Lord Grandison, which was only in his name, for the use of my Lady
Castlemaine's children; and that this did incense her, and she did speak
very scornful words, and sent a scornful message to him about it.  He
gone, after supper, I to bed, being mightily pleased with my wife's
playing so well upon the flageolet, and I am resolved she shall learn to
play upon some instrument, for though her eare be bad, yet I see she will
attain any thing to be done by her hand.

12th.  Up, and at the office all the morning till almost noon, and then I
rode from the office (which I have not done five times I think since I
come thither) and to the Exchequer for some tallies for Tangier; and that
being done, to the Dog taverne, and there I spent half a piece upon the
clerks, and so away, and I to Mrs. Martin's, but she not at home, but
staid and drunk with her sister and landlady, and by that time it was time
to go to a play, which I did at the Duke's house, where "Tu Quoque" was
the first time acted, with some alterations of Sir W. Davenant's; but the
play is a very silly play, methinks; for I, and others that sat by me, Mr.
Povy and Mr. Progers, were weary of it; but it will please the citizens.
My wife also was there, I having sent for her to meet me there, and W.
Hewer.  After the play we home, and there I to the office and despatched
my business, and then home, and mightily pleased with my wife's playing on
the flageolet, she taking out any tune almost at first sight, and keeping
time to it, which pleases me mightily.  So to supper and to bed.

13th.  Called up by people come to deliver in ten chaldron of coals,
brought in one of our prizes from Newcastle.  The rest we intend to sell,
we having above ten chaldron between us.  They sell at about 28s. or 29s.
per chaldron; but Sir W. Batten hath sworn that he was a cuckold that
sells under 30s., and that makes us lay up all but what we have for our
own spending, which is very pleasant; for I believe we shall be glad to
sell them for less.  To the office, and there despatched business till ten
o'clock, and then with Sir W. Batten and my wife and Mrs. Turner by
hackney-coach to Walthamstow, to Mr. Shipman's to dinner, where Sir W. Pen
and my Lady and Mrs. Lowther (the latter of which hath got a sore nose,
given her, I believe, from her husband, which made me I could not look
upon her with any pleasure), and here a very good and plentifull wholesome
dinner, and, above all thing, such plenty of milk meats, she keeping a
great dairy, and so good as I never met with.  The afternoon proved very
foul weather, the morning fair.  We staid talking till evening, and then
home, and there to my flageolet with my wife, and so to bed without any
supper, my belly being full and dinner not digested.  It vexed me to hear
how Sir W. Pen, who come alone from London, being to send his coachman for
his wife and daughter, and bidding his coachman in much anger to go for
them (he being vexed, like a rogue, to do anything to please his wife),
his coachman Tom was heard to say a pox, or God rot her, can she walk
hither?  These words do so mad me that I could find in my heart to give
him or my Lady notice of them.

14th.  Up, and to the office, where all the morning busy.  At noon comes
Mr. Pierce and dined with me to advise about several matters of his
relating to the office and his purse, and here he told me that the King
and Duke of York and the whole Court is mighty joyful at the Duchesse of
York's being brought to bed this day, or yesterday, of a son; which will
settle men's minds mightily.  And he tells me that he do think that what
the King do, of giving the Duke of Monmouth the command of his Guards, and
giving my Lord Gerard L12,000 for it, is merely to find an employment for
him upon which he may live, and not out of any design to bring him into
any title to the Crowne; which Mr. Moore did the other day put me into
great fear of.  After dinner, he gone, my wife to the King's play-house to
see "The Northerne Castle," which I think I never did see before.  Knipp
acted in it, and did her part very extraordinary well; but the play is but
a mean, sorry play; but the house very full of gallants. It seems, it hath
not been acted a good while.  Thence to the Exchange for something for my
wife, and then home and to the office, and then home to our flageolet, and
so to bed, being mightily troubled in mind at the liberty I give myself of
going to plays upon pretence of the weakness of my eyes, that cannot
continue so long together at work at my office, but I must remedy it.

15th (Lord's day).  Up to my chamber, there to set some papers to rights.
By and by to church, where I stood, in continual fear of Mrs. Markham's
coming to church, and offering to come into our pew, to prevent which,
soon as ever I heard the great door open, I did step back, and clap my
breech to our pew-door, that she might be forced to shove me to come in;
but as God would have it, she did not come.  Mr. Mills preached, and after
sermon, by invitation, he and his wife come to dine with me, which is the
first time they have been in my house; I think, these five years, I
thinking it not amiss, because of their acquaintance in our country, to
shew them some respect.  Mr. Turner and his wife, and their son the
Captain, dined with me, and I had a very good dinner for them, and very
merry, and after dinner, he [Mr. Mills] was forced to go, though it
rained, to Stepney, to preach.  We also to church, and then home, and
there comes Mr. Pelling, with two men, by promise, one Wallington and
Piggott, the former whereof, being a very little fellow, did sing a most
excellent bass, and yet a poor fellow, a working goldsmith, that goes
without gloves to his hands.  Here we sung several good things, but I am
more and more confirmed that singing with many voices is not singing, but
a sort of instrumental musique, the sense of the words being lost by not
being heard, and especially as they set them with Fuges of words, one
after another, whereas singing properly, I think, should be but with one
or two voices at most and the counterpoint.  They supped with me, and so
broke, up, and then my wife and I to my chamber, where, through the
badness of my eyes, she was forced to read to me, which she do very well,
and was Mr. Boyle's discourse upon the style of the Scripture,' which is a
very fine piece, and so to bed.

16th.  Up, and several come to me, among others Mr. Yeabsly of Plymouth,
to discourse about their matters touching Tangier, and by and by Sir H.
Cholmly, who was with me a good while; who tells me that the Duke of
York's child is christened, the Duke of Albemarle and the Marquis of
Worcester' godfathers, and my Lady Suffolke godmother; and they have named
it Edgar, which is a brave name.  But it seems they are more joyful in the
Chancellor's family, at the birth of this Prince, than in wisdom they
should, for fear it should give the King cause of jealousy.  Sir H.
Cholmly do not seem to think there is any such thing can be in the King's
intention as that of raising the Duke of Monmouth to the Crowne, though he
thinks there may possibly be some persons that would, and others that
would be glad to have the Queen removed to some monastery, or somewhere or
other, to make room for a new wife; for they will all be unsafe under the
Duke of York.  He says the King and Parliament will agree; that is, that
the King will do any thing that they will have him.  We together to the
Exchequer about our Tangier orders, and so parted at the New Exchange,
where I staid reading Mrs. Phillips's poems till my wife and Mercer called
me to Mrs. Pierces, by invitation to dinner, where I find her painted,
which makes me loathe her, and the nastiest poor dinner that made me sick,
only here I met with a Fourth Advice to the Painter upon the coming in of
the Dutch to the River and end of the war, that made my heart ake to read,
it being too sharp, and so true.  Here I also saw a printed account of the
examinations taken, touching the burning of the City of London, shewing
the plot of the Papists therein; which, it seems, hath been ordered and to
have been burnt by the hands of the hangman, in Westminster Palace.  I
will try to get one of them.  After dinner she showed us her closet, which
is pretty, with her James's picture done by Hales, but with a mighty bad
hand, which is his great fault that he do do negligently, and the drapery
also not very good.  Being tired of being here, and sick of their damned
sluttish dinner, my wife and Mercer and I away to the King's play-house,
to see the "Scornfull Lady;" but it being now three o'clock there was not
one soul in the pit; whereupon, for shame, we would not go in, but,
against our wills, went all to see "Tu Quoque" again, where there is a
pretty store of company, and going with a prejudice the play appeared
better to us.  Here we saw Madam Morland, who is grown mighty fat, but is
very comely.  But one of the best arts of our sport was a mighty pretty
lady that sat behind, that did laugh so heartily and constantly, that it
did me good to hear her.  Thence to the King's house, upon a wager of mine
with my wife, that there would be no acting there today, there being no
company: so I went in and found a pretty good company there, and saw their
dance at the end of he play, and so to the coach again, and to the Cock
ale house, and there drank in our coach, and so home, and my wife read to
me as last night, and so to bed vexed with our dinner to-day, and myself
more with being convinced that Mrs. Pierce paints, so that henceforth to
be sure I shall loathe her.

17th.  Up, and at the office all the morning, where Mr. Wren come to us
and sat with us, only to learn, and do intend to come once or twice a week
and sit with us.  In the afternoon walked to the Old Swan, the way mighty
dirty, and there called at Michell's, and there had opportunity para kiss
su moher, but elle did receive it with a great deal of seeming regret,
which did vex me.  But however I do not doubt overcoming her as I did the
moher of the monsieur at Deptford.  So thence by water to Westminster, to
Burgess, and there did receive my orders for L1500 more for Tangier.
Thence to the Hall, and there talked a little with Mrs. Michell, and so to
Mrs. Martin's to pay for my cuffs and drink with her . .  .  .  And by and
by away by coach and met with Sir H. Cholmly, and with him to the Temple,
and there in Playford's shop did give him some of my Exchequer orders and
took his receipts, and so parted and home, and there to my business hard
at the office, and then home, my wife being at Mrs. Turner's, who and her
husband come home with her, and here staid and talked and staid late, and
then went away and we to bed.  But that which vexed me much this evening
is that Captain Cocke and Sir W. Batten did come to me, and sat, and drank
a bottle of wine, and told me how Sir W. Pen hath got an order for the
"Flying Greyhound" for himself, which is so false a thing, and the part of
a knave, as nothing almost can be more. This vexed me; but I resolve to
bring it before the Duke, and try a pull for it.

18th.  Up betimes and to Captain Cocke, in his coach which he sent for me,
and he not being ready I walked in the Exchange, which is now made pretty,
by having windows and doors before all their shops, to keep out the cold.
By and by to him, and he being ready, he and I out in his coach to my Lord
Chancellor's; there to Mr. Wren's chamber, who did tell us the whole of
Sir W. Pen's having the order for this ship of ours, and we went with him
to St. James's, and there I did see the copy of it, which is built upon a
suggestion of his having given the King a ship of his, "The Prosperous,"
wherein is such a cheat as I have the best advantage in the world over
him, and will make him do reason, or lay him on his back.  This I was very
glad of, and having done as far as I could in it we returned, and I home,
and there at the office all the morning, and at noon with my Lord Bruncker
to the Treasurer's office to look over the clerks who are there making up
the books, but in such a manner as it is a shame to see.  Then home to
dinner, and after dinner, my mind mighty full of this business of Sir W.
Pen's, to the office, and there busy all the afternoon.  This evening Sir
W. Batten and [Sir] W. Pen and I met at [Sir] W. Batten's house, and there
I took an opportunity to break the business, at which [Sir] W. Pen is much
disturbed, and would excuse it the most he can, but do it so basely, that
though he do offer to let go his pretence to her, and resign up his order
for her, and come in only to ask his share of her (which do very well
please me, and give me present satisfaction), yet I shall remember him for
a knave while I live.  But thus my mind is quieted for the present more
than I thought I should be, and am glad that I shall have no need of
bidding him open defiance, which I would otherwise have done, and made a
perpetual war between us.  So to the office, and there busy pretty late,
and so home and to supper with my wife, and so to bed.

19th.  Up, and all the morning at the office.  At noon home to dinner, W.
Hewer and I and my wife, when comes my cozen, Kate Joyce, and an aunt of
ours, Lettice, formerly Haynes, and now Howlett, come to town to see her
friends, and also Sarah Kite, with her little boy in her armes, a very
pretty little boy.  The child I like very well, and could wish it my own.
My wife being all unready, did not appear.  I made as much of them as I
could such ordinary company; and yet my heart was glad to see them, though
their condition was a little below my present state, to be familiar with.
She tells me how the lifeguard, which we thought a little while since was
sent down into the country about some insurrection, was sent to
Winchcombe, to spoil the tobacco there, which it seems the people there do
plant contrary to law, and have always done, and still been under force
and danger of having it spoiled, as it hath been oftentimes, and yet they
will continue to plant it.

     [Winchcombe St. Peter, a market-town in Gloucestershire.  Tobacco
     was first cultivated in this parish, after its introduction into
     England, in 1583, and it proved, a considerable source of profit to
     the inhabitants, till the trade was placed under restrictions.  The
     cultivation was first prohibited during the Commonwealth, and
     various acts were passed in the reign of Charles II. for the same
     purpose.  Among the king's pamphlets in the British Museum is a
     tract entitled "Harry Hangman's Honour, or Glostershire Hangman's
     Request to the Smokers and Tobacconists of London," dated June 11th,
     1655.  The author writes: "The very planting of tobacco hath proved
     the decay of my trade, for since it hath been planted in
     Glostershire, especially at Winchcomb, my trade hath proved nothing
     worth."  He adds: "Then 'twas a merry world with me, for indeed
     before tobacco was there planted, there being no kind of trade to
     employ men, and very small tillage, necessity compelled poor men to
     stand my friends by stealing of sheep and other cattel, breaking of
     hedges, robbing of orchards, and what not."]

The place, she says, is a miserable poor place.  They gone, I to the
office, where all the afternoon very busy, and at night, when my eyes were
weary of the light, I and my wife to walk in the garden, and then home to
supper and pipe, and then to bed.

20th.  At the office doing business all the morning.  At noon expected
Creed to have come to dine with me and brought Mr. Sheres (the gentleman
lately come from my Lord Sandwich) with him; but they come not, so there
was a good dinner lost.  After dinner my wife and Jane about some business
of hers abroad, and then I to the office, where, having done my business,
I out to pay some debts: among others to the taverne at the end of
Billiter Lane, where my design was to see the pretty mistress of the
house, which I did, and indeed is, as I always thought, one of the
modestest, prettiest, plain women that ever I saw.  Thence was met in the
street by Sir W. Pen, and he and I by coach to the King's playhouse, and
there saw "The Mad Couple,"  which I do not remember that I have seen; it
is a pretty pleasant play.  Thence home, and my wife and I to walk in the
garden, she having been at the same play with Jane, in the 18d. seat, to
shew Jane the play, and so home to supper and to bed.

21st.  All the morning at the office, dined at home, and expected Sheres
again, but he did not come, so another dinner lost by the folly of Creed.
After having done some business at the office, I out with my wife to
Sheres's lodging and left an invitation for him to dine with me tomorrow,
and so back and took up my wife at the Exchange, and then kissed Mrs.
Smith's pretty hand, and so with my wife by coach to take some ayre (but
the way very dirty) as far as Bow, and so drinking (as usual) at Mile End
of Byde's ale, we home and there busy at my letters till late, and so to
walk by moonshine with my wife, and so to bed.  The King, Duke of York,
and the men of the Court, have been these four or five days a-hunting at
Bagshot.

22nd (Lord's day).  At my chamber all the morning making up some accounts,
to my great content.  At noon comes Mr. Sheres, whom I find a good,
ingenious man, but do talk a little too much of his travels.  He left my
Lord Sandwich well, but in pain to be at home for want of money, which
comes very hardly.  Most of the afternoon talking of Spain, and informing
him against his return how things are here, and so spent most of the
afternoon, and then he parted, and then to my chamber busy till my eyes
were almost blind with writing and reading, and I was fain to get the boy
to come and write for me, and then to supper, and Pelling come to me at
supper, and then to sing a Psalm with him, and so parted and to bed, after
my wife had read some thing to me (to save my eyes) in a good book.  This
night I did even my accounts of the house, which I have to my great shame
omitted now above two months or more, and therefore am content to take my
wife's and mayd's accounts as they give them, being not able to correct
them, which vexes me; but the fault being my own, contrary to my wife's
frequent desires, I cannot find fault, but am resolved never to let them
come to that pass again.  The truth is, I have indulged myself more in
pleasure for these last two months than ever I did in my life before,
since I come to be a person concerned in business; and I doubt, when I
come to make up my accounts, I shall find it so by the expence.

23rd.  Up, and walked to the Exchange, there to get a coach but failed,
and so was forced to walk a most dirty walk to the Old Swan, and there
took boat, and so to the Exchange, and there took coach to St. James's and
did our usual business with the Duke of York.  Thence I walked over the
Park to White Hall and took water to Westminster, and there, among other
things, bought the examinations of the business about the Fire of London,
which is a book that Mrs. Pierce tells me hath been commanded to be burnt.
The examinations indeed are very plain.  Thence to the Excise office, and
so to the Exchange, and did a little business, and so home and took up my
wife, and so carried her to the other end, where I 'light at my Lord
Ashly's, by invitation, to dine there, which I did, and Sir H. Cholmly,
Creed, and Yeabsly, upon occasion of the business of Yeabsly, who, God
knows, do bribe him very well for it; and it is pretty to see how this
great man do condescend to these things, and do all he can in his
examining of his business to favour him, and yet with great cunning not to
be discovered but by me that am privy to it.  At table it is worth
remembering that my Lord tells us that the House of Lords is the last
appeal that a man can make, upon a poynt of interpretation of the law, and
that therein they are above the judges; and that he did assert this in the
Lords' House upon the late occasion of the quarrel between my Lord
Bristoll and the Chancellor, when the former did accuse the latter of
treason, and the judges did bring it in not to be treason: my Lord Ashly
did declare that the judgment of the judges was nothing in the presence of
their Lordships, but only as far as they were the properest men to bring
precedents; but not to interpret the law to their Lordships, but only the
inducements of their persuasions: and this the Lords did concur in.
Another pretty thing was my Lady Ashly's speaking of the bad qualities of
glass-coaches; among others, the flying open of the doors upon any great
shake: but another was, that my Lady Peterborough being in her
glass-coach, with the glass up, and seeing a lady pass by in a coach whom
she would salute, the glass was so clear, that she thought it had been
open, and so ran her head through the glass, and cut all her forehead!
After dinner, before we fell to the examination of Yeabsly's business, we
were put into my Lord's room before he could come to us, and there had
opportunity to look over his state of his accounts of the prizes; and
there saw how bountiful the King hath been to several people and hardly
any man almost, Commander of the Navy of any note, but hath had some
reward or other out of it; and many sums to the Privy-purse, but not so
many, I see, as I thought there had been: but we could not look quite
through it.  But several Bedchamber-men and people about the Court had
good sums; and, among others, Sir John Minnes and Lord Bruncker have L200
a-piece for looking to the East India prizes, while I did their work for
them.  By and by my Lord come, and we did look over Yeabsly's business a
little; and I find how prettily this cunning Lord can be partial and
dissemble it in this case, being privy to the bribe he is to receive.
This done; we away, and with Sir H. Cholmly to Westminster; who by the way
told me how merry the king and Duke of York and Court were the other day,
when they were abroad a-hunting.  They come to Sir G. Carteret's house at
Cranbourne, and there were entertained, and all made drunk; and that all
being drunk, Armerer did come to the King, and swore to him, "By God,
Sir," says he, "you are not so kind to the Duke of York of late as you
used to be."--"Not I?" says the King.  "Why so?"--"Why," says he, "if you
are, let us drink his health."--"Why, let us," says the King.  Then he
fell on his knees, and drank it; and having done, the King began to drink
it.  "Nay, Sir," says Armerer, "by God you must do it on your knees!"  So
he did, and then all the company: and having done it, all fell a-crying
for joy, being all maudlin and kissing one another, the King the Duke of
York, and the Duke of York the King: and in such a maudlin pickle as never
people were: and so passed the day.  But Sir H. Cholmly tells me, that the
King hath this good luck, that the next day he hates to have any body
mention what he had done the day before, nor will suffer any body to gain
upon him that way; which is a good quality. Parted with Sir H. Cholmly at
White Hall, and there I took coach and took up my wife at Unthanke's, and
so out for ayre, it being a mighty pleasant day, as far as Bow, and so
drank by the way, and home, and there to my chamber till by and by comes
Captain Cocke about business; who tells me that Mr. Bruncker is lost for
ever, notwithstanding my Lord Bruncker hath advised with him, Cocke, how
he might make a peace with the Duke of York and Chancellor, upon promise
of serving him in the Parliament but Cocke says that is base to offer, and
will have no success neither.  He says that Mr. Wren hath refused a
present of Tom Wilson's for his place of Store-keeper of Chatham, and is
resolved never to take any thing; which is both wise in him, and good to
the King's service.  He stayed with me very late, here being Mrs. Turner
and W. Batelier drinking and laughing, and then to bed.

24th.  Up, and to the Office, where all the morning very busy.  At noon
home, where there dined with me Anthony Joyce and his wife, and Will and
his wife, and my aunt Lucett, that was here the other day, and Sarah Kite,
and I had a good dinner for them, and were as merry as I could be in that
company where W. Joyce is, who is still the same impertinent fellow that
ever he was.  After dinner I away to St. James's, where we had an audience
of the Duke of York of many things of weight, as the confirming an
establishment of the numbers of men on ships in peace and other things of
weight, about which we stayed till past candle-light, and so Sir W. Batten
and W. Pen and I fain to go all in a hackney-coach round by London Wall,
for fear of cellars, this being the first time I have been forced to go
that way this year, though now I shall begin to use it. We tired one coach
upon Holborne-Conduit Hill, and got another, and made it a long journey
home.  Where to the office and then home, and at my business till twelve
at night, writing in short hand the draught of a report to make to the
King and Council to-morrow, about the reason of not having the book of the
Treasurer made up.  This I did finish to-night to the spoiling of my eyes,
I fear.  This done, then to bed.  This evening my wife tells me that W.
Batelier hath been here to-day, and brought with him the pretty girl he
speaks of, to come to serve my wife as a woman, out of the school at Bow.
My wife says she is extraordinary handsome, and inclines to have her, and
I am glad of it--at least, that if we must have one, she should be
handsome.  But I shall leave it wholly to my wife, to do what she will
therein.

25th.  Up as soon as I could see and to the office to write over fair with
Mr. Hater my last night's work, which I did by nine o'clock, and got it
signed, and so with Sir H. Cholmly, who come to me about his business, to
White Hall: and thither come also my Lord Bruncker: and we by and by
called in, and our paper read; and much discourse thereon by Sir G.
Carteret, my Lord Anglesey, Sir W. Coventry, and my Lord Ashly, and
myself: but I could easily discern that they none of them understood the
business; and the King at last ended it with saying lazily, "Why," says
he, "after all this discourse, I now come to understand it; and that is,
that there can nothing be done in this more than is possible," which was
so silly as I never heard: "and therefore," says he, "I would have these
gentlemen to do as much as possible to hasten the Treasurer's accounts;
and that is all."  And so we broke up: and I confess I went away ashamed,
to see how slightly things are advised upon there.  Here I saw the Duke of
Buckingham sit in Council again, where he was re-admitted, it seems, the
last Council-day: and it is wonderful to see how this man is come again to
his places, all of them, after the reproach and disgrace done him: so that
things are done in a most foolish manner quite through.  The Duke of
Buckingham did second Sir W. Coventry in the advising the King that he
would not concern himself in the owning or not owning any man's accounts,
or any thing else, wherein he had not the same satisfaction that would
satisfy the Parliament; saying, that nothing would displease the
Parliament more than to find him defending any thing that is not right,
nor justifiable to the utmost degree but methought he spoke it but very
poorly.  After this, I walked up and down the Gallery till noon; and here
I met with Bishop Fuller, who, to my great joy, is made, which I did not
hear before, Bishop of Lincoln.  At noon I took coach, and to Sir G.
Carteret's, in Lincoln's-Inn-Fields, to the house that is my Lord's, which
my Lord lets him have: and this is the first day of dining there. And
there dined with him and his lady my Lord Privy-seale, who is indeed a
very sober man; who, among other talk, did mightily wonder at the reason
of the growth of the credit of banquiers, since it is so ordinary a thing
for citizens to break, out of knavery.  Upon this we had much discourse;
and I observed therein, to the honour of this City, that I have not heard
of one citizen of London broke in all this war, this plague, this fire,
and this coming up of the enemy among us; which he owned to be very
considerable.

     [This remarkable fact is confirmed by Evelyn, in a letter to Sir
     Samuel Tuke, September 27th, 1666.  See "Correspondence," vol.
     iii., p. 345, edit. 1879.]

After dinner I to the King's playhouse, my eyes being so bad since last
night's straining of them, that I am hardly able to see, besides the pain
which I have in them.  The play was a new play; and infinitely full: the
King and all the Court almost there.  It is "The Storme," a play of
Fletcher's;' which is but so-so, methinks; only there is a most admirable
dance at the end, of the ladies, in a military manner, which indeed did
please me mightily.  So, it being a mighty wet day and night, I with much
ado got a coach, and, with twenty stops which he made, I got him to carry
me quite through, and paid dear for it, and so home, and there comes my
wife home from the Duke of York's playhouse, where she hath been with my
aunt and Kate Joyce, and so to supper, and betimes to bed, to make amends
for my last night's work and want of sleep.

26th.  Up, and to my chamber, whither Jonas Moore comes, and, among other
things, after our business done, discoursing of matters of the office, I
shewed him my varnished things, which he says he can outdo much, and tells
me the mighty use of Napier's bones;

     [John Napier or Neper (1550-1617), laird of Merchiston (now
     swallowed up in the enlarged Edinburgh of to-day, although the old
     castle still stands), and the inventor of logarithms.  He published
     his "Rabdologiae seu numerationis per virgulas libri duo" in 1617,
     and the work was reprinted and translated into Italian (1623) and
     Dutch (1626).  In 1667 William Leybourn published "The Art of
     Numbering by Speaking Rods, vulgarly termed Napier's Bones."]

so that I will have a pair presently.  To the office, where busy all the
morning sitting, and at noon home to dinner, and then with my wife abroad
to the King's playhouse, to shew her yesterday's new play, which I like as
I did yesterday, the principal thing extraordinary being the dance, which
is very good.  So to Charing Cross by coach, about my wife's business, and
then home round by London Wall, it being very dark and dirty, and so to
supper, and, for the ease of my eyes, to bed, having first ended all my
letters at the office.

27th.  Up, and to the office, where very busy all the morning.  While I
was busy at the Office, my wife sends for me to come home, and what was it
but to see the pretty girl which she is taking to wait upon her: and
though she seems not altogether so great a beauty as she had before told
me, yet indeed she is mighty pretty; and so pretty, that I find I shall be
too much pleased with it, and therefore could be contented as to my
judgement, though not to my passion, that she might not come, lest I may
be found too much minding her, to the discontent of my wife.  She is to
come next week.  She seems, by her discourse, to be grave beyond her
bigness and age, and exceeding well bred as to her deportment, having been
a scholar in a school at Bow these seven or eight years.  To the office
again, my head running on this pretty girl, and there till noon, when
Creed and Sheres come and dined with me; and we had a great deal of pretty
discourse of the ceremoniousness of the Spaniards, whose ceremonies are so
many and so known, that, Sheres tells me, upon all occasions of joy or
sorrow in a Grandee's family, my Lord Embassador is fain to send one with
an 'en hora buena', if it be upon a marriage, or birth of a child, or a
'pesa me', if it be upon the death of a child, or so.  And these
ceremonies are so set, and the words of the compliment, that he hath been
sent from my Lord, when he hath done no more than send in word to the
Grandee that one was there from the Embassador; and he knowing what was
his errand, that hath been enough, and he never spoken with him: nay,
several Grandees having been to marry a daughter, have wrote letters to my
Lord to give him notice, and out of the greatness of his wisdom to desire
his advice, though people he never saw; and then my Lord he answers by
commending the greatness of his discretion in making so good an alliance,
&c., and so ends.  He says that it is so far from dishonour to a man to
give private revenge for an affront, that the contrary is a disgrace; they
holding that he that receives an affront is not fit to appear in the sight
of the world till he hath revenged himself; and therefore, that a
gentleman there that receives an affront oftentimes never appears again in
the world till he hath, by some private way or other, revenged himself:
and that, on this account, several have followed their enemies privately
to the Indys, thence to Italy, thence to France and back again, watching
for an opportunity to be revenged.  He says my Lord was fain to keep a
letter from the Duke of York to the Queen of Spain a great while in his
hands, before he could think fit to deliver it, till he had learnt whether
the Queen would receive it, it being directed to his cozen.  He says that
many ladies in Spain, after they are found to be with child, do never stir
out of their beds or chambers till they are brought to bed: so ceremonious
they are in that point also.  He tells me of their wooing by serenades at
the window, and that their friends do always make the match; but yet that
they have opportunities to meet at masse at church, and there they make
love: that the Court there hath no dancing, nor visits at night to see the
King or Queen, but is always just like a cloyster, nobody stirring in it:
that my Lord Sandwich wears a beard now, turned up in the Spanish manner.
But that which pleases me most indeed is, that the peace which he hath
made with Spain is now printed here, and is acknowledged by all the
merchants to be the best peace that ever England had with them: and it
appears that the King thinks it so, for this is printed before the
ratification is gone over; whereas that with France and Holland was not in
a good while after, till copys come over of it in English out of Holland
and France, that it was a reproach not to have it printed here.  This I am
mighty glad of; and is the first and only piece of good news, or thing fit
to be owned, that this nation hath done several years.  After dinner I to
the office, and they gone, anon comes Pelling, and he and I to Gray's Inne
Fields, thinking to have heard Mrs. Knight sing at her lodgings, by a
friend's means of his;

     [Mrs. Knight, a celebrated singer and mistress of Charles II. There
     is in Waller's "Poems" a song sung by her to the queen on her
     birthday.  In her portrait, engraved by Faber, after Kneller, she is
     represented in mourning, and in a devout posture before a crucifix.
     Evelyn refers to her singing as incomparable, and adds that she had
     "the greatest reach of any English woman; she had been lately
     roaming in Italy, and was much improv'd in that quality" ("Diary,"
     December 2nd, 1674).]

but we come too late; so must try another time.  So lost our labour, and I
by coach home, and there to my chamber, and did a great deal of good
business about my Tangier accounts, and so with pleasure discoursing with
my wife of our journey shortly to Brampton, and of this little girle,
which indeed runs in my head, and pleases me mightily, though I dare not
own it, and so to supper and to bed.

28th.  Up, having slept not so much to-night as I used to do, for my
thoughts being so full of this pretty little girle that is coming to live
with us, which pleases me mightily.  All the morning at the Office, busy
upon an Order of Council, wherein they are mightily at a loss what to
advise about our discharging of seamen by ticket, there being no money to
pay their wages before January, only there is money to pay them since
January, provided by the Parliament, which will be a horrid disgrace to
the King and Crowne of England that no man shall reckon himself safe, but
where the Parliament takes care.  And this did move Mr. Wren at the table
to-day to say, that he did believe if ever there be occasion more to raise
money, it will become here, as it is in Poland, that there are two
treasurers--one for the King, and the other for the kingdom.  At noon
dined at home, and Mr. Hater with me, and Mr. Pierce, the surgeon, dropped
in, who I feared did come to bespeak me to be godfather to his son, which
I am unwilling now to be, having ended my liking to his wife, since I find
she paints.  After dinner comes Sir Fr. Hollis to me about business; and I
with him by coach to the Temple, and there I 'light; all the way he
telling me romantic lies of himself and his family, how they have been
Parliamentmen for Grimsby, he and his forefathers, this 140 years; and his
father is now: and himself, at this day, stands for to be, with his
father, by the death of his fellow-burgess; and that he believes it will
cost him as much as it did his predecessor, which was L300 in ale, and L52
in buttered ale; which I believe is one of his devilish lies.  Here I
'light and to the Duke of York's playhouse, and there saw a piece of "Sir
Martin Marrall," with great delight, though I have seen it so often, and
so home, and there busy late, and so home to my supper and bed.

29th (Lord's day).  Up, and put off first my summer's silk suit, and put
on a cloth one.  Then to church, and so home to dinner, my wife and I
alone to a good dinner.  All the afternoon talking in my chamber with my
wife, about my keeping a coach the next year, and doing some things to my
house, which will cost money--that is, furnish our best chamber with
tapestry, and other rooms with pictures.  In the evening read good
books--my wife to me; and I did even my kitchen accounts.  Then to supper,
and so to bed.

30th.  By water to White Hall, there to a committee of Tangier, but they
not met yet, I went to St. James's, there thinking to have opportunity to
speak to the Duke of York about the petition I have to make to him for
something in reward for my service this war, but I did waive it.  Thence
to White Hall, and there a Committee met, where little was done, and
thence to the Duke of York to Council, where we the officers of the Navy
did attend about the business of discharging the seamen by tickets, where
several of the Lords spoke and of our number none but myself, which I did
in such manner as pleased the King and Council.  Speaking concerning the
difficulty of pleasing of seamen and giving them assurance to their
satisfaction that they should be paid their arrears of wages, my Lord
Ashly did move that an assignment for money on the Act might be put into
the hands of the East India Company, or City of London, which he thought
the seamen would believe.  But this my Lord Anglesey did very handsomely
oppose, and I think did carry it that it will not be: and it is indeed a
mean thing that the King should so far own his own want of credit as to
borrow theirs in this manner.  My Lord Anglesey told him that this was the
way indeed to teach the Parliament to trust the King no more for the time
to come, but to have a kingdom's Treasurer distinct from the King's. Home
at noon to dinner, where I expected to have had our new girle, my wife's
woman, but she is not yet come.  I abroad after dinner to White Hall, and
there among other things do hear that there will be musique to-morrow
night before the King.  So to Westminster, where to the Swan .  . .  .
and drank and away to the Hall, and thence to Mrs. Martin's, to bespeak
some linen, and there je did avoir all with her, and drank, and away,
having first promised my goddaughter a new coat-her first coat. So by
coach home, and there find our pretty girl Willet come, brought by Mr.
Batelier, and she is very pretty, and so grave as I never saw a little
thing in my life.  Indeed I think her a little too good for my family, and
so well carriaged as I hardly ever saw.  I wish my wife may use her well.
Now I begin to be full of thought for my journey the next week, if I can
get leave, to Brampton.  Tonight come and sat with me Mr. Turner and his
wife and tell me of a design of sending their son Franke to the East Indy
Company's service if they can get him entertainment, which they are
promised by Sir Andr. Rickard, which I do very well like of.  So the
company broke up and to bed.




     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     Act of Council passed, to put out all Papists in office
     And a deal of do of which I am weary
     But do it with mighty vanity and talking
     Feared she hath from some [one] or other of a present
     Fell a-crying for joy, being all maudlin and kissing one another
     Found to be with child, do never stir out of their beds
     Had his hand cut off, and was hanged presently!
     Hates to have any body mention what he had done the day before
     House of Lords is the last appeal that a man can make
     I find her painted, which makes me loathe her (cosmetics)
     King do resolve to declare the Duke of Monmouth legitimate
     Lady Castlemayne is compounding with the King for a pension
     My intention to learn to trill
     Never, while he lives, truckle under any body or any faction
     Pressing in it as if none of us had like care with him
     Singing with many voices is not singing
     Their condition was a little below my present state
     Weary of it; but it will please the citizens
     Weigh him after he had done playing





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Diary of Samuel Pepys, September 1667
by Samuel Pepys

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***

***** This file should be named 4180.txt or 4180.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/4/1/8/4180/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
