Project Gutenberg's Diary of Samuel Pepys, October 1667, by Samuel Pepys

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Diary of Samuel Pepys, October 1667

Author: Samuel Pepys

Release Date: December 1, 2004 [EBook #4181]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***




Produced by David Widger





                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A. F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                 OCTOBER
                                  1667

October 1st.  All the morning busy at the office, pleased mightily with my
girle that we have got to wait on my wife.  At noon dined with Sir G.
Carteret and the rest of our officers at his house in Broad Street, they
being there upon his accounts.  After dinner took coach and to my wife,
who was gone before into the Strand, there to buy a nightgown, where I
found her in a shop with her pretty girle, and having bought it away home,
and I thence to Sir G. Carteret's again, and so took coach alone, it now
being almost night, to White Hall, and there in the Boarded-gallery did
hear the musick with which the King is presented this night by Monsieur
Grebus, the master of his musick; both instrumentall--I think twenty-four
violins--and vocall; an English song upon Peace.  But, God forgive me!  I
never was so little pleased with a concert of musick in my life.  The
manner of setting of words and repeating them out of order, and that with
a number of voices, makes me sick, the whole design of vocall musick being
lost by it.  Here was a great press of people; but I did not see many
pleased with it, only the instrumental musick he had brought by practice
to play very just.  So thence late in the dark round by the wall home by
coach, and there to sing and sup with my wife, and look upon our pretty
girle, and so to bed.

2nd.  Up, and very busy all the morning, upon my accounts of Tangier, to
present to the Commissioners of the Treasury in the afternoon, and the
like upon the accounts of the office.  This morning come to me Mr. Gawden
about business, with his gold chain about his neck, as being Sheriffe of
the City this year.  At noon to the Treasury Office again, and there dined
and did business, and then by coach to the New Exchange, and there met my
wife and girl, and took them to the King's house to see "The Traytour,"
which still I like as a very good play; and thence, round by the wall,
home, having drunk at the Cock ale-house, as I of late have used to do,
and so home and to my chamber to read, and so to supper and to bed.

3rd.  Up, and going out of doors, I understand that Sir W. Batten is gone
to bed on a sudden again this morning, being struck very ill, and I
confess I have observed him for these last two months to look very ill and
to look worse and worse.  I to St. James's (though it be a sitting day) to
the Duke of York, about the Tangier Committee, which met this morning, and
he come to us, and the Charter for the City of Tangier was read and the
form of the Court Merchant.  That being done Sir W. Coventry took me into
the gallery, and walked with me an hour, discoursing of Navy business, and
with much kindness to, and confidence in, me still; which I must endeavour
to preserve, and will do; and, good man! all his care how to get the Navy
paid off, and that all other things therein may go well. He gone, I thence
to my Lady Peterborough, who sent for me; and with her an hour talking
about her husband's pension, and how she hath got an order for its being
paid again; though, I believe, for all that order, it will hardly be; but
of that I said nothing; but her design is to get it paid again: and how to
raise money upon it, to clear it from the engagement which lies upon it to
some citizens, who lent her husband money, without her knowledge, upon it,
to vast loss.  She intends to force them to take their money again, and
release her husband of those hard terms.  The woman is a very wise woman,
and is very plain in telling me how her plate and jewels are at pawne for
money, and how they are forced to live beyond their estate, and do get
nothing by his being a courtier.  The lady I pity, and her family.  Having
done with her, and drunk two glasses of her meade, which she did give me,
and so to the Treasurer's Office, and there find my Lord Bruncker and
[Sir] W. Pen at dinner with Sir G. Carteret about his accounts, where I
dined and talked and settled some business, and then home, and there took
out my wife and Willet, thinking to have gone to a play, but both houses
were begun, and so we to the 'Change, and thence to my tailor's, and
there, the coachman desiring to go home to change his horses, we went with
him into a nasty end of all St. Giles's, and there went into a nasty room,
a chamber of his, where he hath a wife and child, and there staid, it
growing dark too, and I angry thereat, till he shifted his horses, and
then home apace, and there I to business late, and so home, to supper, and
walk in the garden with my wife and girle, with whom we are mightily
pleased, and after talking and supping, to bed.  This noon, going home, I
did call on Will Lincolne and agree with him to carry me to Brampton.

4th.  Up, and to White Hall to attend the Council about Commissioner
Pett's business, along with my Lord Bruncker and Sir W. Pen, and in the
Robe-chamber the Duke of York come to us, the officers of the Navy, and
there did meet together about Navy business, where Sir W. Coventry was
with us, and among other things did recommend his Royal Highness, now the
prizes were disposing, to remember Sir John Harman to the King, for some
bounty, and also for my Lady Minnes, which was very nobly done of him.
Thence all of us to attend the Council, where we were anon called on, and
there was a long hearing of Commissioner Pett, who was there, and there
were the two Masters Attendant of Chatham called in, who do deny their
having any order from Commissioner Pett about bringing up the great ships,
which gives the lie to what he says; but, in general, I find him to be but
a weak, silly man, and that is guilty of horrid neglect in this business
all along.  Here broke off without coming to an issue, but that there
should be another hearing on Monday next.  So the Council rose, and I
staid walking up and down the galleries till the King went to dinner, and
then I to my Lord Crew's to dinner; but he having dined, I took a very
short leave, confessing I had not dined; and so to an ordinary hard by the
Temple-gate, where I have heretofore been, and there dined--cost me 10d.
And so to my Lord Ashly's, where after dinner Sir H. Cholmly, Creed and I,
with his Lordship, about Mr. Yeabsly's business, where having come to
agreement with him abating him L1000 of what he demands for ships lost, I
to Westminster, to Mrs. Martin's lodging, whither I sent for her, and
there hear that her husband is come from sea, which is sooner than I
expected; and here I staid and drank, and so did toucher elle and away,
and so by coach to my tailor's, and thence to my Lord Crew's, and there
did stay with him an hour till almost night, discoursing about the ill
state of my Lord Sandwich, that he can neither be got to be called home,
nor money got to maintain him there; which will ruin his family.  And the
truth is, he do almost deserve it, for by all relation he hath, in a
little more than a year and a half, spent L20,000 of the King's money, and
the best part of L10,000 of his own; which is a most prodigious expence,
more than ever Embassador spent there, and more than these Commissioners
of the Treasury will or do allow.  And they demand an account before they
will give him any more money; which puts all his friends to a loss what to
answer.  But more money we must get him, or to be called home.  I offer to
speak to Sir W. Coventry about it; but my Lord will not advise to it,
without consent of Sir G. Carteret. So home, and there to see Sir W.
Batten, who fell sick yesterday morning: He is asleep: and so I could not
see him; but in an hour after, word is brought me that he is so ill, that
it is believed he cannot live till to-morrow, which troubles me and my
wife mightily, partly out of kindness, he being a good neighbour and
partly because of the money he owes me, upon our bargain of the late
prize.  So home and to supper and to bed.

5th.  Up, and to the Office; and there all the morning; none but my Lord
Anglesey and myself; but much surprized with the news of the death of Sir
W. Batten, who died this morning, having been but two days sick.  Sir W.
Pen and I did dispatch a letter this morning to Sir W. Coventry, to
recommend Colonel Middleton, who we think a most honest and understanding
man, and fit for that place.  Sir G. Carteret did also come this morning,
and walked with me in the garden; and concluded not to concern [himself]
or have any advice made to Sir W. Coventry, in behalf of my Lord
Sandwich's business; so I do rest satisfied, though I do think they are
all mad, that they will judge Sir W. Coventry an enemy, when he is indeed
no such man to any body, but is severe and just, as he ought to be, where
he sees things ill done.  At noon home, and by coach to Temple Bar to a
India shop, and there bought a gown and sash, which cost me 26s., and so
she [Mrs. Pepys] and Willet away to the 'Change, and I to my Lord Crew,
and there met my Lord Hinchingbroke and Lady Jemimah, and there dined with
them and my Lord, where pretty merry, and after dinner my Lord Crew and
Hinchingbroke and myself went aside to discourse about my Lord Sandwich's
business, which is in a very ill state for want of money, and so parted,
and I to my tailor's, and there took up my wife and Willet, who staid
there for me, and to the Duke of York's playhouse, but the house so full,
it being a new play, "The Coffee House," that we could not get in, and so
to the King's house: and there, going in, met with Knepp, and she took us
up into the tireing-rooms: and to the women's shift, where Nell was
dressing herself, and was all unready, and is very pretty, prettier than I
thought.  And so walked all up and down the house above, and then below
into the scene-room, and there sat down, and she gave us fruit and here I
read the questions to Knepp, while she answered me, through all her part
of "Flora's Figary's," which was acted to-day.  But, Lord! to see how they
were both painted would make a man mad, and did make me loath them; and
what base company of men comes among them, and how lewdly they talk!  and
how poor the men are in clothes, and yet what a shew they make on the
stage by candle-light, is very observable.  But to see how Nell cursed,
for having so few people in the pit, was pretty; the other house carrying
away all the people at the new play, and is said, now-a-days, to have
generally most company, as being better players.  By and by into the pit,
and there saw the play, which is pretty good, but my belly was full of
what I had seen in the house, and so, after the play done, away home, and
there to the writing my letters, and so home to supper and to bed.

6th (Lord's day).  Up, and dressed myself, and so walked out with the boy
to Smithfield to Cow Lane, to Lincolne's, and there spoke with him, and
agreed upon the hour to-morrow, to set out towards Brampton; but vexed
that he is not likely to go himself, but sends another for him.  Here I
took a hackney coach, and to White Hall, and there met Sir W. Coventry,
and discoursed with him, and then with my Lord Bruncker, and many others,
to end my matters in order to my going into the country to-morrow for five
or six days, which I have not done for above three years.  Walked with
Creed into the Park a little, and at last went into the Queen's side, and
there saw the King and Queen, and saw the ladies, in order to my hearing
any news stirring to carry into the country, but met with none, and so
away home by coach, and there dined, and W. How come to see me, and after
dinner parted, and I to my writing to my Lord Sandwich, which is the
greatest business I have to do before my going into the country, and in
the evening to my office to set matters to rights there, and being in the
garden Sir W. Pen did come to me, and fell to discourse about the business
of "The Flying Greyhound," wherein I was plain to him and he to me, and at
last concluded upon my writing a petition to the Duke of York for a
certain ship, The Maybolt Gallyott, and he offers to give me L300 for my
success, which, however, I would not oblige him to, but will see the issue
of it by fair play, and so I did presently draw a petition, which he
undertakes to proffer to the Duke of York, and solicit for me, and will
not seem to doubt of his success.  So I wrote, and did give it him, and
left it with him, and so home to supper, where Pelling comes and sits with
me, and there tells us how old Mr. Batelier is dead this last night in the
night, going to bed well, which I am mightily troubled for, he being a
good man.  Supper done, and he gone, I to my chamber to write my journal
to this night, and so to bed.

7th.  Up betimes, and did do several things towards the settling all
matters both of house and office in order for my journey this day, and did
leave my chief care, and the key of my closet, with Mr. Hater, with
directions what papers to secure, in case of fire or other accident; and
so, about nine o'clock, I, and my wife, and Willet, set out in a coach I
have hired, with four horses; and W. Hewer and Murford rode by us on
horseback; and so my wife and she in their morning gowns, very handsome
and pretty, and to my great liking.  We set out, and so out at Allgate,
and so to the Green Man, and so on to Enfield, in our way seeing Mr.
Lowther and his lady in a coach, going to Walthamstow; and he told us that
he would overtake us at night, he being to go that way.  So we to Enfield,
and there bayted, it being but a foul, bad day, and there Lowther and Mr.
Burford, an acquaintance of his, did overtake us, and there drank and eat
together; and, by and by, we parted, we going before them, and very merry,
my wife and girle and I talking, and telling tales, and singing, and
before night come to Bishop Stafford, where Lowther and his friend did
meet us again, and carried us to the Raynedeere, where Mrs. Aynsworth,

     [Elizabeth Aynsworth, here mentioned, was a noted procurerss at
     Cambridge, banished from that town by the university authorities for
     her evil courses.  She subsequently kept the Rein Deer Inn at
     Bishops Stortford, at which the Vice-Chancellor, and some of the
     heads of colleges, had occasion to sleep, in their way to London,
     and were nobly entertained, their supper being served off plate.
     The next morning their hostess refused to make any charge, saying,
     that she was still indebted to the Vice-Chancellor, who, by driving
     her out of Cambridge, had made her fortune.  No tradition of this
     woman has been preserved at Bishops Stortford; but it appears, from
     the register of that parish, that she was buried there 26th of
     March, 1686.  It is recorded in the "History of Essex," vol. iii.,
     (p. 130) 8vo., 1770, and in a pamphlet in the British Museum,
     entitled, "Boteler's Case," that she was implicated in the murder of
     Captain Wood, a Hertfordshire gentleman, at Manuden, in Essex, and
     for which offence a person named Boteler was executed at Chelmsford,
     September 10th, 1667, and that Mrs. Aynsworth, tried at the same
     time as an accessory before the fact, was acquitted for want of
     evidence; though in her way to the jail she endeavoured to throw
     herself into the river, but was prevented.  See Postea, May 25th,
     1668.--B.]

who lived heretofore at Cambridge, and whom I knew better than they think
for, do live.  It was the woman that, among other things, was great with
my cozen Barnston, of Cottenham, and did use to sing to him, and did teach
me "Full forty times over," a very lewd song: a woman they are very well
acquainted with, and is here what she was at Cambridge, and all the good
fellows of the country come hither.  Lowther and his friend stayed and
drank, and then went further this night; but here we stayed, and supped,
and lodged.  But, as soon as they were gone, and my supper getting ready,
I fell to write my letter to my Lord Sandwich, which I could not finish
before my coming from London; so did finish it to my good content, and a
good letter, telling him the present state of all matters, and did get a
man to promise to carry it to-morrow morning, to be there, at my house, by
noon, and I paid him well for it; so, that being done, and my mind at
ease, we to supper, and so to bed, my wife and I in one bed, and the girl
in another, in the same room, and lay very well, but there was so much
tearing company in the house, that we could not see my landlady; so I had
no opportunity of renewing my old acquaintance with her, but here we slept
very well.

8th.  Up pretty betimes, though not so soon as we intended, by reason of
Murford's not rising, and then not knowing how to open our door, which,
and some other pleasant simplicities of the fellow, did give occasion to
us to call him.  Sir Martin Marrall, and W. Hewer being his helper and
counsellor, we did call him, all this journey, Mr. Warner, which did give
us good occasion of mirth now and then.  At last, rose, and up, and broke
our fast, and then took coach, and away, and at Newport did call on Mr.
Lowther, and he and his friend, and the master of the house, their friend,
where they were, a gentleman, did presently get a-horseback and overtook
us, and went with us to Audley-End, and did go along with us all over the
house and garden: and mighty merry we were.  The house indeed do appear
very fine, but not so fine as it hath heretofore to me; particularly the
ceilings are not so good as I always took them to be, being nothing so
well wrought as my Lord Chancellor's are; and though the figure of the
house without be very extraordinary good, yet the stayre-case is exceeding
poor; and a great many pictures, and not one good one in the house but one
of Harry the Eighth, done by Holben; and not one good suit of hangings in
all the house, but all most ancient things, such as I would not give the
hanging-up of in my house; and the other furniture, beds and other things,
accordingly.

     [Mr. George T. Robinson, F.S.A., in a paper on "Decorative Plaster
     Work," read before the Society of Arts in April, 1891, refers to the
     ceilings at Audley End as presenting an excellent idea of the state
     of the stuccoer's art in the middle of James I.'s reign, and adds,
     "Few houses in England can show so fine a series of the same date
     .  .  .  The great hall has medallions in the square portions of the
     ceiling formed by its dividing timber beams.  The large saloon on
     the principal floor-a room about 66 feet long by 30 feet wide-has a
     very remarkable ceiling of the pendentive type, which presents many
     peculiarities, the most notable of which, that these not only depend
     from the ceiling, but the outside ones spring from the walls in a
     natural and structural manner.  This is a most unusual circumstance
     in the stucco work of the time, the reason for the omission of this
     reasonable treatment evidently being the unwillingness of the
     stuccoer to omit his elaborate frieze in which he took such delight"
     ("Journal Soc. of Arts," vol. xxxix., p. 449)]

Only the gallery is good, and, above all things, the cellars, where we
went down and drank of much good liquor; and indeed the cellars are fine:
and here my wife and I did sing to my great content.  And then to the
garden, and there eat many grapes, and took some with us and so away
thence, exceeding well satisfied, though not to that degree that, by my
old esteem of the house, I ought and did expect to have done, the
situation of it not pleasing me.  Here we parted with Lowther and his
friends, and away to Cambridge, it being foul, rainy weather, and there
did take up at the Rose, for the sake of Mrs. Dorothy Drawwater, the
vintner's daughter, which is mentioned in the play of Sir Martin Marrall.
Here we had a good chamber, and bespoke a good supper; and then I took my
wife, and W. Hewer, and Willet, it holding up a little, and shewed them
Trinity College and St. John's Library, and went to King's College Chapel,
to see the outside of it only; and so to our inne, and with much pleasure
did this, they walking in their pretty morning gowns, very handsome, and I
proud to find myself in condition to do this; and so home to our lodging,
and there by and by, to supper, with much good sport, talking with the
Drawers concerning matters of the town, and persons whom I remember, and
so, after supper, to cards; and then to bed, lying, I in one bed, and my
wife and girl in another, in the same room, and very merry talking
together, and mightily pleased both of us with the girl. Saunders, the
only violin in my time, is, I hear, dead of the plague in the late plague
there.

9th.  Up, and got ready, and eat our breakfast; and then took coach: and
the poor, as they did yesterday, did stand at the coach to have something
given them, as they do to all great persons; and I did give them
something: and the town musique did also come and play: but, Lord! what
sad music they made!  However, I was pleased with them, being all of us in
very good humour, and so through the town, and observed at our College of
Magdalene the posts new painted, and understand that the Vice-Chancellor'
is there this year.  And so away for Huntingdon mightily pleased all along
the road to remember old stories; and come to Brampton at about noon, and
there find my father and sister and brother all well and here laid up our
things, and up and down to see the garden with my father, and the house,
and do altogether find it very pretty; especially the little parlour and
the summerhouses in the garden, only the wall do want greens upon it, and
the house is too low-roofed; but that is only because of my coming from a
house with higher ceilings.  But altogether is very pretty; and I bless
God that I am like to have such a pretty place to retire to: and I did
walk with my father without doors, and do find a very convenient way of
laying out money there in building, which will make a very good seat, and
the place deserves it, I think, very well.  By and by to dinner, and after
dinner I walked up to Hinchingbroke, where my Lady expected me; and there
spent all the afternoon with her: the same most excellent, good, discreet
lady that ever she was; and, among other things, is mightily pleased with
the lady that is like to be her son Hinchingbroke's wife, which I am
mightily glad of.  By and by my wife comes with Willet, my wife in her
velvett vest, which is mighty fine, and becomes her exceedingly.  I am
pleased with my Lady Paulina and Anne, who both are grown very proper
ladies, and handsome enough.  But a thousand questions my Lady asked me,
till she could think of no more almost, but walked up and down the house,
with me. But I do find, by her, that they are reduced to great straits for
money, having been forced to sell her plate, 8 or L900 worth; and she is
now going to sell a suit of her best hangings, of which I could almost
wish to buy a piece or two, if the pieces will be broke.  But the house is
most excellently furnished, and brave rooms and good pictures, so that it
do please me infinitely beyond Audley End.  Here we staid till night
walking and talking and drinking, and with mighty satisfaction my Lady
with me alone most of the day talking of my Lord's bad condition to be
kept in Spayne without money and at a great expense, which (as we will
save the family) we must labour to remove.  Night being come, we took
leave with all possible kindness, and so home, and there Mr. Shepley staid
with us and sapped, and full of good country discourse, and when supper
done took his leave, and we all to bed, only I a little troubled that my
father tells me that he is troubled that my wife shows my sister no
countenance, and, him but very little, but is as a stranger in the house;
and I do observe she do carry herself very high; but I perceive there was
some great falling out when she was here last, but the reason I have no
mind to enquire after, for vexing myself, being desirous to pass my time
with as much mirth as I can while I am abroad.  So all to bed. My wife and
I in the high bed in our chamber, and Willet in the trundle bed, which she
desired to lie in, by us.

10th.  Waked in the morning with great pain of the collique, by cold taken
yesterday, I believe, with going up and down in my shirt, but with rubbing
my belly, keeping of it warm, I did at last come to some ease, and rose,
and up to walk up and down the garden with my father, to talk of all our
concernments: about a husband for my sister, whereof there is at present
no appearance; but we must endeavour to find her one now, for she grows
old and ugly: then for my brother; and resolve he shall stay here this
winter, and then I will either send him to Cambridge for a year, till I
get him some church promotion, or send him to sea as a chaplain, where he
may study, and earn his living.  Then walked round about our Greene, to
see whether, in case I cannot buy out my uncle Thomas and his son's right
in this house, that I can buy another place as good thereabouts to build
on, and I do not see that I can.  But this, with new building, may be made
an excellent pretty thing, and I resolve to look after it as soon as I
can, and Goody Gorum dies.  By this time it was almost noon, and then my
father and I and wife and Willet abroad, by coach round the towne of
Brampton, to observe any other place as good as ours, and find none; and
so back with great pleasure; and thence went all of us, my sister and
brother, and W. Hewer, to dinner to Hinchingbroke, where we had a good
plain country dinner, but most kindly used; and here dined the Minister of
Brampton and his wife, who is reported a very good, but poor man.  Here I
spent alone with my Lady, after dinner, the most of the afternoon, and
anon the two twins were sent for from schoole, at Mr. Taylor's, to come to
see me, and I took them into the garden, and there, in one of the
summer-houses, did examine them, and do find them so well advanced in
their learning, that I was amazed at it: they repeating a whole ode
without book out of Horace, and did give me a very good account of any
thing almost, and did make me very readily very good Latin, and did give
me good account of their Greek grammar, beyond all possible expectation;
and so grave and manly as I never saw, I confess, nor could have believed;
so that they will be fit to go to Cambridge in two years at most.  They
are both little, but very like one another, and well-looked children.
Then in to my Lady again, and staid till it was almost night again, and
then took leave for a great while again, but with extraordinary kindness
from my Lady, who looks upon me like one of her own family and interest.
So thence, my wife and people by the highway, and I walked over the park
with Mr. Shepley, and through the grove, which is mighty pretty, as is
imaginable, and so over their drawbridge to Nun's Bridge, and so to my
father's, and there sat and drank, and talked a little, and then parted.
And he being gone, and what company there was, my father and I, with a
dark lantern; it being now night, into the garden with my wife, and there
went about our great work to dig up my gold. But, Lord!  what a tosse I
was for some time in, that they could not justly tell where it was; that I
begun heartily to sweat, and be angry, that they should not agree better
upon the place, and at last to fear that it was gone but by and by poking
with a spit, we found it, and then begun with a spudd to lift up the
ground.  But, good God! to see how sillily they did it, not half a foot
under ground, and in the sight of the world from a hundred places, if any
body by accident were near hand, and within sight of a neighbour's window,
and their hearing also, being close by: only my father says that he saw
them all gone to church before he begun the work, when he laid the money,
but that do not excuse it to me.  But I was out of my wits almost, and the
more from that, upon my lifting up the earth with the spudd, I did discern
that I had scattered the pieces of gold round about the ground among the
grass and loose earth; and taking up the iron head-pieces wherein they
were put, I perceive the earth was got among the gold, and wet, so that
the bags were all rotten, and all the notes, that I could not tell what in
the world to say to it, not knowing how to judge what was wanting, or what
had been lost by Gibson in his coming down: which, all put together, did
make me mad; and at last was forced to take up the head-pieces, dirt and
all, and as many of the scattered pieces as I could with the dirt discern
by the candlelight, and carry them up into my brother's chamber, and there
locke them up till I had eat a little supper: and then, all people going
to bed, W. Hewer and I did all alone, with several pails of water and
basins, at last wash the dirt off of the pieces, and parted the pieces and
the dirt, and then begun to tell [them]; and by a note which I had of the
value of the whole in my pocket, do find that there was short above a
hundred pieces, which did make me mad; and considering that the
neighbour's house was so near that we could not suppose we could speak one
to another in the garden at the place where the gold lay--especially my
father being deaf--but they must know what we had been doing on, I feared
that they might in the night come and gather some pieces and prevent us
the next morning; so W. Hewer and I out again about midnight, for it was
now grown so late, and there by candlelight did make shift to gather
forty-five pieces more.  And so in, and to cleanse them: and by this time
it was past two in the morning; and so to bed, with my mind pretty quiet
to think that I have recovered so many.  And then to bed, and I lay in the
trundle-bed, the girl being gone to bed to my wife, and there lay in some
disquiet all night, telling of the clock till it was daylight.

11th.  And then rose and called W. Hewer, and he and I, with pails and a
sieve, did lock ourselves into the garden, and there gather all the earth
about the place into pails, and then sift those pails in one of the
summer-houses, just as they do for dyamonds in other parts of the world;
and there, to our great content, did with much trouble by nine o'clock
(and by the time we emptied several pails and could not find one), we did
make the last night's forty-five up seventy-nine: so that we are come to
about twenty or thirty of what I think the true number should be; and
perhaps within less; and of them I may reasonably think that Mr. Gibson
might lose some: so that I am pretty well satisfied that my loss is not
great, and do bless God that it is so well,

     [About the year 1842, in removing the foundation of an old wall,
     adjoining a mansion at Brampton, always considered the quondam
     residence of the Pepys family, an iron pot, full of silver coins,
     was discovered, and taken to the Earl of Sandwich, the owner of the
     house, in whose possession they still remain.  The pot was so much
     corroded, that a small piece of it only could be preserved.  The
     coins were chiefly half-crowns of Elizabeth and the two elder
     Stuarts, and all of a date anterior to the Restoration.  Although
     Pepys states that the treasure which he caused to be buried was gold
     exclusively, it is very probable that, in the confusion, a pot full
     of silver money was packed up with the rest; but, at all events, the
     coincidence appeared too singular to pass over without notice.--B.]

and do leave my father to make a second examination of the dirt, which he
promises he will do, and, poor man, is mightily troubled for this
accident, but I declared myself very well satisfied, and so indeed I am;
and my mind at rest in it, being but an accident, which is unusual; and so
gives me some kind of content to remember how painful it is sometimes to
keep money, as well as to get it, and how doubtful I was how to keep it
all night, and how to secure it to London: and so got all my gold put up
in bags.  And so having the last night wrote to my Lady Sandwich to lend
me John Bowles to go along with me my journey, not telling her the reason,
that it was only to secure my gold, we to breakfast, and then about ten
o'clock took coach, my wife and I, and Willet, and W. Hewer, and Murford
and Bowles (whom my Lady lent me), and my brother John on horseback; and
with these four I thought myself pretty safe.  But, before we went out,
the Huntingdon musick come to me and played, and it was better than that
of Cambridge.  Here I took leave of my father, and did give my sister 20s.
She cried at my going; but whether it was at her unwillingness for my
going, or any unkindness of my wife's, or no, I know not; but, God forgive
me!  I take her to be so cunning and ill-natured, that I have no great
love for her; but only [she] is my sister, and must be provided for.  My
gold I put into a basket, and set under one of the seats; and so my work
every quarter of an hour was to look to see whether all was well; and I
did ride in great fear all the day, but it was a pleasant day, and good
company, and I mightily contented.  Mr. Shepley saw me beyond St. Neots,
and there parted, and we straight to Stevenage, through Bald Lanes, which
are already very bad; and at Stevenage we come well before night, and all
sat, and there with great care I got the gold up to the chamber, my wife
carrying one bag, and the girl another, and W. Hewer the rest in the
basket, and set it all under a bed in our chamber; and then sat down to
talk, and were very pleasant, satisfying myself, among other things, from
John Bowles, in some terms of hunting, and about deere, bucks, and does.
And so anon to supper, and very merry we were, and a good supper, and
after supper to bed.  Brecocke alive still, and the best host I know
almost.

12th.  Up, and eat our breakfast, and set out about nine o'clock, and so
to Barnett, where we staid and baited, the weather very good all day and
yesterday, and by five o'clock got home, where I find all well; and did
bring my gold, to my heart's content, very safe home, having not this day
carried it in a basket, but in our hands: the girl took care of one, and
my wife another bag, and I the rest, I being afraid of the bottom of the
coach, lest it should break, and therefore was at more ease in my mind
than I was yesterday.  At home we find that Sir W. Batten's burial was
to-day carried from hence, with a hundred or two of coaches, to
Walthamstow, and there buried.  Here I hear by Mr. Pierce the surgeon; and
then by Mr. Lewes, and also by Mr. Hater, that the Parliament hath met on
Thursday last, and adjourned to Monday next.  The King did make them a
very kind speech, promising them to leave all to them to do, and call to
account what and whom they pleased; and declared by my Lord Keeper how
many, thirty-six, actes he had done since he saw them; among others,
disbanding the army, and putting all Papists out of employment, and
displacing persons that had managed their business ill, that the
Parliament is mightily pleased with the King's speech, and voted giving
him thanks for what he said and hath done; and, among things, would by
name thank him for displacing my Lord Chancellor, for which a great many
did speak in the House, but it was opposed by some, and particularly Harry
Coventry, who got that it should be put to a Committee to consider what
particulars to mention in their thanks to the King, saying that it was too
soon to give thanks for the displacing of a man, before they knew or had
examined what was the cause of his displacing.  And so it rested; but this
do shew that they are and will be very high; and Mr. Pierce do tell me
that he fears, and do hear, that it hath been said among them, that they
will move for the calling my Lord Sandwich home, to bring him to account;
which do trouble me mightily; but I trust it will not be so. Anon comes
home Sir W. Pen from the burial, and he and I to walk in the garden, where
he did confirm the most of this news, and so to talk of our particular
concernments, and among the rest he says that Lady Batten and her
children-in-law are all broke in pieces, and that there is but L800 found
in the world, of money; and is in great doubt what we shall do towards the
doing ourselves right with them, about the prize-money.  This troubles me,
but we will fall to work upon that next week close.  Then he tells me he
did deliver my petition into the hands of Sir W. Coventry, who did take it
with great kindness and promised to present it to the Duke of York, and
that himself has since seen the Duke of York, but it was in haste, and
thinks the Duke of York did tell him that the thing was done, but he is
confident that it either is or will be done.  This do please me mightily.
So after a little talk more I away home to supper with John Bowles and
brother and wife (who, I perceive, is already a little jealous of my being
fond of Willet, but I will avoid giving her any cause to continue in that
mind, as much as possible), and before that did go with Sir W. Pen to my
Lady Batten, whom I had not seen since she was a widow, which she took
unkindly, but I did excuse it; and the house being full of company, and of
several factions, she against the children, and they against one another
and her, I away, and home to supper, and after supper to bed.

13th (Lord's day).  Up, and by water to White Hall, and thence walked to
Sir W. Coventry's lodgings, but he was gone out, so I to St. James's, and
there to the Duke of York's chamber: and there he was dressing; and many
Lords and Parliament-men come to kiss his hands, they being newly come to
town.  And there the Duke of York did of himself call me to him, and tell
me that he had spoke to the King, and that the King had granted me the
ship I asked for; and did, moreover, say that he was mightily satisfied
with my service, and that he would be willing to do anything that was in
his power for me: which he said with mighty kindness; which I did return
him thanks for, and departed with mighty joy, more than I did expect. And
so walked over the Park to White Hall, and there met Sir H. Cholmly, who
walked with me, and told me most of the news I heard last night of the
Parliament; and thinks they will do all things very well, only they will
be revenged of my Lord Chancellor; and says, however, that he thinks there
will be but two things proved on him; and that one is, that he may have
said to the King, and to others, words to breed in the King an ill opinion
of the Parliament--that they were factious, and that it was better to
dissolve them: and this, he thinks, they will be able to prove; but what
this will amount to, he knows not.  And next, that he hath taken money for
several bargains that have been made with the Crown; and did instance one
that is already complained of: but there are so many more involved in it,
that, should they unravel things of this sort, every body almost will be
more or less concerned.  But these are the two great points which he
thinks they will insist on, and prove against him. Thence I to the Chapel,
and there heard the sermon and a pretty good anthem, and so home by water
to dinner, where Bowies and brother, and a good dinner, and in the
afternoon to make good my journal to this day, and so by water again to
White Hall, and thence only walked to Mrs. Martin's, and there sat with
her and her sister and Borroughs.  .  .  and there drank and talked and
away by water home, and there walked with Sir W. Pen, and told him what
the Duke of York told me to-day about the ship I begged; and he was knave
enough, of his own accord, but, to be sure, in order to his own advantage,
to offer me to send for the master of the vessel, "The Maybolt Galliott,"
and bid him to get her furnished as for a long voyage, and I to take no
notice of it, that she might be the more worth to me: so that here he is a
very knave to the King, and I doubt not his being the same to me on
occasion.  So in a doors and supped with my wife and brother, W. Hewer,
and Willett, and so evened with W. Hewer for my expenses upon the road
this last journey, and do think that the whole journey will cost me little
less than L18 or L20, one way or other; but I am well pleased with it, and
so after supper to bed.

14th.  Up, and by water to White Hall, and thence walked to St. James's,
and there to Mr. Wren's; and he told me that my business was done about my
warrant on the Maybolt Galliott; which I did see, and though it was not so
full in the reciting of my services as the other was in that of Sir W.
Pen's, yet I was well pleased with it, and do intend to fetch it away
anon.  Thence with Sir Thomas Allen, in a little sorry coach which he hath
set up of late, and Sir Jeremy Smith, to White Hall, and there I took
water and went to Westminster Hall, and there hear that the House is this
day again upon the business of giving the King the thanks of the House for
his speech, and, among other things, for laying aside of my Lord
Chancellor.  Thence I to Mrs. Martin's, where by appointment comes to me
Mrs. Howlett, which I was afraid was to have told me something of my
freedom with her daughter, but it was not so, but only to complain to me
of her son-in-law, how he abuses and makes a slave of her, and his mother
is one that encourages him in it, so that they are at this time upon very
bad terms one with another, and desires that I would take a time to advise
him and tell him what it becomes him to do, which office I am very glad
of, for some ends of my own also con sa fille, and there drank and parted,
I mightily satisfied with this business, and so home by water with Sir W.
Warren, who happened to be at Westminster, and there I pretty strange to
him, and little discourse, and there at the office Lord Bruncker, W. Pen,
T. Hater and I did some business, and so home to dinner, and thence I out
to visit Sir G. Carteret and ladies there; and from him do understand that
the King himself (but this he told me as a great secret) is satisfied that
this thanks which he expects from the House, for the laying aside of my
Lord Chancellor, is a thing irregular; but, since it is come into the
House, he do think it necessary to carry it on, and will have it, and hath
made his mind known to be so, to some of the House.  But Sir G. Carteret
do say he knows nothing of what my Lord Bruncker told us to-day, that the
King was angry with the Duke of York yesterday, and advised him not to
hinder what he had a mind to have done, touching this business; which is
news very bad, if true.  Here I visited my Lady Carteret, who hath been
sick some time, but now pretty well, but laid on her bed.  Thence to my
Lord Crew, to see him after my coming out of the country, and he seems
satisfied with some steps they have made in my absence towards my Lord
Sandwich's relief for money: and so I have no more to do, nor will trouble
myself more about it till they send for me.  He tells me also that the
King will have the thanks of the House go on: and commends my Lord
Keeper's speech for all but what he was forced to say, about the reason of
the King's sending away the House so soon the last time, when they were
met, but this he was forced to do. Thence to Westminster Hall, and there
walked with Mr. Scowen, who tells me that it is at last carried in the
House that the thanks shall be given to the King--among other things,
particularly for the removal of my Lord Chancellor; but he tells me it is
a strange act, and that which he thinks would never have been, but that
the King did insist upon it, that, since it come into the House, it might
not be let fall.  After walking there awhile I took coach and to the Duke
of York's House, and there went in for nothing into the pit, at the last
act, to see Sir Martin Marrall, and met my wife, who was there, and my
brother, and W. Hewer and Willett, and carried them home, still being
pleased with the humour of the play, almost above all that ever I saw.
Home, and there do find that John Bowles is not yet come thither.  I
suppose he is playing the good fellow in the town.  So to the office a
while, and then home to supper and to bed.

15th.  Up, and to the office, where, Sir W. Pen being ill of the gout, we
all of us met there in his parlour and did the business of the office, our
greatest business now being to manage the pay of the ships in order and
with speed to satisfy the Commissioners of the Treasury.  This morning my
brother set out for Brampton again, and is gone.  At noon home to dinner,
and thence my wife and I and Willet to the Duke of York's house, where,
after long stay, the King and Duke of York come, and there saw "The
Coffee-house," the most ridiculous, insipid play that ever I saw in my
life, and glad we were that Betterton had no part in it.  But here, before
the play begun, my wife begun to complain to me of Willet's confidence in
sitting cheek by jowl by us, which was a poor thing; but I perceive she is
already jealous of my kindness to her, so that I begin to fear this girle
is not likely to stay long with us.  The play done, we home by coach, it
being moonlight, and got well home, and I to my chamber to settle some
papers, and so to supper and to bed.

16th.  Up, and at home most of the morning with Sir H. Cholmly, about some
accounts of his; and for news he tells me that the Commons and Lords have
concurred, and delivered the King their thanks, among other things, for
his removal of the Chancellor; who took their thanks very well, and, among
other things, promised them, in these words, never, in any degree, to
entertain the Chancellor any employment again.  And he tells me that it is
very true, he hath it from one that was by, that the King did, give the
Duke of York a sound reprimand; told him that he had lived with him with
more kindness than ever any brother King lived with a brother, and that he
lived as much like a monarch as himself, but advised him not to cross him
in his designs about the Chancellor; in which the Duke of York do very
wisely acquiesce, and will be quiet as the King bade him, but presently
commands all his friends to be silent in the business of the Chancellor,
and they were so: but that the Chancellor hath done all that is possible
to provoke the King, and to bring himself to lose his head by enraging of
people.  He gone, I to the office, busy all the morning. At noon to Broad
Street to Sir G. Carteret and Lord Bruncker, and there dined with them,
and thence after dinner with Bruncker to White Hall, where the Duke of
York is now newly come for this winter, and there did our usual business,
which is but little, and so I away to the Duke of York's house, thinking
as we appointed, to meet my wife there, but she was not; and more, I was
vexed to see Young (who is but a bad actor at best) act Macbeth in the
room of Betterton, who, poor man! is sick: but, Lord! what a prejudice it
wrought in me against the whole play, and everybody else agreed in
disliking this fellow.  Thence home, and there find my wife gone home;
because of this fellow's acting of the part, she went out of the house
again.  There busy at my chamber with Mr. Yeabsly, and then with Mr.
Lewes, about public business late, and so to supper and to bed.

17th.  Up, and being sent for by my Lady Batten, I to her, and there she
found fault with my not seeing her since her being a widow, which I
excused as well as I could, though it is a fault, but it is my nature not
to be forward in visits.  But here she told me her condition, which is
good enough, being sole executrix, to the disappointment of all her
husband's children, and prayed my friendship about the accounts of the
prizes, which I promised her.  And here do see what creatures widows are
in weeping for their husbands, and then presently leaving off; but I
cannot wonder at it, the cares of the world taking place of all other
passions.  Thence to the office, where all the morning busy, and at noon
home to dinner, where Mr. John Andrews and his wife come and dined with
me, and pretty merry we were, only I out of humour the greatest part of
the dinner, by reason that my people had forgot to get wine ready, I
having none in my house, which I cannot say now these almost three years,
I think, without having two or three sorts, by which we were fain to stay
a great while, while some could be fetched.  When it come I begun to be
merry, and merry we were, but it was an odd, strange thing to observe of
Mr. Andrews what a fancy he hath to raw meat, that he eats it with no
pleasure unless the blood run about his chops, which it did now by a leg
of mutton that was not above half boiled; but, it seems, at home all his
meat is dressed so, and beef and all, and [he] eats it so at nights also.
Here most of our discourse is of the business of the Parliament, who run
on mighty furiously, having yesterday been almost all the morning
complaining against some high proceedings of my Lord Chief Justice
Keeling, that the gentlemen of the country did complain against him in the
House, and run very high.  It is the man that did fall out with my cozen
Roger Pepys, once, at the Assizes there, and would have laid him by the
heels; but, it seems, a very able lawyer.  After dinner I to the office,
where we all met with intent to proceed to the publique sale of several
prize ships, but upon discourse my Lord Anglesey did discover (which
troubled me that he that is a stranger almost should do more than we
ourselves could) that the appraisements made by our officers were not
above half of what he had been offered for one of them, and did make it
good by bringing a gentleman to give us L700 for the Wildboare, which they
valued but at L276, which made us all startle and stop the sale, and I did
propose to acquaint the Duke of York with it, and accordingly we did agree
on it, and I wrote a severe letter about it, and we are to attend him with
it to-morrow about it.  This afternoon my Lord Anglesey tells us that the
House of Commons have this morning run into the inquiry in many things;
as, the sale of Dunkirke, the dividing of the fleete the last year, the
business of the prizes with my Lord Sandwich, and many other things; so
that now they begin to fall close upon it, and God knows what will be the
end of it, but a Committee they have chosen to inquire into the
miscarriages of the war.  Having done, and being a little tired, Sir W.
Pen and I in his coach out to Mile End Green, and there drank a cup of
Byde's ale, and so talking about the proceedings of Parliament, and how
little a thing the King is become to be forced to suffer it, though I
declare my being satisfied that things should be enquired into, we back
again home, and I to my office to my letters, and so home to supper and to
bed.

18th.  Up, and by coach with Sir W. Pen to White Hall, and there attended
the Duke of York; but first we find him to spend above an hour in private
in his closet with Sir W. Coventry; which I was glad to see, that there is
so much confidence between them.  By and by we were called in and did our
usual business, and complained of the business yesterday discovered of our
officers abusing the King in the appraisement of the prizes.  Here it was
worth observing that the Duke of York, considering what third rate ships
to keep abroad, the Rupert was thought on, but then it was said that
Captain Hubbert was Commander of her and that the King had a mind for
Spragg to command the ship, which would not be well to be by turning out
Hubbert, who is a good man, but one the Duke of York said he did not know
whether he did so well conforme, as at this lime to please the people and
Parliament.  Sir W. Coventry answered, and the Duke of York merrily agreed
to it, that it was very hard to know what it was that the Parliament would
call conformity at this time, and so it stopped, which I only observe to
see how the Parliament's present temper do amuse them all.  Thence to
several places to buy a hat, and books, and neckcloths, and several
errands I did before I got home, and, among others, bought me two new pair
of spectacles of Turlington, who, it seems, is famous for them; and his
daughter, he being out of the way, do advise me two very young sights, as
that that will help me most, and promises me great ease from them, and I
will try them.  At the Exchange I met Creed, and took him home with me,
and dined, and among other things he tells me that Sir Robert Brookes is
the man that did mention the business in Parliament yesterday about my
Lord Sandwich, but that it was seconded by nobody, but the matter will
fall before the Committee for miscarriages.  Thence, after dinner, my wife
and he, and I, and Willet to the King's house, and saw "Brenoralt," which
is a good tragedy, that I like well, and parted after the play, and so
home, and there a little at my office, and so to my chamber, and spent
this night late in telling over all my gold, and putting it into proper
bags and my iron chest, being glad with my heart to see so much of it here
again, but cannot yet tell certainly how much I have lost by Gibson in his
journey, and my father's burying of it in the dirt.  At this late, but did
it to my mind, and so to supper and to bed.

19th.  At the office all the morning, where very busy, and at noon home to
a short dinner, being full of my desire of seeing my Lord Orrery's new
play this afternoon at the King's house, "The Black Prince," the first
time it is acted; where, though we come by two o'clock, yet there was no
room in the pit, but we were forced to go into one of the upper boxes, at
4s. a piece, which is the first time I ever sat in a box in my life.  And
in the same box come, by and by, behind me, my Lord Barkeley [of Stratton]
and his lady; but I did not turn my face to them to be known, so that I
was excused from giving them my seat; and this pleasure I had, that from
this place the scenes do appear very fine indeed, and much better than in
the pit.  The house infinite full, and the King and Duke of York was
there.  By and by the play begun, and in it nothing particular but a very
fine dance for variety of figures, but a little too long.  But, as to the
contrivance, and all that was witty (which, indeed, was much, and very
witty), was almost the same that had been in his two former plays of
"Henry the 5th" and "Mustapha," and the same points and turns of wit in
both, and in this very same play often repeated, but in excellent
language, and were so excellent that the whole house was mightily pleased
with it all along till towards the end he comes to discover the chief of
the plot of the play by the reading of along letter, which was so long and
some things (the people being set already to think too long) so
unnecessary that they frequently begun to laugh, and to hiss twenty times,
that, had it not been for the King's being there, they had certainly
hissed it off the stage.  But I must confess that, as my Lord Barkeley
says behind me, the having of that long letter was a thing so absurd, that
he could not imagine how a man of his parts could possibly fall into it;
or, if he did, if he had but let any friend read it, the friend would have
told him of it; and, I must confess, it is one of the most remarkable
instances that ever I did or expect to meet with in my life of a wise
man's not being wise at all times, and in all things, for nothing could be
more ridiculous than this, though the letter of itself at another time
would be thought an excellent letter, and indeed an excellent Romance, but
at the end of the play, when every body was weary of sitting, and were
already possessed with the effect of the whole letter; to trouble them
with a letter a quarter of an hour long, was a most absurd thing.  After
the play done, and nothing pleasing them from the time of the letter to
the end of the play, people being put into a bad humour of disliking
(which is another thing worth the noting), I home by coach, and could not
forbear laughing almost all the way home, and all the evening to my going
to bed, at the ridiculousness of the letter, and the more because my wife
was angry with me, and the world, for laughing, because the King was
there, though she cannot defend the length of the letter.  So after having
done business at the office, I home to supper and to bed.

20th (Lord's day).  Up, and put on my new tunique of velvett; which is
very plain, but good.  This morning is brought to me an order for the
presenting the Committee of Parliament to-morrow with a list of the
commanders and ships' names of all the fleetes set out since the war, and
particularly of those ships which were divided from the fleete with Prince
Rupert;

     [This question of the division of the fleet in May, 1666, was one
     over which endless controversy as to responsibility was raised.
     When Prince Rupert, with twenty ships, was detached to prevent the
     junction of the French squadron with the Dutch, the Duke of
     Albemarle was left with fifty-four ships against eighty belonging to
     the Dutch.  Albemarle's tactics are praised by Captain Mahan.]

which gives me occasion to see that they are busy after that business, and
I am glad of it.  So I alone to church, and then home, and there Mr. Deane
comes and dines with me by invitation, and both at and after dinner he and
I spent all the day till it was dark in discourse of business of the Navy
and the ground of the many miscarriages, wherein he do inform me in many
more than I knew, and I had desired him to put them in writing, and many
indeed they are and good ones; and also we discoursed of the business of
shipping, and he hath promised me a draught of the ship he is now
building, wherein I am mightily pleased.  This afternoon comes to me
Captain O'Bryan, about a ship that the King hath given him; and he and I
to talk of the Parliament; and he tells me that the business of the Duke
of York's slackening sail in the first fight, at the beginning of the war,
is brought into question, and Sir W. Pen and Captain Cox are to appear
to-morrow about it; and it is thought will at last be laid upon Mr.
Bruncker's giving orders from the Duke of York (which the Duke of York do
not own) to Captain Cox to do it; but it seems they do resent this very
highly, and are mad in going through all business, where they can lay any
fault.  I am glad to hear, that in the world I am as kindly spoke of as
any body; for, for aught I see, there is bloody work like to be, Sir W.
Coventry having been forced to produce a letter in Parliament wherein the
Duke of Albemarle did from Sheernesse write in what good posture all
things were at Chatham, and that the chain was so well placed that he
feared no attempt of the enemy: so that, among other things, I see every
body is upon his own defence, and spares not to blame another to defend
himself, and the same course I shall take.  But God knows where it will
end!  He gone, and Deane, I to my chamber for a while, and then comes
Pelling the apothecary to see us, and sat and supped with me (my wife
being gone to bed sick of the cholique), and then I to bed, after supper.
Pelting tells me that my Lady Duchesse Albemarle was at Mrs. Turner's this
afternoon, she being ill, and did there publickly talk of business, and of
our Office; and that she believed that I was safe, and had done well; and
so, I thank God!  I hear every body speaks of me; and indeed, I think,
without vanity, I may expect to be profited rather than injured by this
inquiry, which the Parliament makes into business.

21st.  Up, and betimes got a coach at the Exchange, and thence to St.
James's, where I had forgot that the Duke of York and family were gone to
White Hall, and thence to Westminster Hall and there walked a little,
finding the Parliament likely to be busy all this morning about the
business of Mr. Bruncker for advising Cox and Harman to shorten sail when
they were in pursuit of the Dutch after the first great victory.  I went
away to Mr. Creed's chamber, there to meet Sir H. Cholmly, about business
of Mr. Yeabsly, where I was delivered of a great fear that they would
question some of the orders for payment of money which I had got them
signed at the time of the plague, when I was here alone, but all did pass.
Thence to Westminster again, and up to the lobby, where many commanders of
the fleete were, and Captain Cox, and Mr. Pierce, the Surgeon; the last of
whom hath been in the House, and declared that he heard Bruncker advise;
and give arguments to, Cox, for the safety of the Duke of York's person,
to shorten sail, that they might not be in the middle of the enemy in the
morning alone; and Cox denying to observe his advice, having received the
Duke of York's commands over night to keep within cannon-shot (as they
then were) of the enemy, Bruncker did go to Harman, and used the same
arguments, and told him that he was sure it would be well pleasing to the
King that care should be taken of not endangering the Duke of York; and,
after much persuasion, Harman was heard to say, "Why, if it must be, then
lower the topsail."  And so did shorten sail, to the loss, as the
Parliament will have it, of the greatest victory that ever was, and which
would have saved all the expence of blood, and money, and honour, that
followed; and this they do resent, so as to put it to the question,
whether Bruncker should not be carried to the Tower: who do confess that,
out of kindness to the Duke of York's safety, he did advise that they
should do so, but did not use the Duke of York's name therein; and so it
was only his error in advising it, but the greatest theirs in taking it,
contrary to order.  At last, it ended that it should be suspended till
Harman comes home; and then the Parliament-men do all tell me that it will
fall heavy, and, they think, be fatal to Bruncker or him.  Sir W. Pen
tells me he was gone to bed, having been all day labouring, and then not
able to stand, of the goute, and did give order for the keeping the sails
standing, as they then were, all night.  But, which I wonder at, he tells
me that he did not know the next day that they had shortened sail, nor
ever did enquire into it till about ten days ago, that this begun to be
mentioned; and, indeed, it is charged privately as a fault on the Duke of
York, that he did not presently examine the reason of the breach of his
orders, and punish it. But Cox tells me that he did finally refuse it; and
what prevailed with Harman he knows not, and do think that we might have
done considerable service on the enemy the next day, if this had not been
done.  Thus this business ended to-day, having kept them till almost two
o'clock; and then I by coach with Sir W. Pen as far as St. Clement's,
talking of this matter, and there set down; and I walked to Sir G.
Carteret's, and there dined with him and several Parliament-men, who, I
perceive, do all look upon it as a thing certain that the Parliament will
enquire into every thing, and will be very severe where they can find any
fault.  Sir W. Coventry, I hear, did this day make a speech, in apology
for his reading the letter of the Duke of Albemarle, concerning the good
condition which Chatham was in before the enemy come thither: declaring
his simple intention therein, without prejudice to my Lord.  And I am told
that he was also with the Duke of Albemarle yesterday to excuse it; but
this day I do hear, by some of Sir W. Coventry's friends, that they think
he hath done himself much injury by making this man, and his interest, so
much his enemy.  After dinner, I away to Westminster, and up to the
Parliament-house, and there did wait with great patience, till seven at
night, to be called in to the Committee, who sat all this afternoon,
examining the business of Chatham; and at last was called in, and told,
that the least they expected from us Mr. Wren had promised them, and only
bade me to bring all my fellow-officers thitherto attend them tomorrow,
afternoon.  Sir Robert Brookes in the chair: methinks a sorry fellow to be
there, because a young man; and yet he seems to speak very well.  I gone
thence, my cozen Pepys comes out to me, and walks in the Hall with me, and
bids me prepare to answer to every thing; for they do seem to lodge the
business of Chatham upon the Commissioners of the Navy, and they are
resolved to lay the fault heavy somewhere, and to punish it: and prays me
to prepare to save myself, and gives me hints what to prepare against;
which I am obliged to him for, and do begin to mistrust lest some unhappy
slip or other after all my diligence and pains may not be found (which I
can [not] foresee) that may prove as fatal to a man as the constant course
of negligence and unfaithfulness of other men.  Here we parted, and I to
White Hall to Mr. Wren's chamber, thereto advise with him about the list
of ships and commanders which he is to present to the Parliament, and took
coach (little Michell being with me, whom I took with me from Westminster
Hall), and setting him down in Gracious street home myself, where I find
my wife and the two Mercers and Willett and W. Batelier have been dancing,
but without a fidler.  I had a little pleasure in talking with these, but
my head and heart full of thoughts between hope and fear and doubts what
will become of us and me particularly against a furious Parliament.  Then
broke up and to bed, and there slept pretty well till about four o'clock,
and from that time could not, but my thoughts running on speeches to the
Parliament to excuse myself from the blame which by other men's negligence
will 'light, it may be, upon the office.  This day I did get a list of the
fourteen particular miscarriages which are already before the Committee to
be examined; wherein, besides two or three that will concern this Office
much, there are those of the prizes, and that of Bergen, and not following
the Dutch ships, against my Lord Sandwich; that, I fear, will ruine him,
unless he hath very good luck, or they may be in better temper before he
can come to be charged: but my heart is full of fear for him and his
family.  I hear that they do prosecute the business against my Lord Chief
Justice Keeling with great severity.

22nd.  Slept but ill all the last part of the night, for fear of this
day's success in Parliament: therefore up, and all of us all the morning
close, till almost two o'clock, collecting all we had to say and had done
from the beginning, touching the safety of the River Medway and Chatham.
And, having done this, and put it into order, we away, I not having time
to eat my dinner; and so all in my Lord Bruncker's coach, that is to say,
Bruncker, W. Pen, T. Harvy, and myself, talking of the other great matter
with which they charge us, that is, of discharging men by ticket, in order
to our defence in case that should be asked.  We come to the
Parliament-door, and there, after a little waiting till the Committee was
sat, we were, the House being very full, called in: Sir W. Pen went in and
sat as a Member; and my Lord Bruncker would not at first go in, expecting
to have a chair set for him, and his brother had bid him not go in, till
he was called for; but, after a few words, I had occasion to mention him,
and so he was called in, but without any more chair or respect paid him
than myself: and so Bruncker, and T. Harvy, and I, were there to answer:
and I had a chair brought me to lean my books upon: and so did give them
such an account, in a series of the whole business that had passed the
Office touching the matter, and so answered all questions given me about
it, that I did not perceive but they were fully satisfied with me and the
business as to our Office: and then Commissioner Pett (who was by at all
my discourse, and this held till within an hour after candlelight, for I
had candles brought in to read my papers by) was to answer for himself, we
having lodged all matters with him for execution. But, Lord! what a
tumultuous thing this Committee is, for all the reputation they have of a
great council, is a strange consideration; there being as impertinent
questions, and as disorderly proposed, as any man could make.  But
Commissioner Pett, of all men living, did make the weakest defence for
himself: nothing to the purpose, nor to satisfaction, nor certain; but
sometimes one thing and sometimes another, sometimes for himself and
sometimes against him; and his greatest failure was, that I observed, from
his [not] considering whether the question propounded was his part to
answer or no, and the thing to be done was his work to do: the want of
which distinction will overthrow him; for he concerns himself in giving an
account of the disposal of the boats, which he had no reason at all to do,
or take any blame upon him for them.  He charged the not carrying up of
"The Charles" upon the Tuesday, to the Duke of Albemarle; but I see the
House is mighty favourable to the Duke of Albemarle, and would give little
weight to it.  And something of want of armes he spoke, which Sir J.
Duncomb answered with great imperiousness and earnestness; but, for all
that, I do see the House is resolved to be better satisfied in the
business of the unreadiness of Sherenesse, and want of armes and
ammunition there and every where: and all their officers were here to-day
attending, but only one called in, about armes for boats, to answer
Commissioner Pett.  None of my brethren said anything but me there, but
only two or three silly words my Lord Bruncker gave, in answer to one
question about the number of men there were in the King's Yard at the
time.  At last, the House dismissed us, and shortly after did adjourne the
debate till Friday next: and my cozen Pepys did come out and joy me in my
acquitting myself so well, and so did several others, and my
fellow-officers all very brisk to see themselves so well acquitted; which
makes me a little proud, but yet not secure but we may yet meet with a
back-blow which we see not.  So, with our hearts very light, Sir W. Pen
and I in his coach home, it being now near eight o'clock, and so to the
office, and did a little business by the post, and so home, hungry, and
eat a good supper, and so, with my mind well at ease, to bed.  My wife not
very well of those.

23rd.  Up, and Sir W. Pen and I in his coach to White Hall, there to
attend the Duke of York; but come a little too late, and so missed it:
only spoke with him, and heard him correct my Lord Barkeley, who fell foul
on Sir Edward Spragg, who, it seems, said yesterday to the House, that if
the Officers of the Ordnance had done as much work at Shereness in ten
weeks as "The Prince" did in ten days, he could have defended the place
against the Dutch: but the Duke of York told him that every body must have
liberty, at this time, to make their own defence, though it be to the
charging of the fault upon any other, so it be true; so I perceive the
whole world is at work in blaming one another.  Thence Sir W. Pen and I
back into London; and there saw the King, with his kettle-drums and
trumpets, going to the Exchange, to lay the first stone of the first
pillar of the new building of the Exchange; which, the gates being shut, I
could not get in to see: but, with Sir W. Pen, to Captain Cocke's to drink
a dram of brandy, and so he to the Treasury office about Sir G. Carteret's
accounts, and I took coach and back again toward Westminster; but in my
way stopped at the Exchange, and got in, the King being newly gone; and
there find the bottom of the first pillar laid.  And here was a shed set
up, and hung with tapestry, and a canopy of state, and some good victuals
and wine, for the King, who, it seems, did it; and so a great many people,
as Tom Killigrew, and others of the Court there, and there I did eat a
mouthful and drink a little, and do find Mr. Gawden in his gowne as
Sheriffe, and understand that the King hath this morning knighted him upon
the place, which I am mightily pleased with; and I think the other
Sheriffe, who is Davis, the little fellow, my schoolfellow,--the
bookseller, who was one of Audley's' Executors, and now become Sheriffe;
which is a strange turn, methinks.  Here mighty merry (there being a good
deal of good company) for a quarter of an hour, and so I away and to
Westminster Hall, where I come just as the House rose; and there, in the
Hall, met with Sir W. Coventry, who is in pain to defend himself in the
business of tickets, it being said that the paying of the ships at Chatham
by ticket was by his direction, and he hath wrote to me to find his
letters, and shew them him, but I find none; but did there argue the case
with him, and I think no great blame can be laid on us for that matter,
only I see he is fearfull.  And he tells me his mistake in the House the
other day, which occasions him much trouble, in shewing of the House the
Duke of Albemarle's letter about the good condition of Chatham, which he
is sorry for, and, owns as a mistake, the thing not being necessary to
have been done; and confesses that nobody can escape from such error, some
times or other.  He says the House was well satisfied with my Report
yesterday; and so several others told me in the Hall that my Report was
very good and satisfactory, and that I have got advantage by it in the
House: I pray God it may prove so!  And here, after the Hall pretty empty,
I did walk a few turns with Commissioner Pett, and did give the poor weak
man some advice for his advantage how to better his pleading for himself,
which I think he will if he can remember and practise, for I would not
have the man suffer what he do not deserve, there being enough of what he
do deserve to lie upon him.  Thence to Mrs. Martin's, and there staid till
two o'clock, and drank and talked, and did give her L3 to buy my
goddaughter her first new gowne .  .  .  .  and so away homeward, and in
my way met Sir W. Pen in Cheapside, and went into his coach, and back
again and to the King's playhouse, and there saw "The Black Prince" again:
which is now mightily bettered by that long letter being printed, and so
delivered to every body at their going in, and some short reference made
to it in heart in the play, which do mighty well; but, when all is done, I
think it the worst play of my Lord Orrery's. But here, to my great
satisfaction, I did see my Lord Hinchingbroke and his mistress, with her
father and mother; and I am mightily pleased with the young lady, being
handsome enough--and, indeed, to my great liking, as I would have her.  I
could not but look upon them all the play; being exceeding pleased with my
good hap to see them, God bring them together! and they are now already
mighty kind to one another, and he is as it were one of their family.  The
play done I home, and to the office a while, and then home to supper, very
hungry, and then to my chamber, to read the true story, in Speed, of the
Black Prince, and so to bed.  This day, it was moved in the House that a
day might be appointed to bring in an, impeachment against the Chancellor,
but it was decried as being irregular; but that, if there was ground for
complaint, it might be brought to the Committee for miscarriages, and, if
they thought good, to present it to the House; and so it was carried.
They did also vote this day thanks to be given to the Prince and Duke of
Albemarle, for their care and conduct in the last year's war, which is a
strange act; but, I know not how, the blockhead Albemarle hath strange
luck to be loved, though he be, and every man must know it, the heaviest
man in the world, but stout and honest to his country.  This evening late,
Mr. Moore come to me to prepare matters for my Lord Sandwich's defence;
wherein I can little assist, but will do all I can; and am in great fear
of nothing but the damned business of the prizes, but I fear my Lord will
receive a cursed deal of trouble by it.

24th.  Up, and to the office, where all the morning very busy, and at noon
took Mr. Hater home with me to dinner, and instantly back again to write
what letters I had to write, that I might go abroad with my wife, who was
not well, only to jumble her, and so to the Duke of York's playhouse; but
there Betterton not being yet well, we would not stay, though since I hear
that Smith do act his part in "The Villaine," which was then acted, as
well or better than he, which I do not believe; but to Charing Cross,
there to see Polichinelli.  But, it being begun, we in to see a Frenchman,
at the house, where my wife's father last lodged, one Monsieur Prin, play
on the trump-marine,

     [The trumpet marine is a stringed instrument having a triangular-
     shaped body or chest and a long neck, a single string raised on a
     bridge and running along the body and neck.  It was played with a
     bow.]

which he do beyond belief; and, the truth is, it do so far outdo a trumpet
as nothing more, and he do play anything very true, and it is most
admirable and at first was a mystery to me that I should hear a whole
concert of chords together at the end of a pause, but he showed me that it
was only when the last notes were 5ths or 3rds, one to another, and then
their sounds like an Echo did last so as they seemed to sound all
together.  The instrument is open at the end, I discovered; but he would
not let me look into it, but I was mightily pleased with it, and he did
take great pains to shew me all he could do on it, which was very much,
and would make an excellent concert, two or three of them, better than
trumpets can ever do, because of their want of compass.  Here we also saw
again the two fat children come out of Ireland, and a brother and sister
of theirs now come, which are of little ordinary growth, like other
people.  But, Lord!  how strange it is to observe the difference between
the same children, come out of the same little woman's belly! Thence to
Mile-End Greene, and there drank, and so home bringing home night with us,
and so to the office a little, and then to bed.

25th.  Up, and all the morning close till two o'clock, till I had not time
to eat my dinner, to make our answer ready for the Parliament this
afternoon, to shew how Commissioner Pett was singly concerned in the
executing of all orders from Chatham, and that we did properly lodge all
orders with him.  Thence with Sir W. Pen to the Parliament Committee, and
there we all met, and did shew, my Lord Bruncker and I, our commissions
under the Great Seal in behalf of all the rest, to shew them our duties,
and there I had no more matters asked me, but were bid to withdraw, and
did there wait, I all the afternoon till eight at, night, while they were
examining several about the business of Chatham again, and particularly my
Lord Bruncker did meet with two or three blurs that he did not think of.
One from Spragg, who says that "The Unity" was ordered up contrary to his
order, by my Lord Bruncker and Commissioner Pett.  Another by Crispin, the
waterman, who said he was upon "The Charles;" and spoke to Lord Bruncker
coming by in his boat, to know whether they should carry up "The Charles,"
they being a great many naked men without armes, and he told them she was
well as she was.  Both these have little in them indeed, but yet both did
stick close against him; and he is the weakest man in the world to make
his defence, and so is like to have much fault laid on him therefrom.
Spragg was in with them all the afternoon, and hath much fault laid on him
for a man that minded his pleasure, and little else of his whole charge.
I walked in the lobby, and there do hear from Mr. Chichly that they were
(the Commissioners of the Ordnance) shrewdly put to it yesterday, being
examined with all severity and were hardly used by them, much otherwise
than we, and did go away with mighty blame; and I am told by every body
that it is likely to stick mighty hard upon them: at which every body is
glad, because of Duncomb's pride, and their expecting to have the thanks
of the House whereas they have deserved, as the Parliament apprehends, as
bad as bad can be.  Here is great talk of an impeachment brought in
against my Lord Mordaunt, and that another will be brought in against my
Lord Chancellor in a few days. Here I understand for certain that they
have ordered that my Lord Arlington's letters, and Secretary Morrice's
letters of intelligence, be consulted, about the business of the Dutch
fleete's coming abroad, which is a very high point, but this they have
done, but in what particular manner I cannot justly say, whether it was
not with the King's leave first asked.  Here late, as I have said, and at
last they broke up, and we had our commissions again, and I do hear how
Birch is the high man that do examine and trouble every body with his
questions, and they say that he do labour all he can to clear Pett, but it
seems a witness has come in tonight, C. Millett, who do declare that he
did deliver a message from the Duke of Albemarle time enough for him to
carry up "The Charles," and he neglected it, which will stick very hard,
it seems, on him.  So Sir W. Pen and I in his coach home, and there to
supper, a good supper, and so weary, and my eyes spent, to bed.

26th.  Up, and we met all this morning at Sir W. Pen's roome, the office
being fowle with the altering of our garden door.  There very busy, and at
noon home, where Mrs. Pierce and her daughter's husband and Mr. Corbet
dined with me.  I had a good dinner for them, and mighty merry.  Pierce
and I very glad at the fate of the officers of Ordnance, that they are
like to have so much blame on them.  Here Mrs. Pierce tells me that the
two Marshalls at the King's house are Stephen Marshall's, the great
Presbyterian's daughters: and that Nelly and Beck Marshall, falling out
the other day, the latter called the other my Lord Buckhurst's whore. Nell
answered then, "I was but one man's whore, though I was brought up in a
bawdy-house to fill strong waters to the guests; and you are a whore to
three or four, though a Presbyter's praying daughter!"  which was very
pretty.  Mrs. Pierce is still very pretty, but paints red on her face,
which makes me hate her, that I thank God I take no pleasure in her at all
more.  After much mirth and good company at dinner, I to the office and
left them, and Pendleton also, who come in to see my wife and talk of
dancing, and there I at the office all the afternoon very busy, and did
much business, with my great content to see it go off of hand, and so
home, my eyes spent, to supper and to bed.

27th (Lord's day).  Up, and to my office, there, with W. Hewer, to dictate
a long letter to the Duke of York, about the bad state of the office, it
being a work I do think fit for the office to do, though it be to no
purpose but for their vindication in these bad times; for I do now learn
many things tending to our safety which I did not wholly forget before,
but do find the fruits of, and would I had practised them more, as, among
other things, to be sure to let our answers to orders bear date presently
after their date, that we may be found quick in our execution. This did us
great good the other day before the Parliament.  All the morning at this,
at noon home to dinner, with my own family alone.  After dinner, I down to
Deptford, the first time that I went to look upon "The Maybolt," which the
King hath given me, and there she is; and I did meet with Mr. Uthwayte,
who do tell me that there are new sails ordered to be delivered her, and a
cable, which I did not speak of at all to him.  So, thereupon, I told him
I would not be my own hindrance so much as to take her into my custody
before she had them, which was all I said to him, but desired him to take
a strict inventory of her, that I might not be cheated by the master nor
the company, when they come to understand that the vessel is gone away,
which he hath promised me, and so away back again home, reading all the
way the book of the collection of oaths in the several offices of this
nation, which is worth a man's reading, and so away home, and there my boy
and I to sing, and at it all the evening, and to supper, and so to bed.
This evening come Sir J. Minnes to me, to let me know that a
Parliament-man hath been with him, to tell him that the Parliament intend
to examine him particularly about Sir W. Coventry's selling of places, and
about my Lord Bruncker's discharging the ships at Chatham by ticket: for
the former of which I am more particularly sorry that that business of
[Sir] W. Coventry should come up again; though this old man tells me, and,
I believe, that he can say nothing to it.

28th.  Up, and by water to White Hall (calling at Michell's and drank a
dram of strong water, but it being early I did not see his wife), and
thence walked to Sir W. Coventry's lodging, but he was gone out, and so
going towards St. James's I find him at his house which is fitting for
him; and there I to him, and was with him above an hour alone, discoursing
of the matters of the nation, and our Office, and himself. He owns that he
is, at this day, the chief person aymed at by the Parliament--that is, by
the friends of my Lord Chancellor, and also by the Duke of Albemarle, by
reason of his unhappy shewing of the Duke of Albemarle's letter, the other
day, in the House; but that he thinks that he is not liable to any hurt
they can fasten on him for anything, he is so well armed to justify
himself in every thing, unless in the old business of selling places, when
he says every body did; and he will now not be forward to tell his own
story, as he hath been; but tells me he is grown wiser, and will put them
to prove any thing, and he will defend himself: besides that, he will
dispute the statute, thinking that it will not be found to reach him.  We
did talk many things, which, as they come into my mind now, I shall set
down without order: that he is weary of public employment; and neither
ever designed, nor will ever, if his commission were brought to him wrapt
in gold, would he accept of any single place in the State, as particularly
Secretary of State; which, he says, the world discourses Morrice is
willing to resign, and he thinks the King might have thought of him, but
he would not, by any means, now take it, if given him, nor anything, but
in commission with others, who may bear part of the blame; for now he
observes well, that whoever did do anything singly are now in danger,
however honest and painful they were, saying that he himself was the only
man, he thinks, at the council-board that spoke his mind clearly, as he
thought, to the good of the King; and the rest, who sat silent, have
nothing said to them, nor are taken notice of.  That the first time the
King did take him so closely into his confidence and ministry of affairs
was upon the business of Chatham, when all the disturbances were there,
and in the kingdom; and then, while everybody was fancying for himself,
the King did find him to persuade him to call for the Parliament,
declaring that it was against his own proper interest, forasmuch as [it
was] likely they would find faults with him, as well as with others, but
that he would prefer the service of the King before his own: and,
thereupon, the King did take him into his special notice, and, from that
time to this, hath received him so; and that then he did see the folly and
mistakes of the Chancellor in the management of things, and saw that
matters were never likely to be done well in that sort of conduct, and did
persuade the King to think fit of the taking away the seals from the
Chancellor, which, when it was done, he told me that he himself, in his
own particular, was sorry for it; for, while he stood, there was he and my
Lord Arlington to stand between him and harm: whereas now there is only my
Lord Arlington, and he is now down, so that all their fury is placed upon
him but that he did tell the King, when he first moved it, that, if he
thought the laying of him, W. Coventry, aside, would at all facilitate the
removing of the Chancellor, he would most willingly submit to it,
whereupon the King did command him to try the Duke of York about it, and
persuade him to it, which he did, by the King's command, undertake, and
compass, and the Duke of York did own his consent to the King, but
afterwards was brought to be of another mind for the Chancellor, and now
is displeased with him, and [so is] the Duchesse, so that she will not see
him; but he tells me the Duke of York seems pretty kind, and hath said
that he do believe that W. Coventry did mean well, and do it only out of
judgment.  He tells me that he never was an intriguer in his life, nor
will be, nor of any combination of persons to set up this, or fling down
that, nor hath, in his own business, this Parliament, spoke to three
members to say any thing for him, but will stand upon his own defence, and
will stay by it, and thinks that he is armed against all they can [say],
but the old business of selling places, and in that thinks they cannot
hurt him. However, I do find him mighty willing to have his name used as
little as he can, and he was glad when I did deliver him up a letter of
his to me, which did give countenance to the discharging of men by ticket
at Chatham, which is now coming in question; and wherein, I confess, I am
sorry to find him so tender of appearing, it being a thing not only good
and fit, all that was done in it, but promoted and advised by him.  But he
thinks the House is set upon wresting anything to his prejudice that they
can pick up.  He tells me he did never, as a great many have, call the
Chancellor rogue and knave, and I know not what; but all that he hath
said, and will stand by, is, that his counsels were not good, nor the
manner of his managing of things.  I suppose he means suffering the King
to run in debt; for by and by the King walking in the parke, with a great
crowd of his idle people about him, I took occasion to say that it was a
sorry thing to be a poor King, and to have others to come to correct the
faults of his own servants, and that this was it that brought us all into
this condition.  He answered that he would never be a poor King, and then
the other would mend of itself.  "No," says he, "I would eat bread and
drink water first, and this day discharge all the idle company about me,
and walk only with two footmen; and this I have told the King, and this
must do it at last."  I asked him how long the King would suffer this. He
told me the King must suffer it yet longer, that he would not advise the
King to do otherwise; for it would break out again worse, if he should
break them up before the core be come up.  After this, we fell to other
talk, of my waiting upon him hereafter, it may be, to read a chapter in
Seneca, in this new house, which he hath bought, and is making very fine,
when we may be out of employment, which he seems to wish more than to
fear, and I do believe him heartily.  Thence home, and met news from Mr.
Townsend of the Wardrobe that old Young, the yeoman taylor, whose place my
Lord Sandwich promised my father, is dead.  Upon which, resolving
presently that my father shall not be troubled with it, but I hope I shall
be able to enable him to end his days where he is, in quiet, I went forth
thinking to tell Mrs. Ferrers (Captain Ferrers's wife), who do expect it
after my father, that she may look after it, but upon second thoughts
forbore it, and so back again home, calling at the New Exchange, and there
buying "The Indian Emperour," newly printed, and so home to dinner, where
I had Mr. Clerke, the sollicitor, and one of the Auditor's clerks to
discourse about the form of making up my accounts for the Exchequer, which
did give me good satisfaction, and so after dinner, my wife, and Mercer,
who grows fat, and Willett, and I, to the King's house, and there saw "The
Committee," a play I like well, and so at night home and to the office,
and so to my chamber about my accounts, and then to Sir W. Pen's to speak
with Sir John Chichly, who desired my advice about a prize which he hath
begged of the King, and there had a great deal of his foolish talk of
ladies and love and I know not what, and so home to supper and to bed.

29th.  Up, and at the office, my Lord Bruncker and I close together till
almost 3 after noon, never stirring, making up a report for the Committee
this afternoon about the business of discharging men by ticket, which it
seems the House is mighty earnest in, but is a foolery in itself, yet
gives me a great deal of trouble to draw up a defence for the Board, as if
it was a crime; but I think I have done it to very good purpose.  Then to
my Lady Williams's, with her and my Lord, and there did eat a snapp of
good victuals, and so to Westminster Hall, where we find the House not up,
but sitting all this day about the method of bringing in the charge
against my Lord Chancellor; and at last resolved for a Committee to draw
up the heads, and so rose, and no Committee to sit tonight.  Here Sir W.
Coventry and Lord Bruncker and I did in the Hall (between the two Courts
at the top of the Hall) discourse about a letter of [Sir] W. Coventry's to
Bruncker, whereon Bruncker did justify his discharging men by ticket, and
insists on one word which Sir W. Coventry would not seem very earnest to
have left out, but I did see him concerned, and did after labour to
suppress the whole letter, the thing being in itself really impertinent,
but yet so it is that [Sir] W. Coventry do not desire to have his name
used in this business, and I have prevailed with Bruncker for it.  Thence
Bruncker and I to the King's House, thinking to have gone into a box
above, for fear of being seen, the King being there, but the play being 3
acts done we would not give 4s., and so away and parted, and I home, and
there after a little supper to bed, my eyes ill, and head full of thoughts
of the trouble this Parliament gives us.

30th.  All the morning till past noon preparing over again our report this
afternoon to the Committee of Parliament about tickets, and then home to
eat a bit, and then with Sir W. Pen to White Hall, where we did a very
little business with the Duke of York at our usual meeting, only I
perceive that he do leave all of us, as the King do those about him, to
stand and fall by ourselves, and I think is not without some cares himself
what the Parliament may do in matters wherein his honour is concerned.
Thence to the Parliament-house; where, after the Committee was sat, I was
called in; and the first thing was upon the complaint of a dirty slut that
was there, about a ticket which she had lost, and had applied herself to
me for another.  .  .  . I did give them a short and satisfactory answer
to that; and so they sent her away, and were ashamed of their foolery, in
giving occasion to 500 seamen and seamen's wives to come before them, as
there was this afternoon.  But then they fell to the business of tickets,
and I did give them the best answer I could, but had not scope to do it in
the methodical manner which I had prepared myself for, but they did ask a
great many broken rude questions about it, and were mightily hot whether
my Lord Bruncker had any order to discharge whole ships by ticket, and
because my answer was with distinction, and not direct, I did perceive
they were not so fully satisfied therewith as I could wish they were.  So
my Lord Bruncker was called in, and they could fasten nothing on him that
I could see, nor indeed was there any proper matter for blame, but I do
see, and it was said publicly in the House by Sir T. Clerges that Sir W.
Batten had designed the business of discharging men by ticket and an order
after the thing was done to justify my Lord Bruncker for having done it.
But this I did not owne at all, nor was it just so, though he did indeed
do something like it, yet had contributed as much to it as any man of the
board by sending down of tickets to do it.  But, Lord! to see that we
should be brought to justify ourselves in a thing of necessity and profit
to the King, and of no profit or convenience to us, but the contrary.  We
being withdrawn, we heard no more of it, but there staid late and do hear
no more, only my cozen Pepys do tell me that he did hear one or two
whisper as if they thought that I do bogle at the business of my Lord
Bruncker, which is a thing I neither did or have reason to do in his
favour, but I do not think it fit to make him suffer for a thing that
deserves well.  But this do trouble me a little that anything should stick
to my prejudice in any of them, and did trouble me so much that all the
way home with Sir W. Pen I was not at good ease, nor all night, though
when I come home I did find my wife, and Betty Turner, the two Mercers,
and Mrs. Parker, an ugly lass, but yet dances well, and speaks the best of
them, and W. Batelier, and Pembleton dancing; and here I danced with them,
and had a good supper, and as merry as I could be, and so they being gone
we to bed.

31st.  Up, and all the morning at the office, and at noon Mr. Creed and
Yeabsly dined with me (my wife gone to dine with Mrs. Pierce and see a
play with her), and after dinner in comes Mr. Turner, of Eynsbury, lately
come to town, and also after him Captain Hill of the "Coventry," who lost
her at Barbadoes, and is come out of France, where he hath been long
prisoner.  After a great deal of mixed discourse, and then Mr. Turner and
I alone a little in my closet, talking about my Lord Sandwich (who I hear
is now ordered by the King to come home again), we all parted, and I by
water, calling at Michell's, and saw and once kissed su wife, but I do
think that he is jealous of her, and so she dares not stand out of his
sight; so could not do more, but away by water to the Temple, and there,
after spending a little time in my bookseller's shop, I to Westminster;
and there at the lobby do hear by Commissioner Pett, to my great
amazement, that he is in worse condition than before, by the coming in of
the Duke of Albemarle's and Prince Rupert's Narratives' this day; wherein
the former do most severely lay matters upon him, so as the House this day
have, I think, ordered him to the Tower again, or something like it; so
that the poor man is likely to be overthrown, I doubt, right or wrong, so
infinite fond they are of any thing the Duke of Albemarle says or writes
to them!  I did then go down, and there met with Colonel Reames and cozen
Roger Pepys; and there they do tell me how the Duke of Albemarle and the
Prince have laid blame on a great many, and particularly on our Office in
general; and particularly for want of provision, wherein I shall come to
be questioned again in that business myself; which do trouble me.  But my
cozen Pepys and I had much discourse alone: and he do bewail the
constitution of this House, and says there is a direct caball and faction,
as much as is possible between those for and those against the Chancellor,
and so in other factions, that there is nothing almost done honestly and
with integrity; only some few, he says, there are, that do keep out of all
plots and combinations, and when their time comes will speak and see right
done, if possible; and that he himself is looked upon to be a man that
will be of no faction, and so they do shun to make him; and I am glad of
it.  He tells me that he thanks God he never knew what it was to be
tempted to be a knave in his life; till he did come into the House of
Commons, where there is nothing done but by passion, and faction, and
private interest.  Reames did tell me of a fellow last night (one Kelsy, a
commander of a fire-ship, who complained for want of his money paid him)
did say that he did see one of the Commissioners of the Navy bring in
three waggon-loads of prize-goods into Greenwich one night; but that the
House did take no notice of it, nor enquire; but this is me, and I must
expect to be called to account, and answer what I did as well as I can.
So thence away home, and in Holborne, going round, it being dark, I espied
Sir D. Gawden's coach, and so went out of mine into his; and there had
opportunity to talk of the business of victuals, which the Duke of
Albemarle and Prince did complain that they were in want of the last year:
but we do conclude we shall be able to show quite the contrary of that;
only it troubles me that we must come to contend with these great persons,
which will overrun us.  So with some disquiet in my mind on this account I
home, and there comes Mr. Yeabsly, and he and I to even some accounts,
wherein I shall be a gainer about L200, which is a seasonable profit, for
I have got nothing a great while; and he being gone, I to bed.




     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     Commons, where there is nothing done but by passion, and faction
     Disquiet all night, telling of the clock till it was daylight
     Painful to keep money, as well as to get it
     Sorry thing to be a poor King
     Spares not to blame another to defend himself
     Wise man's not being wise at all times





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Diary of Samuel Pepys, October 1667
by Samuel Pepys

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***

***** This file should be named 4181.txt or 4181.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/4/1/8/4181/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
