Project Gutenberg's Diary of Samuel Pepys, Feb/Mar 1668/69, by Samuel Pepys

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Diary of Samuel Pepys, Feb/Mar 1668/69

Author: Samuel Pepys

Release Date: November 28, 2004 [EBook #4197]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***




Produced by David Widger





                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A. F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                             FEBRUARY & MARCH
                                1668-1669

February 1st.  Up, and by water from the Tower to White Hall, the first
time that I have gone to that end of the town by water, for two or three
months, I think, since I kept a coach, which God send propitious to me;
but it is a very great convenience.  I went to a Committee of Tangier, but
it did not meet, and so I meeting Mr. Povy, he and I away to Dancre's, to
speak something touching the pictures I am getting him to make for me.
And thence he carried me to Mr. Streeter's, the famous history-painter
over the way, whom I have often heard of, but did never see him before;
and there I found him, and Dr. Wren, and several Virtuosos, looking upon
the paintings which he is making for the new Theatre at Oxford: and,
indeed, they look as if they would be very fine, and the rest think better
than those of Rubens in the Banqueting-house at White Hall, but I do not
so fully think so.  But they will certainly be very noble; and I am
mightily pleased to have the fortune to see this man and his work, which
is very famous; and he a very civil little man, and lame, but lives very
handsomely.  So thence to my Lord Bellassis, and met him within: my
business only to see a chimney-piece of Dancre's doing, in distemper, with
egg to keep off the glaring of the light, which I must have done for my
room: and indeed it is pretty, but, I must confess, I do think it is not
altogether so beautiful as the oyle pictures; but I will have some of one,
and some of another.  Thence set him down at Little Turnstile, and so I
home, and there eat a little dinner, and away with my wife by coach to the
King's playhouse, thinking to have seen "The Heyresse," first acted on
Saturday last; but when we come thither, we find no play there; Kinaston,
that did act a part therein, in abuse to Sir Charles Sedley, being last
night exceedingly beaten with sticks, by two or three that assaulted him,
so as he is mightily bruised, and forced to keep his bed.  So we to the
Duke of York's playhouse, and there saw "She Would if She Could," and so
home and to my office to business, and then to supper and to bed.  This
day, going to the play, The. Turner met us, and carried us to her mother,
at my Lady Mordaunt's; and I did carry both mother and daughter with us to
the Duke of York's playhouse, at next door.

2nd.  Up, and to the office, where all the morning, and home to dinner at
noon, where I find Mr. Sheres; and there made a short dinner, and carried
him with us to the King's playhouse, where "The Heyresse,"
not-withstanding Kinaston's being beaten, is acted; and they say the King
is very angry with Sir Charles Sedley for his being beaten, but he do deny
it.  But his part is done by Beeston, who is fain to read it out of a book
all the while, and thereby spoils the part, and almost the play, it being
one of the best parts in it; and though the design is, in the first
conception of it, pretty good, yet it is but an indifferent play, wrote,
they say, by my Lord Newcastle.  But it was pleasant to see Beeston come
in with others, supposing it to be dark, and yet he is forced to read his
part by the light of the candles: and this I observing to a gentleman that
sat by me, he was mightily pleased therewith, and spread it up and down.
But that, that pleased me most in the play is, the first song that Knepp
sings, she singing three or four; and, indeed, it was very finely sung, so
as to make the whole house clap her.  Thence carried Sheres to White Hall,
and there I stepped in, and looked out Mr. May, who tells me that he and
his company cannot come to dine with me to-morrow, whom I expected only to
come to see the manner of our Office and books, at which I was not very
much displeased, having much business at the Office, and so away home, and
there to the office about my letters, and then home to supper and to bed,
my wife being in mighty ill humour all night, and in the morning I found
it to be from her observing Knepp to wink and smile on me; and she says I
smiled on her; and, poor wretch! I did perceive that she did, and do on
all such occasions, mind my eyes. I did, with much difficulty, pacify her,
and were friends, she desiring that hereafter, at that house, we might
always sit either above in a box, or, if there be [no] room, close up to
the lower boxes.

3rd.  So up, and to the Office till noon, and then home to a little
dinner, and thither again till night, mighty busy, to my great content,
doing a great deal of business, and so home to supper, and to bed; I
finding this day that I may be able to do a great deal of business by
dictating, if I do not read myself, or write, without spoiling my eyes, I
being very well in my eyes after a great day's work.

4th.  Up, and at the office all the morning.  At noon home with my people
to dinner, and then after dinner comes Mr. Spong to see me, and brings me
my Parallelogram, in better order than before, and two or three draughts
of the port of Brest, to my great content, and I did call Mr. Gibson to
take notice of it, who is very much pleased therewith; and it seems this
Parallelogram is not, as Mr. Sheres would, the other day, have persuaded
me, the same as a Protractor, which do so much the more make me value it,
but of itself it is a most usefull instrument.  Thence out with my wife
and him, and carried him to an instrument-maker's shop in Chancery Lane,
that was once a 'Prentice of Greatorex's, but the master was not within,
and there he [Gibson] shewed me a Parallelogram in brass, which I like so
well that I will buy, and therefore bid it be made clean and fit for me.
And so to my cozen Turner's, and there just spoke with The., the mother
not being at home; and so to the New Exchange, and thence home to my
letters; and so home to supper and to bed.  This morning I made a slip
from the Office to White Hall, expecting Povy's business at a Committee of
Tangier, at which I would be, but it did not meet, and so I presently
back.

5th.  Up betimes, by coach to Sir W. Coventry's, and with him by coach to
White Hall, and there walked in the garden talking of several things, and
by my visit to keep fresh my interest in him; and there he tells me how it
hath been talked that he was to go one of the Commissioners to Ireland,
which he was resolved never to do, unless directly commanded; for he told
me that for to go thither, while the Chief Secretary of State was his
professed enemy, was to undo himself; and, therefore, it were better for
him to venture being unhappy here, than to go further off, to be undone by
some obscure instructions, or whatever other way of mischief his enemies
should cut out for him.  He mighty kind to me, and so parted, and thence
home, calling in two or three places--among others, Dancre's, where I find
him beginning of a piece for me, of Greenwich, which will please me well,
and so home to dinner, and very busy all the afternoon, and so at night
home to supper, and to bed.

6th.  Up, and to the office, where all the morning, and thence after
dinner to the King's playhouse, and there,--in an upper box, where come in
Colonel Poynton and Doll Stacey, who is very fine, and, by her
wedding-ring, I suppose he hath married her at last,--did see "The Moor of
Venice:" but ill acted in most parts; Mohun, which did a little surprise
me, not acting Iago's part by much so well as Clun used to do; nor another
Hart's, which was Cassio's; nor, indeed, Burt doing the Moor's so well as
I once thought he did.  Thence home, and just at Holborn Conduit the bolt
broke, that holds the fore-wheels to the perch, and so the horses went
away with them, and left the coachman and us; but being near our
coachmaker's, and we staying in a little ironmonger's shop, we were
presently supplied with another, and so home, and there to my letters at
the office, and so to supper and to bed.

7th (Lord's day).  My wife mighty peevish in the morning about my lying
unquietly a-nights, and she will have it that it is a late practice, from
my evil thoughts in my dreams, .  .  .  .and mightily she is troubled
about it; but all blew over, and I up, and to church, and so home to
dinner, where she in a worse fit, which lasted all the afternoon, and
shut herself up, in her closet, and I mightily grieved and vexed, and
could not get her to tell me what ayled her, or to let me into her
closet, but at last she did, where I found her crying on the ground,
and I could not please her; but I did at last find that she did plainly
expound it to me.  It was, that she did believe me false to her with
Jane, and did rip up three or four silly circumstances of her not rising
till I come out of my chamber, and her letting me thereby see her
dressing herself; and that I must needs go into her chamber and was
naught with her; which was so silly, and so far from truth, that I could
not be troubled at it, though I could not wonder at her being troubled,
if she had these thoughts, and therefore she would lie from me, and
caused sheets to be put on in the blue room, and would have Jane to lie
with her lest I should come to her.  At last, I did give her such
satisfaction, that we were mighty good friends, and went to bed betimes
 .  .  .  .  .

8th.  Up, and dressed myself; and by coach, with W. Hewer and my wife, to
White Hall, where she set us two down; and in the way, our little boy, at
Martin, my bookseller's shop, going to 'light, did fall down; and, had he
not been a most nimble boy (I saw how he did it, and was mightily pleased
with him for it), he had been run over by the coach.  I to visit my Lord
Sandwich; and there, while my Lord was dressing himself, did see a young
Spaniard, that he hath brought over with him, dance, which he is admired
for, as the best dancer in Spain, and indeed he do with mighty mastery;
but I do not like his dancing as the English, though my Lord commends it
mightily: but I will have him to my house, and show it my wife.  Here I
met with Mr. Moore, who tells me the state of my Lord's accounts of his
embassy, which I find not so good as I thought: for, though it be passed
the King and his Cabal (the Committee for Foreign Affairs as they are
called), yet they have cut off from L9000 full L8000, and have now sent it
to the Lords of the Treasury, who, though the Committee have allowed the
rest, yet they are not obliged to abide by it. So that I do fear this
account may yet be long ere it be passed--much more, ere that sum be paid:
I am sorry for the family, and not a little for what it owes me.  So to my
wife, took her up at Unthank's, and in our way home did shew her the tall
woman in Holborne, which I have seen before; and I measured her, and she
is, without shoes, just six feet five inches high, and they say not above
twenty-one years old.  Thence home, and there to dinner, and my wife in a
wonderful ill humour; and, after dinner, I staid with her alone, being not
able to endure this life, and fell to some angry words together; but by
and by were mighty good friends, she telling me plain it was still about
Jane, whom she cannot believe but I am base with, which I made a matter of
mirth at; but at last did call up Jane, and confirm her mistress's
directions for her being gone at Easter, which I find the wench willing to
be, but directly prayed that Tom might go with her, which I promised, and
was but what I designed; and she being thus spoke with, and gone, my wife
and I good friends, and mighty kind, I having promised, and I will perform
it, never to give her for the time to come ground of new trouble; and so I
to the Office, with a very light heart, and there close at my business all
the afternoon.  This day I was told by Mr. Wren, that Captain Cox,
Master-Attendant at Deptford, is to be one of us very soon, he and Tippets
being to take their turns for Chatham and Portsmouth, which choice I like
well enough; and Captain Annesley is to come in his room at Deptford.
This morning also, going to visit Roger Pepys, at the potticary's in
King's Street, he tells me that Roger is gone to his wife's, so that they
have been married, as he tells me, ever since the middle of last week: it
was his design, upon good reasons, to make no noise of it; but I am well
enough contented that it is over.  Dispatched a great deal of business at
the office, and there pretty late, till finding myself very full of wind,
by my eating no dinner to-day, being vexed, I was forced to go home, and
there supped W. Batelier with us, and so with great content to bed.

9th.  Up, and all the morning busy at the office, and after dinner abroad
with my wife to the King's playhouse, and there saw "The Island
Princesse," which I like mighty well, as an excellent play: and here we
find Kinaston to be well enough to act again, which he do very well, after
his beating by Sir Charles Sedley's appointment; and so thence home, and
there to my business at the Office, and after my letters done, then home
to supper and to bed, my mind being mightily eased by my having this
morning delivered to the Office a letter of advice about our answers to
the Commissioners of Accounts, whom we have neglected, and I have done
this as a record in my justification hereafter, when it shall come to be
examined.

10th.  Up, and with my wife and W. Hewer, she set us down at White Hall,
where the Duke of York was gone a-hunting: and so, after I had done a
little business there, I to my wife, and with her to the plaisterer's at
Charing Cross, that casts heads and bodies in plaister: and there I had my
whole face done; but I was vexed first to be forced to daub all my face
over with pomatum: but it was pretty to feel how soft and easily it is
done on the face, and by and by, by degrees, how hard it becomes, that you
cannot break it, and sits so close, that you cannot pull it off, and yet
so easy, that it is as soft as a pillow, so safe is everything where many
parts of the body do bear alike.  Thus was the mould made; but when it
came off there was little pleasure in it, as it looks in the mould, nor
any resemblance whatever there will be in the figure, when I come to see
it cast off, which I am to call for a day or two hence, which I shall long
to see.  Thence to Hercules Pillars, and there my wife and W. Hewer and I
dined, and back to White Hall, where I staid till the Duke of York come
from hunting, which he did by and by, and, when dressed, did come out to
dinner; and there I waited: and he did tell me that to-morrow was to be
the great day that the business of the Navy would be dis coursed of before
the King and his Caball, and that he must stand on his guard, and did
design to have had me in readiness by, but that upon second thoughts did
think it better to let it alone, but they are now upon entering into the
economical part of the Navy.  Here he dined, and did mightily magnify his
sauce, which he did then eat with every thing, and said it was the best
universal sauce in the world, it being taught him by the Spanish
Embassador; made of some parsley and a dry toast, beat in a mortar,
together with vinegar, salt, and a little pepper: he eats it with flesh,
or fowl, or fish: and then he did now mightily commend some new sort of
wine lately found out, called Navarre wine, which I tasted, and is, I
think, good wine: but I did like better the notion of the sauce, and by
and by did taste it, and liked it mightily.  After dinner, I did what I
went for, which was to get his consent that Balty might hold his
Muster-Master's place by deputy, in his new employment which I design for
him, about the Storekeeper's accounts; which the Duke of York did grant
me, and I was mighty glad of it.  Thence home, and there I find Povy and
W. Batelier, by appointment, met to talk of some merchandize of wine and
linnen; but I do not like of their troubling my house to meet in, having
no mind to their pretences of having their rendezvous here, but, however,
I was not much troubled, but went to the office, and there very busy, and
did much business till late at night, and so home to supper, and with
great pleasure to bed.  This day, at dinner, I sent to Mr. Spong to come
to me to Hercules Pillars, who come to us, and there did bring with him my
new Parallelogram of brass, which I was mightily pleased with, and paid
for it 25s., and am mightily pleased with his ingenious and modest
company.

11th.  Up, and to the office, where sat all the morning, and at noon home
and heard that the last night Colonel Middleton's wife died, a woman I
never saw since she come hither, having never been within their house
since.  Home at noon to dinner, and thence to work all the afternoon with
great pleasure, and did bring my business to a very little compass in my
day book, which is a mighty pleasure, and so home to supper and get my
wife to read to me, and then to bed.

12th.  Up, and my wife with me to White Hall, and Tom, and there she sets
us down, and there to wait on the Duke of York, with the rest of us, at
the Robes, where the Duke of York did tell us that the King would have us
prepare a draught of the present administration of the Navy, and what it
was in the late times, in order to his being able to distinguish between
the good and the bad, which I shall do, but to do it well will give me a
great deal of trouble.  Here we shewed him Sir J. Minnes's propositions
about balancing Storekeeper's accounts; and I did shew him Hosier's, which
did please him mightily, and he will have it shewed the Council and King
anon, to be put in practice.  Thence to the Treasurer's; and I and Sir J.
Minnes and Mr. Tippets down to the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury,
and there had a hot debate from Sir Thomas Clifford and my Lord Ashly (the
latter of which, I hear, is turning about as fast as he can to the Duke of
Buckingham's side, being in danger, it seems, of being otherwise out of
play, which would not be convenient for him), against Sir W. Coventry and
Sir J. Duncomb, who did uphold our Office against an accusation of our
Treasurers, who told the Lords that they found that we had run the King in
debt L50,000 or more, more than the money appointed for the year would
defray, which they declared like fools, and with design to hurt us, though
the thing is in itself ridiculous.  But my Lord Ashly and Clifford did
most horribly cry out against the want of method in the Office.  At last
it come that it should be put in writing what they had to object; but I
was devilish mad at it, to see us thus wounded by our own members, and so
away vexed, and called my wife, and to Hercules Pillars, Tom and I, there
dined; and here there coming a Frenchman by with his Shew, we did make him
shew it us, which he did just as Lacy acts it, which made it mighty
pleasant to me.  So after dinner we away and to Dancre's, and there saw
our picture of Greenwich in doing, which is mighty pretty, and so to White
Hall, my wife to Unthank's, and I attended with Lord Brouncker the King
and Council, about the proposition of balancing Storekeeper's accounts and
there presented Hosier's book, and it was mighty well resented and
approved of.  So the Council being up, we to the Queen's side with the
King and Duke of York: and the Duke of York did take me out to talk of our
Treasurers, whom he is mighty angry with: and I perceive he is mighty
desirous to bring in as many good motions of profit and reformation in the
Navy as he can, before the Treasurers do light upon them, they being
desirous, it seems, to be thought the great reformers: and the Duke of
York do well.  But to my great joy he is mighty open to me in every thing;
and by this means I know his whole mind, and shall be able to secure
myself, if he stands. Here to-night I understand, by my Lord Brouncker,
that at last it is concluded on by the King and Buckingham that my Lord of
Ormond shall not hold his government of Ireland, which is a great stroke,
to shew the power of Buckingham and the poor spirit of the King, and
little hold that any man can have of him.  Thence I homeward, and calling
my wife called at my cozen Turner's, and there met our new cozen Pepys
(Mrs. Dickenson), and Bab. and Betty' come yesterday to town, poor girls,
whom we have reason to love, and mighty glad we are to see them; and there
staid and talked a little, being also mightily pleased to see Betty
Turner, who is now in town, and her brothers Charles and Will, being come
from school to see their father, and there talked a while, and so home,
and there Pelling hath got me W. Pen's book against the Trinity.

     [Entitled, "The Sandy Foundation Shaken; or those .  .  .  doctrines
     of one God subsisting in three distinct and separate persons; the
     impossibility of God's pardoning sinners without a plenary
     satisfaction, the justification of impure persons by an imputative
     righteousness, refuted from the authority of Scripture testimonies
     and right reason, etc.  London, 1668."  It caused him to be
     imprisoned in the Tower.  "Aug. 4, 1669.  Young Penn who wrote the
     blasphemous book is delivered to his father to be transported"
     ("Letter to Sir John Birkenhead, quoted by Bishop Kennett in his MS.
     Collections, vol. lxxxix., p. 477).]

I got my wife to read it to me; and I find it so well writ as, I think, it
is too good for him ever to have writ it; and it is a serious sort of
book, and not fit for every body to read.  So to supper and to bed.

13th.  Up, and all the morning at the office, and at noon home to dinner,
and thence to the office again mighty busy, to my great content, till
night, and then home to supper and, my eyes being weary, to bed.

14th (Lord's day).  Up, and by coach to Sir W. Coventry, and there, he
taking physic, I with him all the morning, full of very good discourse of
the Navy and publick matters, to my great content, wherein I find him
doubtful that all will be bad, and, for his part, he tells me he takes no
more care for any thing more than in the Treasury; and that, that being
done, he goes to cards and other delights, as plays, and in summertime to
bowles.  But here he did shew me two or three old books of the Navy, of my
Lord Northumberland's' times, which he hath taken many good notes out of,
for justifying the Duke of York and us, in many things, wherein, perhaps,
precedents will be necessary to produce, which did give me great content.
At noon home, and pleased mightily with my morning's work, and coming
home, I do find a letter from Mr. Wren, to call me to the Duke of York
after dinner.  So dined in all haste, and then W. Hewer and my wife and I
out, we set her at my cozen Turner's while we to White Hall, where the
Duke of York expected me; and in his closet Wren and I. He did tell me how
the King hath been acquainted with the Treasurers' discourse at the Lords
Commissioners of the Treasury, the other day, and is dissatisfied with our
running him in debt, which I removed; and he did, carry me to the King,
and I did satisfy him also; but his satisfaction is nothing worth, it
being easily got, and easily removed; but I do purpose to put in writing
that which shall make the Treasurers ashamed.  But the Duke of York is
horrid angry against them; and he hath cause, for they do all they can to
bring dishonour upon his management, as do vainly appear in all they do.
Having done with the Duke of York, who do repose all in me, I with Mr.
Wren to his, chamber, to talk; where he observed, that these people are
all of them a broken sort of people, that have not much to lose, and
therefore will venture all to make their fortunes better: that Sir Thomas
Osborne is a beggar, having 11 of L1200 a-year, but owes above L10,000.
The Duke of Buckingham's condition is shortly this: that he hath about
L19,600 a-year, of which he pays away about L7,000 a-year in interest,
about L2000 in fee-farm rents to the King, about L6000 wages and pensions,
and the rest to live upon, and pay taxes for the whole. Wren says, that
for the Duke of York to stir in this matter, as his quality might justify,
would but make all things worse, and that therefore he must bend, and
suffer all, till time works it out: that he fears they will sacrifice the
Church, and that the King will take anything, and so he will hold up his
head a little longer, and then break in pieces.  But Sir W. Coventry did
today mightily magnify my late Lord Treasurer, for a wise and solid,
though infirm man: and, among other things, that when he hath said it was
impossible in nature to find this or that sum of money, and my Lord
Chancellor hath made sport of it, and tell the King that when my Lord hath
said it [was] impossible, yet he hath made shift to find it, and that was
by Sir G. Carteret's getting credit, my Lord did once in his hearing say
thus, which he magnifies as a great saying--that impossible would be found
impossible at last; meaning that the King would run himself out, beyond
all his credit and funds, and then we should too late find it impossible;
which is, he says, now come to pass.  For that Sir W. Coventry says they
could borrow what money they would, if they had assignments, and funds to
secure it with, which before they had enough of, and then must spend it as
if it would never have an end.  From White Hall to my cozen Turner's, and
there took up my wife; and so to my uncle Wight's, and there sat and
supped, and talked pretty merry, and then walked home, and to bed.

15th.  Up, and with Tom to White Hall; and there at a Committee of
Tangier, where a great instance of what a man may lose by the neglect of a
friend: Povy never had such an opportunity of passing his accounts, the
Duke of York being there, and everybody well disposed, and in expectation
of them; but my Lord Ashly, on whom he relied, and for whose sake this day
was pitched on, that he might be sure to be there, among the rest of his
friends, staid too long, till the Duke of York and the company thought
unfit to stay longer and so the day lost, and God knows when he will ever
have so good a one again, as long as he lives; and this was the man of the
whole company that he hath made the most interest to gain, and now most
depended upon him.  So up and down the house a while, and then to the
plaisterer's, and there saw the figure of my face taken from the mould:
and it is most admirably like, and I will have another made, before I take
it away, and therefore I away and to the Temple, and thence to my cozen
Turner's, where, having the last night been told by her that she had drawn
me for her Valentine, I did this day call at the New Exchange, and bought
her a pair of green silk stockings and garters and shoe-strings, and two
pair of jessimy gloves, all coming to about 28s., and did give them her
this noon.  At the 'Change, I did at my bookseller's shop accidentally
fall into talk with Sir Samuel Tuke about trees, and Mr. Evelyn's garden;
and I do find him, I think, a little conceited, but a man of very fine
discourse as any I ever heard almost, which I was mighty glad of.  I dined
at my cozen Turner's, and my wife also and her husband there, and after
dinner, my wife and I endeavoured to make a visit to Ned Pickering; but he
not at home, nor his lady; and therefore back again, and took up my cozen
Turner, and to my cozen Roger's lodgings, and there find him pretty well
again, and his wife mighty kind and merry, and did make mighty much of us,
and I believe he is married to a very good woman.  Here was also Bab. and
Betty, who have not their clothes yet, and therefore cannot go out,
otherwise I would have had them abroad to-morrow; but the poor girls
mighty kind to us, and we must skew them kindness also.  Here in Suffolk
Street lives Moll Davis; and we did see her coach come for her to her
door, a mighty pretty fine coach.  Here we staid an hour or two, and then
carried Turner home, and there staid and talked a while, and then my wife
and I to White Hall; and there, by means of Mr. Cooling, did get into the
play, the only one we have seen this winter: it was "The Five Hours'
Adventure:" but I sat so far I could not hear well, nor was there any
pretty woman that I did see, but my wife, who sat in my Lady Fox's pew

     [We may suppose that pews were by no means common at this time
     within consecrated walls, from the word being applied indifferently
     by Pepys to a box in a place of amusement, and two days afterwards
     to a seat at church.  It would appear, from other authorities, that
     between 1646 and 1660 scarcely any pews had been erected; and Sir C.
     Wren is known to have objected to their introduction into his London
     churches.--B.]

with her.  The house very full; and late before done, so that it was past
eleven before we got home.  But we were well pleased with seeing it, and
so to supper, where it happened that there was no bread in the house,
which was an unusual case, and so to bed.

16th.  Up, and to the office, where all the morning, my head full of
business of the office now at once on my hands, and so at noon home to
dinner, where I find some things of W. Batelier's come out of France,
among which some clothes for my wife, wherein she is likely to lead me to
the expence of so much money as vexed me; but I seemed so, more than I at
this time was, only to prevent her taking too much, and she was mighty
calm under it.  But I was mightily pleased with another picture of the
King of France's head, of Nanteuil's, bigger than the other which he
brought over, that pleases me infinitely: and so to the Office, where busy
all the afternoon, though my eyes mighty bad with the light of the candles
last night, which was so great as to make my eyes sore all this day, and
do teach me, by a manifest experiment, that it is only too much light that
do make my eyes sore.  Nevertheless, with the help of my tube, and being
desirous of easing my mind of five or six days journall, I did venture to
write it down from ever since this day se'nnight, and I think without
hurting my eyes any more than they were before, which was very much, and
so home to supper and to bed.

17th.  Up, and with W. Hewer with me to Lincoln's Inn, by appointment, to
have spoke with Mr. Pedley about Mr. Goldsborough's business and Mr.
Weaver's, but he was gone out, and so I with Mr. Castle, the son-in-law of
Weaver, to White Hall to look for him, but did not find him, but here I
did meet with several and talked, and do hear only that the King dining
yesterday at the Dutch Embassador's, after dinner they drank, and were
pretty merry; and, among the rest of the King's company, there was that
worthy fellow my lord of Rochester, and Tom Killigrew, whose mirth and
raillery offended the former so much, that he did give Tom Killigrew a box
on the ear in the King's presence, which do much give offence to the
people here at Court, to see how cheap the King makes himself, and the
more, for that the King hath not only passed by the thing, and pardoned it
to Rochester already, but this very morning the King did publickly walk up
and down, and Rochester I saw with him as free as ever, to the King's
everlasting shame, to have so idle a rogue his companion.  How Tom
Killigrew takes it, I do not hear.  I do also this day hear that my Lord
Privy Seale do accept to go Lieutenant into Ireland; but whether it be
true or no, I cannot tell.  So calling at my shoemaker's, and paying him
to this day, I home to dinner, and in the afternoon to Colonel Middleton's
house, to the burial of his wife, where we are all invited, and much more
company, and had each of us a ring: and so towards evening to our church,
where there was a sermon preached by Mills, and so home. At church there
was my Lord Brouncker and Mrs. Williams in our pew, the first time they
were ever there or that I knew that either of them would go to church.  At
home comes Castle to me, to desire me to go to Mr. Pedly, this night, he
being to go out of town to-morrow morning, which I, therefore, did, by
hackney-coach, first going to White Hall to meet with Sir W. Coventry, but
missed him.  But here I had a pleasant rencontre of a lady in mourning,
that, by the little light I had, seemed handsome. I passing by her, I did
observe she looked back again and again upon me, I suffering her to go
before, and it being now duske.  I observed she went into the little
passage towards the Privy Water-Gate, and I followed, but missed her; but
coming back again, I observed she returned, and went to go out of the
Court.  I followed her, and took occasion, in the new passage now built,
where the walke is to be, to take her by the hand, to lead her through,
which she willingly accepted, and I led her to the Great Gate, and there
left her, she telling me, of her own accord, that she was going as far as,
Charing Cross; but my boy was at the gate, and so je durst not go out con
her, which vexed me, and my mind (God forgive me) did run apres her toute
that night, though I have reason to thank God, and so I do now, that I was
not tempted to go further.  So to Lincoln's Inn, where to Mr. Pedly, with
whom I spoke, and did my business presently: and I find him a man of very
good language, and mighty civil, and I believe very upright: and so home,
where W. Batelier was, and supped with us, and I did reckon this night
what I owed him; and I do find that the things my wife, of her own head,
hath taken (together with my own, which comes not to above L5), comes to
above L22.  But it is the last, and so I am the better contented; and they
are things that are not trifles, but clothes, gloves, shoes, hoods, &c.
So after supper, to bed.

18th.  Up, and to the Office, and at noon home, expecting to have this day
seen Bab. and Betty Pepys here, but they come not; and so after dinner my
wife and I to the Duke of York's house, to a play, and there saw "The Mad
Lover," which do not please me so well as it used to do, only Betterton's
part still pleases me.  But here who should we have come to us but Bab.
and Betty and Talbot, the first play they were yet at; and going to see
us, and hearing by my boy, whom I sent to them, that we were here, they
come to us hither, and happened all of us to sit by my cozen Turner and
The., and we carried them home first, and then took Bab. and Betty to our
house, where they lay and supped, and pretty merry, and very fine with
their new clothes, and good comely girls they are enough, and very glad I
am of their being with us, though I would very well have been contented to
have been without the charge.  So they to bed and we to bed.

19th.  Up, and after seeing the girls, who lodged in our bed, with their
maid Martha, who hath been their father's maid these twenty years and
more, I with Lord Brouncker to White Hall, where all of us waited on the
Duke of York; and after our usual business done, W. Hewer and I to look my
wife at the Black Lion, Mercer's, but she is gone home, and so I home and
there dined, and W. Batelierand W. Hewer with us.  All the afternoon I at
the Office, while the young people went to see Bedlam, and at night home
to them and to supper, and pretty merry, only troubled with a great cold
at this time, and my eyes very bad ever since Monday night last that the
light of the candles spoiled me.  So to bed.  This morning, among other
things, talking with Sir W. Coventry, I did propose to him my putting in
to serve in Parliament, if there should, as the world begins to expect, be
a new one chose: he likes it mightily, both for the King's and Service's
sake, and the Duke of York's, and will propound it to the Duke of York:
and I confess, if there be one, I would be glad to be in.

20th.  Up, and all the morning at the office, and then home to dinner, and
after dinner out with my wife and my two girls to the Duke of York's
house, and there saw "The Gratefull Servant," a pretty good play, and
which I have forgot that ever I did see.  And thence with them to Mrs.
Gotier's, the Queen's tire-woman, for a pair of locks for my wife; she is
an oldish French woman, but with a pretty hand as most I have seen; and so
home, and to supper, W. Batelier and W. Hewer with us, and so my cold
being great, and greater by my having left my coat at my tailor's to-night
and come home in a thinner that I borrowed there, I went to bed before
them and slept pretty well.

21st (Lord's day).  Up, and with my wife and two girls to church, they
very fine; and so home, where comes my cozen Roger and his wife, I having
sent for them, to dine with us, and there comes in by chance also Mr.
Shepley, who is come to town with my Lady Paulina, who is desperately
sick, and is gone to Chelsey, to the old house where my Lord himself was
once sick, where I doubt my Lord means to visit hers more for young Mrs.
Beck's sake than for hers.  Here we dined with W. Batelier, and W. Hewer
with us, these two, girls making it necessary that they be always with us,
for I am not company light enough to be always merry with them and so sat
talking all the afternoon, and then Shepley went: away first, and then my
cozen Roger and his wife.  And so I, to my Office, to write down my
Journall, and so home to my chamber and to do a little business there, my
papers being in mighty disorder, and likely so to continue while these
girls are with us.  In the evening comes W. Batelier and his sisters and
supped and talked with us, and so spent the evening, myself being somewhat
out of order because of my eyes, which have never been well since last
Sunday's reading at Sir W. Coventry's chamber, and so after supper to bed.

22nd.  Up, and betimes to White Hall; but there the Duke of York is gone
abroad a-hunting, and therefore after a little stay there I into London,
with Sir H. Cholmly, talking all the way of Tangier matters, wherein I
find him troubled from some reports lately from Norwood (who is his great
enemy and I doubt an ill man), of some decay of the Mole, and a breach
made therein by the sea to a great value.  He set me down at the end of
Leadenhall Street, and so I home, and after dinner, with my wife, in her
morning-gown, and the two girls dressed, to Unthanke's, where my wife
dresses herself, having her gown this day laced, and a new petticoat; and
so is indeed very fine.  And in the evening I do carry them to White Hall,
and there did without much trouble get into the playhouse, there in a good
place among the Ladies of Honour, and myself also sat in the pit; and
there by and by come the King and Queen, and they begun "Bartholomew
Fayre."  But I like no play here so well as at the common playhouse;
besides that, my eyes being very ill since last Sunday and this day
se'nnight, with the light of the candles, I was in mighty pain to defend
myself now from the light of the candles.  After the play done, we met
with W. Batelier and W. Hewer and Talbot Pepys, and they follow us in a
hackney-coach: and we all stopped at Hercules' Pillars; and there I did
give them the best supper I could, and pretty merry; and so home between
eleven and twelve at night, and so to bed, mightily well pleased with this
day's work.

23rd.  Up: and to the Office, where all the morning, and then home, and
put a mouthfull of victuals in my mouth; and by a hackney-coach followed
my wife and the girls, who are gone by eleven o'clock, thinking to have
seen a new play at the Duke of York's house.  But I do find them staying
at my tailor's, the play not being to-day, and therefore I now took them
to Westminster Abbey, and there did show them all the tombs very finely,
having one with us alone, there being other company this day to see the
tombs, it being Shrove Tuesday; and here we did see, by particular favour,
the body of Queen Katherine of Valois; and I had the upper part of her
body in my hands, and I did kiss her mouth, reflecting upon it that I did
kiss a Queen,

     [Pepys's attachment to the fair sex extended even to a dead queen.
     The record of this royal salute on his natal day is very
     characteristic.  The story told him in Westminster Abbey appears to
     have been correct; for Neale informs us ("History of Westminster
     Abbey," vol. ii., p. 88) that near the south side of Henry V.'s tomb
     there was formerly a wooden chest, or coffin, wherein part of the
     skeleton and parched body of Katherine de Valois, his queen (from
     the waist upwards), was to be seen.  She was interred in January,
     1457, in the Chapel of Our Lady, at the east end of this church; but
     when that building was pulled down by her grandson, Henry VII., her
     coffin was found to be decayed, and her body was taken up, and
     placed in a chest, near her first husband's tomb.  "There," says
     Dart, "it hath ever since continued to be seen, the bones being
     firmly united, and thinly clothed with flesh, like scrapings of
     tanned leather."  This awful spectacle of frail mortality was at
     length removed from the public gaze into St. Nicholas's Chapel, and
     finally deposited under the monument of Sir George Villiers, when
     the vault was made for the remains of Elizabeth Percy, Duchess of
     Northumberland, in December, 1776.--B.]

and that this was my birth-day, thirty-six years old, that I did first
kiss a Queen.  But here this man, who seems to understand well, tells me
that the saying is not true that says she was never buried, for she was
buried; only, when Henry the Seventh built his chapel, it was taken up and
laid in this wooden coffin; but I did there see that, in it, the body was
buried in a leaden one, which remains under the body to this day. Thence
to the Duke of York's playhouse, and there, finding the play begun, we
homeward to the Glass-House,

     [Glass House Alley, Whitefriars and Blackfriars, marked the site for
     some years: The Whitefriars Glass Works of Messrs.  Powell and Sons
     are on the old site, now Temple Street.]

and there shewed my cozens the making of glass, and had several things
made with great content; and, among others, I had one or two
singing-glasses made, which make an echo to the voice, the first that ever
I saw; but so thin, that the very breath broke one or two of them.  So
home, and thence to Mr. Batelier's, where we supped, and had a good
supper, and here was Mr. Gumbleton; and after supper some fiddles, and so
to dance; but my eyes were so out of order, that I had little pleasure
this night at all, though I was glad to see the rest merry, and so about
midnight home and to bed.

24th.  Lay long in bed, both being sleepy and my eyes bad, and myself
having a great cold so as I was hardly able to speak, but, however, by and
by up and to the office, and at noon home with my people to dinner, and
then I to the office again, and there till the evening doing of much
business, and at night my wife sends for me to W. Hewer's lodging, where I
find two best chambers of his so finely furnished, and all so rich and
neat, that I was mightily pleased with him and them and here only my wife,
and I, and the two girls, and had a mighty neat dish of custards and
tarts, and good drink and talk.  And so away home to bed, with infinite
content at this his treat; for it was mighty pretty, and everything mighty
rich.

25th.  All the morning at the office.  At noon home and eat a bit myself,
and then followed my wife and girls to the Duke of York's house, and there
before one, but the house infinite full, where, by and by, the King and
Court come, it being a new play, or an old one new vamped, by Shadwell,
called "The Royall Shepherdesse;" but the silliest for words and design,
and everything, that ever I saw in my whole life, there being nothing in
the world pleasing in it, but a good martial dance of pikemen, where
Harris and another do handle their pikes in a dance to admiration; but
never less satisfied with a play in my life.  Thence to the office I, and
did a little business, and so home to supper with my girls, and pretty
merry, only my eyes, which continue very bad, and my cold, that I cannot
speak at all, do trouble me.

26th.  Was forced to send my excuse to the Duke of York for my not
attending him with my fellows this day because of my cold, and was the
less troubled because I was thereby out of the way to offer my proposals
about Pursers till the Surveyor hath delivered his notions, which he is to
do to-day about something he has to offer relating to the Navy in general,
which I would be glad to see and peruse before I offer what I have to say.
So lay long in bed, and then up and to my office, and so to dinner, and
then, though I could not speak, yet I went with my wife and girls to the
King's playhouse, to shew them that, and there saw "The Faithfull
Shepherdesse."  But, Lord!  what an empty house, there not being, as I
could tell the people, so many as to make up above L10 in the whole house!
The being of a new play at the other house, I suppose, being the cause,
though it be so silly a play that I wonder how there should be enough
people to go thither two days together, and not leave more to fill this
house.  The emptiness of the house took away our pleasure a great deal,
though I liked it the better; for that I plainly discern the musick is the
better, by how much the house the emptier. Thence home, and again to W.
Hewer's, and had a pretty little treat, and spent an hour or two, my voice
being wholly taken away with my cold, and so home and to bed.

27th.  Up, and at the office all the morning, where I could speak but a
little.  At noon home to dinner, and all the afternoon till night busy at
the office again, where forced to speak low and dictate.  But that that
troubles me most is my eyes, which are still mighty bad night and day, and
so home at night to talk and sup with my cozens, and so all of us in
mighty good humour to bed.

28th (Lord's day).  Up, and got my wife to read to me a copy of what the
Surveyor offered to the Duke of York on Friday, he himself putting it into
my hands to read; but, Lord! it is a poor, silly thing ever to think to
bring it in practice, in the King's Navy.  It is to have the Captains to
account for all stores and victuals; but upon so silly grounds, to my
thinking; and ignorance of the present instructions of Officers, that I am
ashamed to hear it.  However, I do take a copy of it, for my future use
and answering; and so to church, where, God forgive me!  I did most of the
time gaze on the fine milliner's wife, in Fenchurch Street, who was at our
church to-day; and so home to dinner.  And after dinner to write down my
Journall; and then abroad by coach with my cozens, to their father's,
where we are kindly received, but he is an great pain for his man Arthur,
who, he fears, is now dead, having been desperately sick, and speaks so
much of him that my cozen, his wife, and I did make mirth of it, and call
him Arthur O'Bradly.  After staying here a little, and eat and drank, and
she gave me some ginger-bread made in cakes, like chocolate, very good,
made by a friend, I carried him and her to my cozen Turner's, where we
staid, expecting her coming from church; but she coming not, I went to her
husband's chamber in the Temple, and thence fetched her, she having been
there alone ever since sermon staying till the evening to walk home on
foot, her horses being ill.  This I did, and brought her home.  And after
talking there awhile, and agreeing to be all merry at my house on Tuesday
next, I away home; and there spent the evening talking and reading, with
my wife and Mr. Pelling, and yet much troubled with my cold, it hardly
suffering me to speak, we to bed.





                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A. F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

   TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                 MARCH
                               1668-1669

March 1st.  Up, and to White Hall to the Committee of Tangier, but it did
not meet.  But here I do hear first that my Lady Paulina Montagu did die
yesterday; at which I went to my Lord's lodgings, but he is shut up with
sorrow, and so not to be spoken with: and therefore I returned, and to
Westminster Hall, where I have not been, I think, in some months.  And
here the Hall was very full, the King having, by Commission to some Lords
this day, prorogued the Parliament till the 19th of October next: at which
I am glad, hoping to have time to go over to France this year.  But I was
most of all surprised this morning by my Lord Bellassis, who, by
appointment, met me at Auditor Wood's, at the Temple, and tells me of a
duell designed between the Duke of Buckingham and my Lord Halifax, or Sir
W. Coventry; the challenge being carried by Harry Saville, but prevented
by my Lord Arlington, and the King told of it; and this was all the
discourse at Court this day.  But I, meeting Sir W. Coventry in the Duke
of York's chamber, he would not own it to me, but told me that he was a
man of too much peace to meddle with fighting, and so it rested: but the
talk is full in the town of the business.  Thence, having walked some
turns with my cozen Pepys, and most people, by their discourse, believing
that this Parliament will never sit more, I away to several places to look
after things against to-morrow's feast, and so home to dinner; and thence,
after noon, my wife and I out by hackneycoach, and spent the afternoon in
several places, doing several things at the 'Change and elsewhere against
to-morrow; and, among others, I did also bring home a piece of my face
cast in plaister, for to make a wizard upon, for my eyes.  And so home,
where W. Batelier come, and sat with us; and there, after many doubts, did
resolve to go on with our feast and dancing to-morrow; and so, after
supper, left the maids to make clean the house, and to lay the cloth, and
other things against to-morrow, and we to bed.

2nd.  Up, and at the office till noon, when home, and there I find my
company come, namely, Madam Turner, Dyke, The., and Betty Turner, and Mr.
Bellwood, formerly their father's clerk, but now set up for himself--a
conceited, silly fellow, but one they make mightily of--my cozen Roger
Pepys, and his wife, and two daughters.  I had a noble dinner for them, as
I almost ever had, and mighty merry, and particularly myself pleased with
looking on Betty Turner, who is mighty pretty.  After dinner, we fell one
to one talk, and another to another, and looking over my house, and
closet, and things; and The. Turner to write a letter to a lady in the
country, in which I did, now and then, put in half a dozen words, and
sometimes five or six lines, and then she as much, and made up a long and
good letter, she being mighty witty really, though troublesome-humoured
with it.  And thus till night, that our musick come, and the Office ready
and candles, and also W. Batelier and his sister Susan come, and also
Will.  Howe and two gentlemen more, strangers, which, at my request
yesterday, he did bring to dance, called Mr. Ireton and Mr. Starkey.  We
fell to dancing, and continued, only with intermission for a good supper,
till two in the morning, the musick being Greeting, and another most
excellent violin, and theorbo, the best in town.  And so with mighty
mirth, and pleased with their dancing of jigs afterwards several of them,
and, among others, Betty Turner, who did it mighty prettily; and, lastly,
W. Batelier's "Blackmore and Blackmore Mad;" and then to a country-dance
again, and so broke up with extraordinary pleasure, as being one of the
days and nights of my life spent with the greatest content; and that which
I can but hope to repeat again a few times in my whole life.  This done,
we parted, the strangers home, and I did lodge my cozen Pepys and his wife
in our blue chamber.  My cozen Turner, her sister, and The., in our best
chamber; Bab., Betty, and Betty Turner, in our own chamber; and myself and
my wife in the maid's bed, which is very good.  Our maids in the,
coachman's bed; the coachman with the boy in his settlebed, and Tom where
he uses to lie.  And so I did, to my great content, lodge at once in my
house, with the greatest ease, fifteen, and eight of them strangers of
quality.  My wife this day put on first her French gown, called a Sac,
which becomes her very well, brought her over by W. Batelier.

3rd.  Up, after a very good night's rest, and was called upon by Sir H.
Cholmly, who was with me an hour, and though acquainted did not stay to
talk with my company I had in the house, but away, and then I to my
guests, and got them to breakfast, and then parted by coaches; and I did,
in mine, carry my she-cozen Pepys and her daughters home, and there left
them, and so to White Hall, where W. Hewer met me; and he and I took a
turn in St. James's Park, and in the Mall did meet Sir W. Coventry and Sir
J. Duncomb, and did speak with them about some business before the Lords
of the Treasury; but I did find them more than usually busy, though I knew
not then the reason of it, though I guess it by what followed to-morrow.
Thence to Dancre's, the painter's, and there saw my picture of Greenwich,
finished to my very good content, though this manner of distemper do make
the figures not so pleasing as in oyle.  So to Unthanke's, and there took
up my wife, and carried her to the Duke of York's playhouse, and there saw
an old play, the first time acted these forty years, called "The Lady's
Tryall," acted only by the young people of the house; but the house very
full.  But it is but a sorry play, and the worse by how much my head is
out of humour by being a little sleepy and my legs weary since last night.
So after the play we to the New Exchange, and so called at my cozen
Turner's; and there, meeting Mr. Bellwood, did hear how my Lord Mayor,
being invited this day to dinner at the Reader's at the Temple, and
endeavouring to carry his sword up, the students did pull it down, and
forced him to go and stay all the day in a private Councillor's chamber,
until the Reader himself could get the young gentlemen to dinner; and then
my Lord Mayor did retreat out of the Temple by stealth, with his sword up.
This do make great heat among the students; and my Lord Mayor did send to
the King, and also I hear that Sir Richard Browne did cause the drums to
beat for the Train-bands, but all is over, only I hear that the students
do resolve to try the Charter of the City.  So we home, and betimes to
bed, and slept well all night.

4th.  Up, and a while at the office, but thinking to have Mr. Povy's
business to-day at the Committee for Tangier, I left the Board and away to
White Hall, where in the first court I did meet Sir Jeremy Smith, who did
tell me that Sir W. Coventry was just now sent to the Tower, about the
business of his challenging the Duke of Buckingham, and so was also Harry
Saville to the Gate-house; which, as [he is] a gentleman, and of the Duke
of York's bedchamber, I heard afterwards that the Duke of York is mightily
incensed at, and do appear very high to the King that he might not be sent
thither, but to the Tower, this being done only in contempt to him.  This
news of Sir W. Coventry did strike me to the heart, and with reason, for
by this and my Lord of Ormond's business, I do doubt that the Duke of
Buckingham will be so flushed, that he will not stop at any thing, but be
forced to do any thing now, as thinking it not safe to end here; and, Sir
W. Coventry being gone, the King will have never a good counsellor, nor
the Duke of York any sure friend to stick to him; nor any good man will be
left to advise what is good.  This, therefore, do heartily trouble me as
any thing that ever I heard. So up into the House, and met with several
people; but the Committee did not meet; and the whole House I find full of
this business of Sir W. Coventry's, and most men very sensible of the
cause and effects of it. So, meeting with my Lord Bellassis, he told me
the particulars of this matter; that it arises about a quarrel which Sir
W. Coventry had with the Duke of Buckingham about a design between the
Duke and Sir Robert Howard, to bring him into a play at the King's house,
which W. Coventry not enduring, did by H. Saville send a letter to the
Duke of Buckingham, that he had a desire to speak with him.  Upon which,
the Duke of Buckingham did bid Holmes, his champion ever since my Lord
Shrewsbury's business,

     [Charles II. wrote to his sister (Henrietta, Duchess of Orleans), on
     March 7th, 1669: "I am not sorry that Sir Will. Coventry has given
     me this good occasion by sending my Lord of Buckingham a challenge
     to turne him out of the Councill.  I do intend to turn him allso out
     of the Treasury.  The truth of it is, he has been a troublesome man
     in both places and I am well rid of him" (Julia Cartwright's
     "Madame," 1894, p.  283).]

go to him to know the business; but H. Saville would not tell it to any
but himself, and therefore did go presently to the Duke of Buckingham, and
told him that his uncle Coventry was a person of honour, and was sensible
of his Grace's liberty taken of abusing him, and that he had a desire of
satisfaction, and would fight with him.  But that here they were
interrupted by my Lord Chamberlain's coming in, who was commanded to go to
bid the Duke of Buckingham to come to the King, Holmes having discovered
it.  He told me that the King did last night, at the Council, ask the Duke
of Buckingham, upon his honour, whether he had received any challenge from
W. Coventry? which he confessed that he had; and then the King asking W.
Coventry, he told him that he did not owne what the Duke of Buckingham had
said, though it was not fit for him to give him a direct contradiction.
But, being by the King put upon declaring, upon his honour, the matter, he
answered that he had understood that many hard questions had upon this
business been moved to some lawyers, and that therefore he was unwilling
to declare any thing that might, from his own mouth, render him obnoxious
to his Majesty's displeasure, and, therefore, prayed to be excused: which
the King did think fit to interpret to be a confession, and so gave
warrant that night for his commitment to the Tower.  Being very much
troubled at this, I away by coach homewards, and directly to the Tower,
where I find him in one Mr. Bennet's house, son to Major Bayly, one of the
Officers of the Ordnance, in the Bricke Tower:

     [The Brick Tower stands on the northern wall, a little to the west
     of Martin tower, with which it communicates by a secret passage.
     It was the residence of the Master of the Ordnance, and Raleigh was
     lodged here for a time.]

where I find him busy with my Lord Halifax and his brother; so I would not
stay to interrupt them, but only to give him comfort, and offer my service
to him, which he kindly and cheerfully received, only owning his being
troubled for the King his master's displeasure, which, I suppose, is the
ordinary form and will of persons in this condition.  And so I parted,
with great content, that I had so earlily seen him there; and so going
out, did meet Sir Jer. Smith going to meet me, who had newly been with Sir
W. Coventry.  And so he and I by water to Redriffe, and so walked to
Deptford, where I have not been, I think, these twelve months: and there
to the Treasurer's house, where the Duke of York is, and his Duchess; and
there we find them at dinner in the great room, unhung; and there was with
them my Lady Duchess of Monmouth, the Countess of Falmouth, Castlemayne,
Henrietta Hide' (my Lady Hinchingbroke's sister), and my Lady
Peterborough.  And after dinner Sir Jer. Smith and I were invited down to
dinner with some of the Maids of Honour, namely, Mrs. Ogle, Blake, and
Howard, which did me good to have the honour to dine with, and look on;
and the Mother of the Maids, and Mrs. Howard, the mother of the Maid of
Honour of that name, and the Duke's housekeeper here.  Here was also
Monsieur Blancfort, Sir Richard Powell, Colonel Villers, Sir Jonathan
Trelawny, and others.  And here drank most excellent, and great variety,
and plenty of wines, more than I have drank, at once, these seven years,
but yet did me no great hurt.  Having dined and very merry, and
understanding by Blancfort how angry the Duke of York was, about their
offering to send Saville to the Gate-house, among the rogues; and then,
observing how this company, both the ladies and all, are of a gang, and
did drink a health to the union of the two brothers, and talking of others
as their enemies, they parted, and so we up; and there I did find the Dupe
of York and Duchess, with all the great ladies, sitting upon a carpet, on
the ground, there being no chairs, playing at "I love my love with an A,
because he is so and so: and I hate him with an A, because of this and
that:"  and some of them, but particularly the Duchess herself, and my
Lady Castlemayne, were very witty.  This done, they took barge, and I with
Sir J. Smith to Captain Cox's; and there to talk, and left them and other
company to drink; while I slunk out to Bagwell's; and there saw her, and
her mother, and our late maid Nell, who cried for joy to see me, but I had
no time for pleasure then nor could stay, but after drinking I back to the
yard, having a month's mind para have had a bout with Nell, which I
believe I could have had, and may another time.  So to Cox's, and thence
walked with Sir J. Smith back to Redriffe; and so, by water home, and
there my wife mighty angry for my absence, and fell mightily out, but not
being certain of any thing, but thinks only that Pierce or Knepp was
there, and did ask me, and, I perceive, the boy, many questions.  But I
did answer her; and so, after much ado, did go to bed, and lie quiet all
night; but [she] had another bout with me in the morning, but I did make
shift to quiet her, but yet she was not fully satisfied, poor wretch! in
her mind, and thinks much of my taking so much pleasure from her; which,
indeed, is a fault, though I did not design or foresee it when I went.

5th.  Up, and by water to White Hall, where did a little business with the
Duke of York at our usual attending him, and thence to my wife, who was
with my coach at Unthanke's, though not very well of those upon her, and
so home to dinner, and after dinner I to the Tower, where I find Sir W.
Coventry with abundance of company with him; and after sitting awhile, and
hearing some merry discourse, and, among others, of Mr. Brouncker's being
this day summoned to Sir William Morton, one of the judges, to give in
security for his good behaviour, upon his words the other day to Sir John
Morton, a Parliament-man, at White Hall, who had heretofore spoke very
highly against Brouncker in the House, I away, and to Aldgate, and walked
forward towards White Chapel, till my wife overtook me with the coach, it
being a mighty fine afternoon; and there we went the first time out of
town with our coach and horses, and went as far as Bow, the spring
beginning a little now to appear, though the way be dirty; and so, with
great pleasure, with the fore-part of our coach up, we spent the
afternoon.  And so in the evening home, and there busy at the Office
awhile, and so to bed, mightily pleased with being at peace with my poor
wife, and with the pleasure we may hope to have with our coach this
summer, when the weather comes to be good.

6th.  Up, and to the office, where all the morning, only before the Office
I stepped to Sir W. Coventry at the Tower, and there had a great deal of
discourse with him; among others, of the King's putting him out of the
Council yesterday, with which he is well contented, as with what else they
can strip him of, he telling me, and so hath long done, that he is weary
and surfeited of business; but he joins with me in his fears that all will
go to naught, as matters are now managed.  He told me the matter of the
play that was intended for his abuse, wherein they foolishly and sillily
bring in two tables like that which he hath made, with a round hole in the
middle, in his closet, to turn himself in; and he is to be in one of them
as master, and Sir J. Duncomb in the other, as his man or imitator: and
their discourse in those tables, about the disposing of their books and
papers, very foolish.  But that, that he is offended with, is his being
made so contemptible, as that any should dare to make a gentleman a
subject for the mirth of the world: and that therefore he had told Tom
Killigrew that he should tell his actors, whoever they were, that did
offer at any thing like representing him, that he would not complain to my
Lord Chamberlain, which was too weak, nor get him beaten, as Sir Charles
Sidly is said to do, but that he would cause his nose to be cut.  He told
me the passage at the Council much like what my Lord Bellassis told me.
He told me how that the Duke of Buckingham did himself, some time since,
desire to join with him, of all men in England, and did bid him propound
to himself to be Chief Minister of State, saying that he would bring it
about, but that he refused to have anything to do with any faction; and
that the Duke of Buckingham did, within these few days, say that, of all
men in England, he would have chosen W. Coventry to have joined entire
with.  He tells me that he fears their prevailing against the Duke of
York; and that their violence will force them to it, as being already
beyond his pardon.  He repeated to me many examples of challenging of
Privy-Councillors and others; but never any proceeded against with that
severity which he is, it never amounting to others to more than a little
confinement.  He tells me of his being weary of the Treasury, and of the
folly, ambition, and desire of popularity of Sir Thomas Clifford; and yet
the rudeness of his tongue and passions when angry.  This and much more
discourse being over I with great pleasure come home and to the office,
where all the morning, and at noon home to dinner, and thence to the
office again, where very hard at work all the afternoon till night, and
then home to my wife to read to me, and to bed, my cold having been now
almost for three days quite gone from me.  This day my wife made it appear
to me that my late entertainment this week cost me above L12, an expence
which I am almost ashamed of, though it is but once in a great while, and
is the end for which, in the most part, we live, to have such a merry day
once or twice in a man's life.

7th (Lord's day).  Up, and to the office, busy till church time, and then
to church, where a dull sermon, and so home to dinner, all alone with my
wife, and then to even my Journall to this day, and then to the Tower, to
see Sir W. Coventry, who had H. Jermin and a great many more with him, and
more, while I was there, come in; so that I do hear that there was not
less than sixty coaches there yesterday, and the other day; which I hear
also that there is a great exception taken at, by the King and the Duke of
Buckingham, but it cannot be helped.  Thence home, and with our coach out
to Suffolk Street, to see my cozen Pepys, but neither the old nor young at
home.  So to my cozen Turner's, and there staid talking a little, and then
back to Suffolk Street, where they not being yet come home I to White
Hall, and there hear that there are letters come from Sir Thomas Allen,
that he hath made some kind of peace with Algiers; upon which the King and
Duke of York, being to go out of town to-morrow, are met at my Lord
Arlington's: so I there, and by Mr. Wren was desired to stay to see if
there were occasion for their speaking with me, which I did, walking
without, with Charles Porter,

     [Charles Porter "was the son of a prebend[ary] in Norwich, and a
     'prentice boy in the city in the rebellious times.  When the
     committee house was blown up, he was very active in that rising, and
     after the soldiers came and dispersed the rout, he, as a rat among
     joint stools, shifted to and fro among the shambles, and had forty
     pistols shot at him by the troopers that rode after him to kill him
     [24th April, 1648].  In that distress he had the presence of mind to
     catch up a little child that, during the rout, was frighted, and
     stood crying in the streets, and, unobserved by the troopers, ran
     away with it.  The people opened a way for him, saying, ' Make room
     for the poor child.' Thus he got off, and while search was made for
     him in the market-place, got into the Yarmouth ferry, and at
     Yarmouth took ship and went to Holland .  .  .  .  In Holland he
     trailed a pike, and was in several actions as a common soldier.  At
     length he kept a cavalier eating-house; but, his customers being
     needy, he soon broke, and came for England, and being a genteel
     youth, was taken in among the chancery clerks, and got to be under a
     master .  .  .  .  His industry was great; and he had an acquired
     dexterity and skill in the forms of the court; and although he was a
     bon companion, and followed much the bottle, yet he made such
     dispatches as satisfied his clients, especially the clerks, who knew
     where to find him.  His person was florid, and speech prompt and
     articulate.  But his vices, in the way of women and the bottle, were
     so ungoverned, as brought him to a morsel .  .  .  .  When the Lord
     Keeper North had the Seal, who from an early acquaintance had a
     kindness for him which was well known, and also that he was well
     heard, as they call it, business flowed in to him very fast, and yet
     he could scarce keep himself at liberty to follow his business ....
     At the Revolution, when his interest fell from, and his debts began
     to fall upon him, he was at his wits' end ....  His character for
     fidelity, loyalty, and facetious conversation was without
     exception"--Roger North's Lives of the Norths (Lord Keeper
     Guilford), ed.  Jessopp, vol. i., pp. 381-2.  He was originally made
     Lord Chancellor of Ireland in the reign of James II., during the
     viceroyalty of Lord Clarendon, 1686, when he was knighted.  "He
     was," says Burnet, "a man of ready wit, and being poor was thought a
     person fit to be made a tool of.  When Clarendon was recalled,
     Porter was also displaced, and Fitton was made chancellor, a man who
     knew no other law than the king's pleasure" ("Own Time").  Sir
     Charles Porter was again made Lord Chancellor of Ireland in 1690,
     and in this same year he acted as one of the Lords Justices.  This
     note of Lord Braybrooke's is retained and added to, but the
     reference may after all be to another Charles Porter.  See vol.
     iii., p. 122, and vol. vi., p. 98.]

talking of a great many things: and I perceive all the world is against
the Duke of Buckingham his acting thus high, and do prophesy nothing but
ruin from it: But he do well observe that the church lands cannot
certainly come to much, if the King shall [be] persuaded to take them;
they being leased out for long leases.  By and by, after two hours' stay,
they rose, having, as Wren tells me, resolved upon sending six ships to
the Streights forthwith, not being contented with the peace upon the terms
they demand, which are, that all our ships, where any Turks or Moores
shall be found slaves, shall be prizes; which will imply that they, must
be searched.  I hear that to-morrow the King and the Duke of York set out
for Newmarket, by three in the morning; to some foot and horse-races, to
be abroad ten or twelve days: So I away, without seeing the Duke of York;
but Mr. Wren showed me the Order of Council about the balancing the
Storekeeper's accounts, passed the Council in the very terms I drew it,
only I did put in my name as he that presented the book of Hosier's
preparing, and that is left out--I mean, my name--which is no great
matter.  So to my wife to Suffolk Streete, where she was gone, and there I
found them at supper, and eat a little with them, and so home, and there
to bed, my cold pretty well gone.

8th.  Up, and with W. Hewer by hackney coach to White Hall, where the King
and the Duke of York is gone by three in the morning, and had the
misfortune to be overset with the Duke of York, the Duke of Monmouth, and
the Prince, at the King's Gate' in Holborne; and the King all dirty, but
no hurt.  How it come to pass I know not, but only it was dark, and the
torches did not, they say, light the coach as they should do.  I thought
this morning to have seen my Lord Sandwich before he went out of town, but
I come half an hour too late; which troubles me, I having not seen him
since my Lady Palls died.  So W. Hewer and I to the Harp-and-Ball, to
drink my morning draught, having come out in haste; and there met with
King, the Parliament-man, with whom I had some impertinent talk.  And so
to the Privy Seal Office, to examine what records I could find there, for
my help in the great business I am put upon, of defending the present
constitution of the Navy; but there could not have liberty without order
from him that is in present waiting, Mr. Bickerstaffe, who is out of town.
This I did after I had walked to the New Exchange and there met Mr. Moore,
who went with me thither, and I find him the same discontented poor man as
ever.  He tells me that Mr. Shepley is upon being turned away from my
Lord's family, and another sent down, which I am sorry for; but his age
and good fellowship have almost made him fit for nothing. Thence, at
Unthanke's my wife met me, and with our coach to my cozen Turner's and
there dined, and after dinner with my wife alone to the King's playhouse,
and there saw "The Mocke Astrologer," which I have often seen, and but an
ordinary play; and so to my cozen Turner's again, where we met Roger
Pepys, his wife, and two daughters, and there staid and talked a little,
and then home, and there my wife to read to me, my eyes being sensibly
hurt by the too great lights of the playhouse.  So to supper and to bed.

9th.  Up, and to the Tower; and there find Sir W. Coventry alone, writing
down his journal, which, he tells me, he now keeps of the material things;
upon which I told him, and he is the only man I ever told it to, I think,
that I kept it most strictly these eight or ten years; and I am sorry
almost that I told it him, it not being necessary, nor may be convenient
to have it known.  Here he showed me the petition he had sent to the King
by my Lord Keeper, which was not to desire any admittance to employment,
but submitting himself therein humbly to his Majesty; but prayed the
removal of his displeasure, and that he might be set free. He tells me
that my Lord Keeper did acquaint the King with the substance of it, not
shewing him the petition; who answered, that he was disposing of his
employments, and when that was done, he might be led to discharge him: and
this is what he expects, and what he seems to desire.  But by this
discourse he was pleased to take occasion to shew me and read to me his
account, which he hath kept by him under his own hand, of all his
discourse, and the King's answers to him, upon the great business of my
Lord Clarendon, and how he had first moved the Duke of York with it twice,
at good distance, one after another, but without success; shewing me
thereby the simplicity and reasons of his so doing, and the manner of it;
and the King's accepting it, telling him that he was not satisfied in his
management, and did discover some dissatisfaction against him for his
opposing the laying aside of my Lord Treasurer, at Oxford, which was a
secret the King had not discovered.  And really I was mighty proud to be
privy to this great transaction, it giving me great conviction of the
noble nature and ends of Sir W. Coventry in it, and considerations in
general of the consequences of great men's actions, and the uncertainty of
their estates, and other very serious considerations.  From this to other
discourse, and so to the Office, where we sat all the morning, and after
dinner by coach to my cozen Turner's, thinking to have taken the young
ladies to a play; but The. was let blood to-day; and so my wife and I
towards the King's playhouse, and by the way found Betty [Turner], and
Bab., and Betty Pepys staying for us; and so took them all to see
"Claricilla," which do not please me almost at all, though there are some
good things in it.  And so to my cozen Turner's again, and there find my
Lady Mordaunt, and her sister Johnson; and by and by comes in a gentleman,
Mr. Overbury, a pleasant man, who plays most excellently on the
flagelette, a little one, that sounded as low as one of mine, and mighty
pretty.  Hence by and by away, and with my wife, and Bab. and Betty Pepys,
and W. Hewer, whom I carried all this day with me, to my cozen
Stradwick's, where I have not been ever since my brother Tom died, there
being some difference between my father and them, upon the account of my
cozen Scott; and I was glad of this opportunity of seeing them, they being
good and substantial people, and kind, and here met my cozen Roger and his
wife, and my cozen Turner, and here, which I never did before, I drank a
glass, of a pint, I believe, at one draught, of the juice of oranges, of
whose peel they make comfits; and here they drink the juice as wine, with
sugar, and it is very fine drink; but, it being new, I was doubtful
whether it might not do me hurt.  Having staid a while, my wife and I
back, with my cozen Turner, etc., to her house, and there we took our
leaves of my cozen Pepys, who goes with his wife and two daughters for
Impington tomorrow.  They are very good people, and people I love, and am
obliged to, and shall have great pleasure in their friendship, and
particularly in hers, she being an understanding and good woman.  So away
home, and there after signing my letters, my eyes being bad, to supper and
to bed.

10th.  Up, and by hackney-coach to Auditor Beale's Office, in Holborne, to
look for records of the Navy, but he was out of the way, and so forced to
go next to White Hall, to the Privy Seal; and, after staying a little
there, then to Westminster, where, at the Exchequer, I met with Mr.
Newport and Major Halsey; and, after doing a little business with Mr.
Burges, we by water to White Hall, where I made a little stop: and so with
them by coach to Temple Bar, where, at the Sugar Loaf we dined, and W.
Hewer with me; and there comes a companion of theirs, Colonel Vernon, I
think they called him; a merry good fellow, and one that was very plain in
cursing the Duke of Buckingham, and discoursing of his designs to ruin us,
and that ruin must follow his counsels, and that we are an undone people.
To which the others concurred, but not so plain, but all vexed at Sir W.
Coventry's being laid aside: but Vernon, he is concerned, I perceive, for
my Lord Ormond's being laid aside; but their company, being all old
cavaliers, were very pleasant to hear how they swear and talk.  But
Halsey, to my content, tells me that my Lord Duke of Albemarle says that
W. Coventry being gone, nothing will be well done at the Treasury, and I
believe it; but they do all talk as that Duncombe, upon some pretence or
other, must follow him.  Thence to Auditor Beale's, his house and office,
but not to be found, and therefore to the Privy Seale at White Hall,
where, with W. Hewer and Mr. Gibson, who met me at the Temple, I spent the
afternoon till evening looking over the books there, and did find several
things to my purpose, though few of those I designed to find, the books
being kept there in no method at all.  Having done there, we by water
home, and there find my cozen Turner and her two daughters come to see us;
and there, after talking a little, I had my coach ready, and my wife and
I, they going home, we out to White Chapel to take a little ayre, though
yet the dirtiness of the road do prevent most of the pleasure, which
should have been from this tour.  So home, and my wife to read to me till
supper, and to bed.

11th.  Up, and to Sir W. Coventry, to the Tower, where I walked and talked
with him an hour alone, from one good thing to another: who tells me that
he hears that the Commission is gone down to the King, with a blank to
fill, for his place in the Treasury: and he believes it will be filled
with one of our Treasurers of the Navy, but which he knows not, but he
believes it will be Osborne.  We walked down to the Stone Walk, which is
called, it seems, my Lord of Northumberland's walk, being paved by some
one of that title, that was prisoner there: and at the end of it, there is
a piece of iron upon the wall, with, his armes upon it, and holes to put
in a peg, for every turn that they make upon that walk. So away to the
Office, where busy all the morning, and so to dinner, and so very busy all
the afternoon, at my Office, late; and then home tired, to supper, with
content with my wife, and so to bed, she pleasing me, though I dare not
own it, that she hath hired a chambermaid; but she, after many
commendations, told me that she had one great fault, and that was, that
she was very handsome, at which I made nothing, but let her go on; but
many times to-night she took occasion to discourse of her handsomeness,
and the danger she was in by taking her, and that she did doubt yet
whether it would be fit for her, to take her.  But I did assure her of my
resolutions to have nothing to do with her maids, but in myself I was glad
to have the content to have a handsome one to look on.

12th.  Up, and abroad, with my own coach, to Auditor Beale's house, and
thence with W. Hewer to his Office, and there with great content spent all
the morning looking over the Navy accounts of several years, and the
several patents of the Treasurers, which was more than I did hope to have
found there.  About noon I ended there, to my great content, and giving
the clerks there 20s. for their trouble, and having sent for W. Howe to me
to discourse with him about the Patent Office records, wherein I
remembered his brother to be concerned, I took him in my coach with W.
Hewer and myself towards Westminster; and there he carried me to Nott's,
the famous bookbinder, that bound for my Lord Chancellor's library; and
here I did take occasion for curiosity to bespeak a book to be bound, only
that I might have one of his binding.  Thence back to Graye's Inne: and,
at the next door, at a cook's-shop of Howe's acquaintance, we bespoke
dinner, it being now two o'clock; and in the meantime he carried us into
Graye's Inne, to his chamber, where I never was before; and it is very
pretty, and little, and neat, as he was always.  And so, after a little
stay, and looking over a book or two there, we carried a piece of my Lord
Coke with us, and to our dinner, where, after dinner, he read at my desire
a chapter in my Lord Coke about perjury, wherein I did learn a good deal
touching oaths, and so away to the Patent Office; in Chancery Lane, where
his brother Jacke, being newly broke by running in debt, and growing an
idle rogue, he is forced to hide himself; and W. Howe do look after the
Office, and here I did set a clerk to look out some things for me in their
books, while W. Hewer and I to the Crowne Offices where we met with
several good things that I most wanted, and did take short notes of the
dockets, and so back to the Patent Office, and did the like there, and by
candle-light ended.  And so home, where, thinking to meet my wife with
content, after my pains all this day, I find her in her closet, alone, in
the dark, in a hot fit of railing against me, upon some news she has this
day heard of Deb.'s living very fine, and with black spots, and speaking
ill words of her mistress, which with good reason might vex her; and the
baggage is to blame, but, God knows, I know nothing of her, nor what she
do, nor what becomes of her, though God knows that my devil that is within
me do wish that I could.  Yet God I hope will prevent me therein, for I
dare not trust myself with it if I should know it; but, what with my high
words, and slighting it, and then serious, I did at last bring her to very
good and kind terms, poor heart!  and I was heartily glad of it, for I do
see there is no man can be happier than myself, if I will, with her.  But
in her fit she did tell me what vexed me all the night, that this had put
her upon putting off her handsome maid and hiring another that was full of
the small pox, which did mightily vex me, though I said nothing, and do
still.  So down to supper, and she to read to me, and then with all
possible kindness to bed.

13th.  Up, and to the Tower, to see Sir W. Coventry, and with him talking
of business of the Navy, all alone, an hour, he taking physic.  And so
away to the Office, where all the morning, and then home to dinner, with
my people, and so to the Office again, and there all the afternoon till
night, when comes, by mistake, my cozen Turner, and her two daughters,
which love such freaks, to eat some anchovies and ham of bacon with me,
instead of noon, at dinner, when I expected them.  But, however, I had
done my business before they come, and so was in good humour enough to be
with them, and so home to them to supper, and pretty merry, being pleased
to see Betty Turner, which hath something mighty pretty.  But that which
put me in good humour, both at noon and night, is the fancy that I am this
day made a Captain of one of the King's ships, Mr. Wren having this day
sent me, the Duke of York's commission to be Captain of "The Jerzy," in
order to my being of a Court-martiall for examining the loss of "The
Defyance," and other things; which do give me occasion of much mirth, and
may be of some use to me, at least I shall get a little money by it for
the time I have it; it being designed that I must really be a Captain to
be able to sit in this Court.  They staid till about eight at night, and
then away, and my wife to read to me, and then to bed in mighty good
humour, but for my eyes.

14th (Lord's day).  Up, and to my office with Tom, whom I made to read to
me the books of Propositions in the time of the Grand Commission, which I
did read a good part of before church, and then with my wife to church,
where I did see my milliner's wife come again, which pleased me; but I
durst not be seen to mind her for fear of my wife's seeing me, though the
woman I did never speak twenty words to, and that but only in her
husband's shop.  But so fearful I am of discontenting my wife, or giving
her cause of jealousy.  But here we heard a most excellent good sermon of
Mr. Gifford's, upon the righteousness of Scribes and Pharisees.  So home
to dinner and to work again, and so till dinner, where W. Howe come and
dined with me, and staid and read in my Lord Cooke upon his chapter of
perjury again, which pleased me, and so parted, and I to my office, and
there made an end of the books of Propositions, which did please me
mightily to hear read, they being excellently writ and much to the
purpose, and yet so as I think I shall make good use of his defence of our
present constitution.  About four o'clock took coach to visit my cozen
Turner, and I out with her to make a visit, but the lady she went to see
was abroad.  So back and to talk with her and her daughters, and then
home, and she and I to walk in the garden, the first time this year, the
weather being mighty temperate; and then I to write down my Journall for
the last week, my eyes being very bad, and therefore I forced to find a
way to use by turns with my tube, one after another, and so home to supper
and to bed.  Before I went from my office this night I did tell Tom my
resolution not to keep him after Jane was gone, but shall do well by him,
which pleases him; and I think he will presently marry her, and go away
out of my house with her.

15th.  Up, and by water with W. Hewer to the Temple; and thence to the
Rolls, where I made inquiry for several rolls, and was soon informed in
the manner of it: and so spent the whole morning with W. Hewer, he taking
little notes in short-hand, while I hired a clerk there to read to me
about twelve or more several rolls which I did call for: and it was great
pleasure to me to see the method wherein their rolls are kept; that when
the Master of the Office, one Mr. Case, do call for them, who is a man
that I have heretofore known by coming to my Lord of Sandwich's, he did
most readily turn to them.  At noon they shut up; and W. Hewer and I did
walk to the Cocke, at the end of Suffolke Streete, where I never was, a
great ordinary, mightily cried up, and there bespoke a pullett; which
while dressing, he and I walked into St. James's Park, and thence back,
and dined very handsome, with a good soup, and a pullet, for 4s. 6d.  the
whole.  Thence back to the Rolls, and did a little more business: and so
by water to White Hall, whither.  I went to speak with Mr. Williamson,
that if he hath any papers relating to the Navy I might see them, which he
promises me: and so by water home, with great content for what I have this
day found, having got almost as much as I desire of the history of the
Navy, from 1618 to 1642, when the King and Parliament fell out.  So home,
and did get my wife to read, and so to supper and to bed.

16th.  Up, and to the office, after having visited Sir W. Coventry at the
Tower, and walked with him upon the Stone Walk, alone, till other company
come to him, and had very good discourse with him.  At noon home, where my
wife and Jane gone abroad, and Tom, in order to their buying of things for
their wedding, which, upon my discourse the last night, is now resolved to
be done, upon the 26th of this month, the day of my solemnity for my
cutting of the stone, when my cozen Turner must be with us.  My wife,
therefore, not at dinner; and comes to me Mr. Evelyn of Deptford, a worthy
good man, and dined with me, but a bad dinner; who is grieved for, and
speaks openly to me his thoughts of, the times, and our ruin approaching;
and all by the folly of the King.  His business to me was about some
ground of his, at Deptford, next to the King's yard: and after dinner we
parted.  My sister Michell coming also this day to see us, whom I left
there, and I away down by water with W. Hewer to Woolwich, where I have
not been I think more than a year or two, and here I saw, but did not go
on board, my ship "The Jerzy," she lying at the wharf under repair.  But
my business was to speak with Ackworth, about some old things and passages
in the Navy, for my information therein, in order to my great business now
of stating the history of the Navy.  This I did; and upon the whole do
find that the late times, in all their management, were not more husbandly
than we; and other things of good content to me. His wife was sick, and so
I could not see her.  Thence, after seeing Mr. Sheldon, I to Greenwich by
water, and there landed at the King's house, which goes on slow, but is
very pretty.

     [The old palace at Greenwich had just been pulled down, and a new
     building commenced by Charles II., only one wing of which was
     completed, at the expense of L36,000, under the auspices of Webb,
     Inigo Jones's kinsman and executor.  In 1694 the unfinished edifice
     was granted by William and Mary to trustees for the use and service
     of a Naval Hospital; and it has been repeatedly enlarged and
     improved till it has arrived at its present splendour.--B.]

I to the Park, there to see the prospect of the hill, to judge of Dancre's
picture, which he hath made thereof for me: and I do like it very well:
and it is a very pretty place.  Thence to Deptford, but staid not,
Uthwayte being out of the way: and so home, and then to the Ship Tavern,
Morrice's, and staid till W. Hewer fetched his uncle Blackburne by
appointment to me, to discourse of the business of the Navy in the late
times; and he did do it, by giving me a most exact account in writing, of
the several turns in the Admiralty and Navy, of the persons employed
therein, from the beginning of the King's leaving the Parliament, to his
Son's coming in, to my great content; and now I am fully informed in all I
at present desire.  We fell to other talk; and I find by him that the
Bishops must certainly fall, and their hierarchy; these people have got so
much ground upon the King and kingdom as is not to be got again from them:
and the Bishops do well deserve it.  But it is all the talk, I find, that
Dr. Wilkins, my friend, the Bishop of Chester, shall be removed to
Winchester, and be Lord Treasurer.  Though this be foolish talk, yet I do
gather that he is a mighty rising man, as being a Latitudinarian, and the
Duke of Buckingham his great friend.  Here we staid talking till to at
night, where I did never drink before since this man come to the house,
though for his pretty wife's sake I do fetch my wine from this, whom I
could not nevertheless get para see to-night, though her husband did seem
to call for her.  So parted here and I home, and to supper and to bed.

17th.  Up, and by water to see Mr. Wren, and then Mr. Williamson, who did
shew me the very original bookes of propositions made by the Commissioners
for the Navy, in 1618, to my great content; but no other Navy papers he
could now shew me.  Thence to Westminster by water and to the Hall, where
Mrs. Michell do surprize me with the news that Doll Lane is suddenly
brought to bed at her sister's lodging, and gives it out that she is
married, but there is no such thing certainly, she never mentioning it
before, but I have cause to rejoice that I have not seen her a great
while, she having several times desired my company, but I doubt to an evil
end.  Thence to the Exchequer, where W. Hewer come to me, and after a
little business did go by water home, and there dined, and took my wife by
a hackney to the King's playhouse, and saw "The Coxcomb," the first time
acted, but an old play, and a silly one, being acted only by the young
people.  Here met cozen Turner and The. So parted there from them, and
home by coach and to my letters at the office, where pretty late, and so
to supper and to bed.

18th.  Up, and to see Sir W. Coventry, and walked with him a good while in
the Stone Walk: and brave discourse about my Lord Chancellor, and his ill
managements and mistakes, and several things of the Navy, and thence to
the office, where we sat all the morning, and so home to dinner, where my
wife mighty finely dressed, by a maid that she hath taken, and is to come
to her when Jane goes; and the same she the other day told me of, to be so
handsome.  I therefore longed to see her, but did not till after dinner,
that my wife and I going by coach, she went with us to Holborne, where we
set her down.  She is a mighty proper maid, and pretty comely, but so so;
but hath a most pleasing tone of voice, and speaks handsomely, but hath
most great hands, and I believe ugly; but very well dressed, and good
clothes, and the maid I believe will please me well enough.  Thence to
visit Ned Pickering and his lady, and Creed and his wife, but the former
abroad, and the latter out of town, gone to my Lady Pickering's in
Northamptonshire, upon occasion of the late death of their brother, Oliver
Pickering, a youth, that is dead of the smallpox.  So my wife and I to
Dancre's to see the pictures; and thence to Hyde Park, the first time we
were there this year, or ever in our own coach, where with mighty pride
rode up and down, and many coaches there; and I thought our horses and
coach as pretty as any there, and observed so to be by others.  Here staid
till night, and so home, and to the office, where busy late, and so home
to supper and to bed, with great content, but much business in my head of
the office, which troubles me.

19th.  Up, and by water to White Hall, there to the Lords of the Treasury,
and did some business, and here Sir Thomas Clifford did speak to me, as
desirous that I would some time come and confer with him about the Navy,
which I am glad of, but will take the direction of the Duke of York before
I do it, though I would be glad to do something to secure myself, if I
could, in my employment.  Thence to the plaisterer's, and took my face,
and my Lord Duke of Albemarle's, home with me by coach, they being done to
my mind; and mighty glad I am of understanding this way of having the
pictures of any friends.  At home to dinner, where Mr. Sheres dined with
us, but after dinner I left him and my wife, and with Commissioner
Middleton and Kempthorne to a Court-martiall, to which, by virtue of my
late Captainship, I am called, the first I was ever at; where many
Commanders, and Kempthorne president.  Here was tried a difference between
Sir L. Van Hemskirke, the Dutch Captain who commands "The Nonsuch," built
by his direction, and his Lieutenant; a drunken kind of silly business.
We ordered the Lieutenant to ask him pardon, and have resolved to lay
before the Duke of York what concerns the Captain, which was striking of
his Lieutenant and challenging him to fight, which comes not within any
article of the laws martiall.  But upon discourse the other day with Sir
W. Coventry, I did advise Middleton, and he and I did forbear to give
judgment, but after the debate did withdraw into another cabin, the Court
being held in one of the yachts, which was on purpose brought up over
against St. Katharine's, it being to be feared that this precedent of our
being made Captains, in order to the trying of the loss of "The Defyance,"
wherein we are the proper persons to enquire into the want of instructions
while ships do lie in harbour, evil use might be hereafter made of the
precedent by putting the Duke of Buckingham, or any of these rude fellows
that now are uppermost, to make packed Courts, by Captains made on purpose
to serve their turns.  The other cause was of the loss of "The Providence"
at Tangier, where the Captain's being by chance on shore may prove very
inconvenient to him, for example's sake, though the man be a good man, and
one whom, for Norwood's sake, I would be kind to; but I will not offer any
thing to the excusing such a miscarriage.  He is at present confined, till
he can bring better proofs on his behalf of the reasons of his being on
shore.  So Middleton and I away to the Office; and there I late busy,
making my people, as I have done lately, to read Mr. Holland's' Discourse
of the Navy, and what other things I can get to inform me fully in all;
and here late, about eight at night, comes Mr. Wren to me, who had been at
the Tower to Coventry.  He come only to see how matters go, and tells me,
as a secret, that last night the Duke of York's closet was broken open,
and his cabinets, and shut again, one of them that the rogue that did it
hath left plate and a watch behind him, and therefore they fear that it
was only for papers, which looks like a very malicious business in design,
to hurt the Duke of York; but they cannot know that till the Duke of York
comes to town about the papers, and therefore make no words of it.  He
gone, I to work again, and then to supper at home, and to bed.

20th.  Up, and to the Tower, to W. Coventry, and there walked with him
alone, on the Stone Walk, till company come to him; and there about the
business of the Navy discoursed with him, and about my Lord Chancellor and
Treasurer; that they were against the war [with the Dutch] at first,
declaring, as wise men and statesmen, at first to the King, that they
thought it fit to have a war with them at some time or other, but that it
ought not to be till we found the Crowns of Spain and France together by
the Bares, the want of which did ruin our war.  But then he told me that,
a great deal before the war, my Lord Chancellor did speak of a war with
some heat, as a thing to be desired, and did it upon a belief that he
could with his speeches make the Parliament give what money he pleased,
and do what he would, or would make the King desire; but he found himself
soon deceived of the Parliament, they having a long time before his
removal been cloyed with his speeches and good words, and were come to
hate him.  Sir W. Coventry did tell me it, as the wisest thing that ever
was said to the King by any statesman of his time, and it was by my Lord
Treasurer that is dead, whom, I find, he takes for a very great
statesman--that when the King did shew himself forward for passing the Act
of Indemnity, he did advise the King that he would hold his hand in doing
it, till he had got his power restored, that had been diminished by the
late times, and his revenue settled in such a manner as he might depend on
himself, without resting upon Parliaments,--and then pass it. But my Lord
Chancellor, who thought he could have the command of Parliaments for ever,
because for the King's sake they were awhile willing to grant all the King
desired, did press for its being done; and so it was, and the King from
that time able to do nothing with the Parliament almost.  Thence to the
office, where sat all the forenoon, and then home to dinner, and so to the
office, where late busy, and so home, mightily pleased with the news
brought me to-night, that the King and Duke of York are come back this
afternoon, and no sooner come, but a warrant was sent to the Tower for the
releasing Sir W. Coventry; which do put me in some hopes that there may
be, in this absence, some accommodation made between the Duke of York and
the Duke of Buckingham and; Arlington.  So home, to supper, and to bed.

21st (Lord's day).  Up, and by water over to Southwarke; and then, not
getting a boat, I forced to walk to Stangate; and so over to White Hall,
in a scull; where up to the Duke of York's dressing-room, and there met
Harry Saville, and understand that Sir W. Coventry is come to his house
last night.  I understand by Mr. Wren that his friends having, by
Secretary Trevor and my Lord Keeper, applied to the King upon his first
coming home, and a promise made that he should be discharged this day, my
Lord Arlington did anticipate them, by sending a warrant presently for his
discharge which looks a little like kindness, or a desire of it; which God
send! though I fear the contrary: however, my heart is glad that he is
out.  Thence up and down the House.  Met with Mr. May, who tells me the
story of his being put by Sir John Denham's place, of Surveyor of the
King's Works, who it seems, is lately dead, by the unkindness of the Duke
Buckingham, who hath brought in Dr. Wren: though, he tells me, he hath
been his servant for twenty years together in all his wants and dangers,
saving him from want of bread by his care and management, and with a
promise of having his help in his advancement, and an engagement under his
hand for L1000 not yet paid, and yet the Duke of Buckingham so ungrateful
as to put him by: which is an ill thing, though Dr. Wren is a worthy man.
But he tells me that the King is kind to him, and hath promised him a
pension of L300 a-year out of the Works; which will be of more content to
him than the place, which, under their present wants of money, is a place
that disobliges most people, being not able to do what they desire to
their lodgings.  Here meeting with Sir H. Cholmly and Povy, that tell me
that my Lord Middleton is resolved in the Cabal that he shall not go to
Tangier; and that Sir Edward Harlow [Harley], whom I know not, is
propounded to go, who was Governor of Dunkirke, and, they say, a most
worthy brave man, which I shall be very glad of.  So by water (H. Russell
coming for me) home to dinner, where W. Howe comes to dine with me; and
after dinner propounds to me my lending him L500, to help him to purchase
a place--the Master of the Patent Office, of Sir Richard Piggott.  I did
give him a civil answer, but shall think twice of it; and the more,
because of the changes we are like to have in the Navy, which will not
make it fit for me to divide the little I have left more than I have done,
God knowing what my condition is, I having not attended, and now not being
able to examine what my state is, of my accounts, and being in the world,
which troubles me mightily.  He gone, I to the office to enter my journall
for a week.  News is lately come of the Algerines taking L3000 in money,
out of one of our Company's East India ships, outward bound, which will
certainly make the war last; which I am sorry for, being so poor as we
are, and broken in pieces.  At night my wife to read to me, and then to
supper, where Pelling comes to see and sup with us, and I find that he is
assisting my wife in getting a licence to our young people to be married
this Lent, which is resolved shall be done upon Friday next, my great day,
or feast, for my being cut of the stone.  So after supper to bed, my eyes
being very bad.

22nd.  Up, and by water, with W. Newer, to White Hall, there to attend the
Lords of the Treasury; but, before they sat, I did make a step to see Sir
W. Coventry at his house, where, I bless God! he is come again; but in my
way I met him, and so he took me into his coach and carried me to White
Hall, and there set me down where he ought not--at least, he hath not yet
leave to come, nor hath thought fit to ask it, hearing that Henry Saville
is not only denied to kiss the King's hand, but the King, being asked it
by the Duke of York, did deny it, and directed that the Duke shall not
receive him, to wait upon him in his chamber, till further orders.  Sir W.
Coventry told me that he was going to visit Sir John Trevor, who hath been
kind to him; and he shewed me a long list of all his friends that he must
this week make visits to, that come to visit him in the Tower; and seems
mighty well satisfied with his being out of business, but I hope he will
not long be so; at least, I do believe that all must go to rat if the King
do not come to see the want of such a servant.  Thence to the
Treasury-Chamber, and there all the morning to my great grief, put to do
Sir G. Downing's work of dividing the Customes for this year, between the
Navy, the Ordnance and Tangier: but it did so trouble my eyes, that I had
rather have given L20 than have had it to do; but I did thereby oblige Sir
Thomas Clifford and Sir J. Duncombe, and so am glad of the opportunity to
recommend myself to the former for the latter I need not, he loving me
well already.  At it till noon, here being several of my brethren with me
but doing nothing, but I all.  But this day I did also represent to our
Treasurers, which was read here, a state of the charge of the Navy, and
what the expence of it this year would likely be; which is done so as it
will appear well done and to my honour, for so the Lords did take it: and
I oblige the Treasurers by doing it, at their request.  Thence with W.
Hewer at noon to Unthanke's, where my wife stays for me and so to the
Cocke, where there was no room, and thence to King Street, to several
cook's shops, where nothing to be had; and at last to the corner shop,
going down Ivy Lane, by my Lord of Salisbury's, and there got a good
dinner, my wife, and W. Newer, and I: and after dinner she, with her
coach, home; and he and I to look over my papers for the East India
Company, against the afternoon: which done, I with them to White Hall, and
there to the Treasury-Chamber, where the East India Company and three
Councillors pleaded against me alone, for three or four hours, till seven
at night, before the Lords; and the Lords did give me the conquest on
behalf of the King, but could not come to any conclusion, the Company
being stiff: and so I think we shall go to law with them.  This done, and
my eyes mighty bad with this day's work, I to Mr. Wren's, and then up to
the Duke of York, and there with Mr. Wren did propound to him my going to
Chatham to-morrow with Commissioner Middleton, and so this week to make
the pay there, and examine the business of "The Defyance" being lost, and
other businesses, which I did the rather, that I might be out of the way
at the wedding, and be at a little liberty myself for a day, or two, to
find a little pleasure, and give my eyes a little ease.  The Duke of York
mightily satisfied with it; and so away home, where my wife troubled at my
being so late abroad, poor woman! though never more busy, but I satisfied
her; and so begun to put things in order for my journey to-morrow, and so,
after supper, to bed.

23rd.  Up, and to my office to do a little business there, and so, my
things being all ready, I took coach with Commissioner Middleton, Captain
Tinker, and Mr. Huchinson, a hackney coach, and over the bridge, and so
out towards Chatham, and; dined at Dartford, where we staid an hour or
two, it being a cold day; and so on, and got to Chatham just at night,
with very good discourse by the way, but mostly of matters of religion,
wherein Huchinson his vein lies.  After supper, we fell to talk of spirits
and apparitions, whereupon many pretty, particular stories were told, so
as to make me almost afeard to lie alone, but for shame I could not help
it; and so to bed and, being sleepy, fell soon to rest, and so rested
well.

24th.  Up, and walked abroad in the garden, and find that Mrs. Tooker has
not any of her daughters here as I expected and so walked to the yard,
leaving Middleton at the pay, and there I only walked up and down the
yard, and then to the Hill-House, and there did give order for the coach
to be made ready; and got Mr. Gibson, whom I carried with me, to go with
me and Mr. Coney, the surgeon, towards Maydston which I had a mighty mind
to see, and took occasion, in my way, at St. Margett's, to pretend to call
to see Captain Allen to see whether Mrs. Jowles, his daughter, was there;
and there his wife come to the door, he being at London, and through a
window, I spied Jowles, but took no notice of he but made excuse till
night, and then promised to come and see Mrs. Allen again, and so away, it
being a mighty cold and windy, but clear day; and had the pleasure of
seeing the Medway running, winding up and down mightily, and a very  fine
country; and I went a little out of the way to have visited Sir John
Bankes, but he at London; but here I had a sight of his seat and house,
the outside, which is an old abbey just like Hinchingbroke, and as good at
least, and mighty finely placed by the river; and he keeps the grounds
about it, and walls and the house, very handsome: I was mightily pleased
with the sight of it.  Thence to Maydstone, which I had a mighty mind to
see, having never been there; and walked all up and down the town, and up
to the top of the steeple, and had a noble view, and then down again: and
in the town did see an old man beating of flax, and did step into the barn
and give him money, and saw that piece of husbandry which I never saw, and
it is very pretty: in the street also I did buy and send to our inne, the
Bell, a dish of fresh fish.  And so, having walked all round the town, and
found it very pretty, as most towns I ever saw, though not very big, and
people of good fashion in it, we to our inne to dinner, and had a good
dinner; and after dinner a barber come to me, and there trimmed me, that I
might be clean against night, to go to Mrs. Allen.  And so, staying till
about four o'clock, we set out, I alone in the coach going and coming; and
in our way back, I 'light out of the way to see a Saxon monument,

     [Kits-Cotty House, a cromlech in Aylesford parish, Kent, on a
     hillside adjacent to the river Medway, three and a half miles N. by
     W. of Maidstone.  It consists of three upright stones and an
     overlying one, and forms a small chamber open in front.  It is
     supposed to have been the centre of a group of monuments indicating
     the burial-place of the Belgian settlers in this part of Britain.
     Other stones of a similar character exist in the neighbourhood.]

as they say, of a King, which is three stones standing upright, and a
great round one lying on them, of great bigness, although not so big as
those on Salisbury Plain; but certainly it is a thing of great antiquity,
and I mightily glad to see it; it is near to Aylesford, where Sir John
Bankes lives.  So homeward, and stopped again at Captain Allen's, and
there 'light, and sent the coach and Gibson home, and I and Coney staid;
and there comes to us Mrs. Jowles, who is a very fine, proper lady, as
most I know, and well dressed.  Here was also a gentleman, one Major
Manly, and his wife, neighbours; and here we staid, and drank, and talked,
and set Coney and him to play while Mrs. Jowles and I to talk, and there
had all our old stories up, and there I had the liberty to salute her
often, and pull off her glove, where her hand mighty moist, and she mighty
free in kindness to me, and je do not at all doubt that I might have had
that that I would have desired de elle had I had time to have carried her
to Cobham, as she, upon my proposing it, was very willing to go, for elle
is a whore, that is certain, but a very brave and comely one.  Here was a
pretty cozen of hers come in to supper also, of a great fortune,
daughter-in-law to this Manly, mighty pretty, but had now such a cold, she
could not speak.  Here mightily pleased with Mrs. Jowles, and did get her
to the street door, and there to her su breasts, and baiser her without
any force, and credo that I might have had all else, but it was not time
nor place.  Here staid till almost twelve at night, and then with a
lanthorn from thence walked over the fields, as dark as pitch, and mighty
cold, and snow, to Chatham, and Mr. Coney with great kindness to me: and
there all in bed before I come home, and so I presently to bed.

25th.  Up, and by and by, about eight o'clock, come Rear-Admiral
Kempthorne and seven Captains more, by the Duke of York's order, as we
expected, to hold the Court-martiall about the loss of "The Defyance;" and
so presently we by boat to "The Charles," which lies over against Upnor
Castle, and there we fell to the business; and there I did manage the
business, the Duke of York having, by special order, directed them to take
the assistance of Commissioner Middleton and me, forasmuch as there might
be need of advice in what relates to the government of the ships in
harbour.  And so I did lay the law open to them, and rattle the Master
Attendants out of their wits almost; and made the trial last till seven at
night, not eating a bit all the day; only when we had done examination,
and I given my thoughts that the neglect of the Gunner of the ship was as
great as I thought any neglect could be, which might by the law deserve
death, but Commissioner Middleton did declare that he was against giving
the sentence of death, we withdrew, as not being of the Court, and so left
them to do what they pleased; and, while they were debating it, the
Boatswain of the ship did bring us out of the kettle a piece of hot salt
beef, and some brown bread and brandy; and there we did make a little
meal, but so good as I never would desire to eat better meat while I live,
only I would have cleaner dishes.  By and by they had done, and called us
down from the quarterdeck; and there we find they do sentence that the
Gunner of "The Defyance" should stand upon "The Charles" three hours with
his fault writ upon his breast, and with a halter about his neck, and so
be made incapable of any office.  The truth is, the man do seem, and is, I
believe, a good man; but his neglect, in trusting a girl to carry fire
into his cabin, is not to be pardoned. This being done, we took boat and
home; and there a good supper was ready for us, which should have been our
dinner.  The Captains, desirous to be at London, went away presently for
Gravesend, to get thither by this night's tide; and so we to supper, it
having been a great snowy and mighty cold, foul day; and so after supper
to bed.

26th.  Up, and with Middleton all the morning at the Docke, looking over
the storehouses and Commissioner Pett's house, in order to Captain Cox's
coming to live there in his stead, as Commissioner.  But it is a mighty
pretty house; and pretty to see how every thing is said to be out of
repair for this new man, though L10 would put it into as good condition in
every thing as it ever was in, so free every body is of the King's money.
By and by to Mr. Wilson's, and there drank, but did not see his wife, nor
any woman in the yard, and so to dinner at the Hill-House; and after
dinner, till eight at night, close, Middleton and I, examining the
business of Mr. Pett, about selling a boat, and we find him a very knave;
and some other quarrels of his, wherein, to justify himself, he hath made
complaints of others.  This being done, we to supper, and so to talk,
Commissioner Middleton being mighty good company upon a journey, and so to
bed, thinking how merry my people are at this time, putting Tom and Jane
to bed, being to have been married this day, it being also my feast for
my being cut of the stone, but how many years I do not remember, but I
think it to be about ten or eleven.

27th.  Up, and did a little business, Middleton and I, then; after
drinking a little buttered ale, he and Huchinson and: I took coach, and,
exceeding merry in talk, to Dartford: Middleton finding stories of his own
life at Barbadoes, and up and down at Venice, and elsewhere, that are
mighty pretty, and worth hearing; and he is a strange good companion, and;
droll upon the road, more than ever I could have thought to have been in
him.  Here we dined and met Captain Allen of Rochester, who dined with us,
and so went on his journey homeward, and we by and by took coach again and
got home about six at night, it being all the morning as cold, snowy,
windy, and rainy day, as any in the whole winter past, but pretty clear in
the afternoon.  I find all well, but my wife abroad with Jane, who was
married yesterday, and I to the office busy, till by and by my wife comes
home, and so home, and there hear how merry they were yesterday, and I
glad at it, they being married, it seems, very handsomely, at Islington;
and dined at the old house, and lay in our blue chamber, with much
company, and wonderful merry.  The Turner and Mary Batelier bridesmaids,
and Talbot Pepys and W. Hewer bridesmen.  Anon to supper and to bed, my
head a little troubled with the muchness of the business I have upon me at
present.  So to bed.

28th (Lord's day).  Lay long talking with pleasure with my wife, and so up
and to the Office with Tom, who looks mighty smug upon his marriage, as
Jane also do, both of whom I did give joy, and so Tom and I at work at the
Office all the morning, till dinner, and then dined, W. Batelier with us;
and so after dinner to work again, and sent for Gibson, and kept him also
till eight at night, doing much business.  And so, that being done, and my
journal writ, my eyes being very bad, and every day worse and worse, I
fear: but I find it most certain that stronge drinks do make my eyes sore,
as they have done heretofore always; for, when I was in the country, when
my eyes were at the best, their stronge beere would make my eyes sore: so
home to supper, and by and by to bed.

29th.  Up, and by water to White Hall; and there to the Duke of York, to
shew myself, after my journey to Chatham, but did no business to-day with
him: only after gone from him, I to Sir T. Clifford's; and there, after an
hour's waiting, he being alone in his closet, I did speak with him, and
give him the account he gave me to draw up, and he did like it very well:
and then fell to talk of the business of the Navy and giving me good
words, did fall foul of the constitution [of the Board], and did then
discover his thoughts, that Sir J. Minnes was too old, and so was Colonel
Middleton, and that my Lord Brouncker did mind his mathematics too much.
I did not give much encouragement to that of finding fault with my
fellow-officers; but did stand up for the constitution, and did say that
what faults there were in our Office would be found not to arise from the
constitution, but from the failures of the officers in whose hands it was.
This he did seem to give good ear to; but did give me of myself very good
words, which pleased me well, though I shall not build upon them any
thing.  Thence home; and after dinner by water with Tom down to Greenwich,
he reading to me all the way, coming and going, my collections out of the
Duke of York's old manuscript of the Navy, which I have bound up, and do
please me mightily.  At Greenwich I come to Captain Cocke's, where the
house full of company, at the burial of James Temple, who, it seems, hath
been dead these five days here I had a very good ring, which I did give my
wife as soon as I come home.  I spent my time there walking in the garden,
talking with James Pierce, who tells me that he is certain that the Duke
of Buckingham had been with his wenches all the time that he was absent,
which was all the last week, nobody knowing where he was.  The great talk
is of the King's being hot of late against Conventicles, and to see
whether the Duke of Buckingham's being returned will turn the King, which
will make him very popular: and some think it is his plot to make the King
thus, to shew his power in the making him change his mind.  But Pierce did
tell me that the King did certainly say, that he that took one stone from
the Church, did take two from his Crown. By and by the corpse come out;
and I, with Sir Richard Browne and Mr. Evelyn, in their coach to the
church, where Mr. Plume preached.  But I, in the midst of the sermon, did
go out, and walked all alone, round to Deptford, thinking para have seen
the wife of Bagwell, which I did at her door, but I could not conveniently
go into her house, and so lost my labour: and so to the King's Yard, and
there my boat by order met me; and home, where I made my boy to finish the
my manuscript, and so to supper and to bed my new chamber-maid, that comes
in the room of Jane; is come, Jane and Tom lying at their own lodging this
night: the new maid's name is Matt, a proper and very comely maid .  .  .
This day also our cook-maid Bridget went away, which I was sorry for;
but, just at her going she was found to be a thief, and so I was the less
trouble for it; but now our whole house will, in a manner, be new which,
since Jane is gone, I am not at all sorry for, for that my late
differences with my wife about poor Deb. will not be remembered.  So to
bed after supper, and to sleep with great content.

30th.  Up, and to Sir W. Coventry, to see and discourse with him; and he
tells me that he hath lately been with my Lord Keeper, and had much
discourse about the Navy; and particularly he tells me that he finds they
are divided touching me and my Lord Brouncker; some are for removing; and
some for keeping us.  He told my Lord Keeper that it would cost the King
L10,000 before he hath made another as fit to serve him in the Navy as I
am; which, though I believe it is true, yet I am much pleased to have that
character given me by W. Coventry, whatever be the success of it. But I
perceive they do think that I know too much, and shall impose upon
whomever shall come next, and therefore must be removed, though he tells
me that Sir T. Clifford is inclined well enough to me, and Sir T. Osborne;
by what I have lately done, I suppose.  This news do a little trouble me,
but yet, when I consider it, it is but what I ought not to be much
troubled for, considering my incapacity, in regard to my eyes, to continue
long at this work, and this when I think of and talk with my wife do make
me the less troubled for it.  After some talk of the business of the navy
more with him, I away and to the Office, where all the morning; and Sir W.
Pen, the first time that he hath been here since his being last sick,
which, I think, is two or three months; and I think will be the last that
he will be here as one of the Board, he now inviting us all to dine with
him, as a parting dinner, on Thursday next, which I am glad of, I am sure;
for he is a very villain.  At noon home to dinner, where, and at the
office, all the afternoon, troubled at what I have this morning heard, at
least my mind full of thoughts upon it, and so at night after supper to
bed.

31st.  Up, and by water to Sir W. Coventry's, there to talk with him about
business of the Navy, and received from him direction what to advise the
Duke of York at this time, which was, to submit and give way to the King's
naming a man or two, that the people about him have a mind should be
brought into the Navy, and perhaps that may stop their fury in running
further against the whole; and this, he believes, will do it. After much
discourse with him, I walked out with him into St. James's Park, where,
being afeard to be seen with him, he having not leave yet to kiss the
King's hand, but notice taken, as I hear, of all that go to him, I did
take the pretence of my attending the Tangier Committee, to take my leave,
though to serve him I should, I think, stick at nothing.  At the
Committee, this morning, my Lord Middleton declares at last his being
ready to go, as soon as ever money can be made ready to pay the garrison:
and so I have orders to get money, but how soon I know not.  Thence home,
and there find Mr Sheres, for whom I find my moher of late to talk with
mighty kindness; and particularly he hath shewn himself to be a poet, and
that she do mightily value him for.  He did not stay to dine with us, but
we to dinner; and then, in the afternoon, my wife being very well dressed
by her new maid, we abroad, to make a visit to Mrs. Pickering; but she
abroad again, and so we never yet saw her.  Thence to Dancre's, and there,
saw our pictures which are in doing; and I did choose a view of Rome
instead of Hampton Court; and mightily pleased I shall be in them. Here
were Sir Charles Cotterell and his son bespeaking something; both
ingenious men.  Thence my wife and I to the Park; and pretty store of
company; and so home with great content the month, my mind in pretty good
content for all things, but the designs on foot to bring alterations in
the Office, which troubles me.




     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     Broken sort of people, that have not much to lose
     But so fearful I am of discontenting my wife
     By her wedding-ring, I suppose he hath married her at last
     Have not much to lose, and therefore will venture all
     His satisfaction is nothing worth, it being easily got
     Nor was there any pretty woman that I did see, but my wife
     With egg to keep off the glaring of the light





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Diary of Samuel Pepys, Feb/Mar 1668/69
by Samuel Pepys

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***

***** This file should be named 4197.txt or 4197.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/4/1/9/4197/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
