The Project Gutenberg EBook of Se-Quo-Yah; from Harper's New Monthly, V.
41, 1870, by Unknown

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Se-Quo-Yah; from Harper's New Monthly, V. 41, 1870

Author: Unknown

Posting Date: July 9, 2009 [EBook #4241]
Release Date: July, 2003
First Posted: December 15, 2001

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SE-QUO-YAH ***




Produced by Robert Rowe, Charles Franks and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team. HTML version by Al Haines.










SE-QUO-YAH.

From Harper's New Monthly, V. 41, 1870




In the year 1768 a German peddler, named George Gist, left the
settlement of Ebenezer, on the lower Savannah, and entered the Cherokee
Nation by the northern mountains of Georgia. He had two pack-horses
laden with the petty merchandise known to the Indian trade. At that
time Captain Stewart was the British Superintendent of the Indians in
that region. Besides his other duties, he claimed the right to regulate
and license such traffic. It was an old bone of contention. A few years
before, the Governor and Council of the colony of Georgia claimed the
sole power of such privilege and jurisdiction. Still earlier, the
colonial authorities of South Carolina assumed it. Traders from
Virginia, even, found it necessary to go round by Carolina and Georgia,
and to procure licenses. Augusta was the great centre of this commerce,
which in those days was more extensive than would be now believed.
Flatboats, barges, and pirogues floated the bales of pelts to
tide-water. Above Augusta, trains of pack-horses, sometimes numbering
one hundred, gathered in the furs, and carried goods to and from remote
regions. The trader immediately in connection with the Indian hunter
expected to make one thousand per cent. The wholesale dealer made
several hundred. The governors, councilors, and superintendents made
all they could. It could scarcely be called legitimate commerce. It was
a grab game.

Our Dutch friend Gist was, correctly speaking, a contrabandist. He had
too little influence or money to procure a license, and too much
enterprise to refrain because he lacked it. He belonged to a class more
numerous than respectable, although it would be a good deal to say that
there was any virtue in yielding to these petty exactions. It was a
mere question of confiscation, or robbery, without redress, by the
Indians. He risked it. With traders, at that time, it was customary to
take an Indian wife. She was expected to furnish the eatables, as well
as cook them. By the law of many Indian tribes property and the control
of the family go with the mother. The husband never belongs to the same
family connection, rarely to the same community or town even, and often
not even to the tribe. He is a sort of barnacle, taken in on his wife's
account. To the adventurer, like a trader, this adoption gave a sort of
legal status or protection. Gist either understood this before he
started on his enterprise, or learned it very speedily after. Of the
Cherokee tongue he knew positively nothing. He had a smattering of very
broken English. Somehow or other he managed to induce a Cherokee girl
to become his wife.

This woman belonged to a family long respectable in the Cherokee
Nation. It is customary for those ignorant of the Indian social polity
to speak of all prominent Indians as "chiefs." Her family had no
pretension to chieftaincy, but was prominent and influential; some of
her brothers were afterward members of the Council. She could not speak
English; but, in common with many Cherokees of even that early date,
had a small proportion of English blood in her veins. The Cherokee
woman, married or single, owns her property, consisting chiefly of
cattle, in her own right. A wealthy Cherokee or Creek, when a son or
daughter is born to him, marks so many young cattle in a new brand, and
these become, with their increase, the child's property. Whether her
cattle constituted any portion of the temptation, I can not say. At any
rate, the girl, who had much of the beauty of her race, became the wife
of the German peddler.

Of George Gist's married life we have little recorded. It was of very
short duration. He converted his merchandise into furs, and did not
make more than one or two trips. With him it had merely been cheap
protection and board. We might denounce him as a low adventurer if we
did not remember that he was the father of one of the most remarkable
men who ever appeared on the continent. Long before that son was born
he gathered together his effects, went the way of all peddlers, and
never was heard of more.

He left behind him in the Cherokee Nation a woman of no common energy,
who through a long life was true to him she still believed to be her
husband. The deserted mother called her babe "Se-quo-yah," in the
poetical language of her race. His fellow-clansmen as he grew up gave
him, as an English one, the name of his father, or something sounding
like it. No truer mother ever lived and cared for her child. She reared
him with the most watchful tenderness. With her own hands she cleared a
little field and cultivated it, and carried her babe while she drove up
her cows and milked them.

His early boyhood was laid in the troublous times of the war of the
Revolution, yet its havoc cast no deeper shadows in the widow's cabin.

As he grew older he showed a different temper from most Indian
children. He lived alone with his mother, and had no old man to teach
him the use of the bow, or indoctrinate him in the religion and morals
of an ancient but perishing people. He would wander alone in the
forest, and showed an early mechanical genius in carving with his knife
many objects from pieces of wood. He employed his boyish leisure in
building houses in the forest. As he grew older these mechanical
pursuits took a more useful shape. The average native American is
taught as a question of self-respect to despise female pursuits. To be
made a "woman" is the greatest degradation of a warrior.

Se-quo-yah first exercised his genius in making an improved kind of
wooden milk-pans and skimmers for his mother. Then he built her a
milk-house, with all suitable conveniences, on one of those grand
springs that gurgle from the mountains of the old Cherokee Nation. As a
climax, he even helped her to milk her cows; and he cleared additions
to her fields, and worked on them with her. She contrived to get a
petty stock of goods, and traded with her countrymen. She taught
Se-quo-yah to be a good judge of furs. He would go on expeditions with
the hunters, and would select such skins as he wanted for his mother
before they returned. In his boyish days the buffalo still lingered in
the valleys of the Ohio and Tennessee. On the one side the French
sought them. On the other were the English and Spaniards. These he
visited with small pack-horse trains for his mother.

For the first hundred years the European colonies were of traders
rather than agriculturists. Besides the fur trade, rearing horses and
cattle occupied their attention. The Indians east of the Mississippi,
and lying between the Appallachian Mountains and the Gulf, had been
agriculturists and fishermen. Buccaneers, pirates, and even the regular
navies or merchant ships of Europe, drove the natives from the haunted
coast. As they fell back, fur traders and merchants followed them with
professions of regard and extortionate prices. Articles of European
manufacture--knives, hatchets, needles, bright cloths, paints, guns,
powder--could only be bought with furs. The Indian mother sighed in her
hut for the beautiful things brought by the Europeans. The warrior of
the Southwest saw with terror the conquering Iroquois, armed with the
dreaded fire-arms of the stranger. When the bow was laid aside, or
handed to the boys of the tribe, the warriors became the abject slaves
of traders. Guns meant gunpowder and lead. These could only come from
the white man. His avarice guarded the steps alike to bear-meat and
beaver-skins. Thus the Indian became a wandering hunter, helpless and
dependent. These hunters traveled great distances, sometimes with a
pack on their backs weighing from thirty to fifty pounds. Until the
middle of the eighteenth century horses had not become very common
among them, and the old Indian used to laugh at the white man, so lazy
that he could not walk. A consuming fire was preying on the vitals of
an ancient simple people. Unscrupulous traders, who boasted that they
made a thousand per cent, held them in the most abject thrall. It has
been carefully computed that these hunters worked, on an average, for
ten cents a day. The power of their old village chiefs grow weaker. No
longer the old men taught the boys their traditions, morals, or
religion. They had ceased to be pagans, without becoming Christians.

The wearied hunter had fire-water given him as an excitement to drown
the cares common to white and red. Slowly the polity, customs,
industries, morals, religion, and character of the red race were
consumed in this terrible furnace of avarice. The foundations of our
early aristocracies were laid. Byrd, in his "History of the Dividing
Line," tells us that a school of seventy-seven Indian children existed
in 1720, and that they could all read and write English; but adds, that
the jealousy of traders and land speculators, who feared it would
interfere with their business, caused it to be closed. Alas! this
people had encountered the iron nerve of Christianity, without reaping
the fruit of its intelligence or mercy.

Silver, although occasionally found among the North American Indians,
was very rare previous to the European conquest. Afterward, among the
commodities offered, were the broad silver pieces of the Spaniards, and
the old French and English silver coins. With the most mobile spirit
the Indian at once took them. He used them as he used his shell-beads,
for money and ornament. Native artificers were common in all the
tribes. The silver was beaten into rings, and broad ornamented silver
bands for the head. Handsome breast-plates were made of it; necklaces,
bells for the ankles, and rings for the toes.

It is not wonderful that Se-quo-yah's mechanical genius led him into
the highest branch of art known to his people, and that he became their
greatest silversmith. His articles of silverware excelled all similar
manufactures among his countrymen.

He next conceived the idea of becoming a blacksmith. He visited the
shops of white men from time to time. He never asked to be taught the
trade. He had eyes in his head, and hands; and when he bought the
necessary material and went to work, it is characteristic that his
first performance was to make his bellows and his tools; and those who
afterward saw them told me they were very well made.

Se-quo-yah was now in comparatively easy circumstances. Besides his
cattle, his store, and his farm, he was a blacksmith and a silversmith.
In spite of all that has been alleged about Indian stupidity and
barbarity, his countrymen were proud of him. He was in danger of
shipwrecking on that fatal sunken reef to American character,
popularity. Hospitality is the ornament, and has been the ruin, of the
aborigine. His home, his store, or his shop, became the resort of his
countrymen; there they smoked and talked, and learned to drink
together. Among the Cherokees those who have are expected to be liberal
to those who have not; and whatever weaknesses he might possess,
niggardliness or meanness was not among them.

After he had grown to man's estate he learned to draw. His sketches, at
first rude, at last acquired considerable merit. He had been taught no
rules of perspective; but while his perspective differed from that of a
European, he did not ignore it, like the Chinese. He had now a very
comfortable hewed-log residence, well furnished with such articles as
were common with the better class of white settlers at that time, many
of them, however, made by himself.

Before he reached his thirty-fifth year he became addicted to convivial
habits to an extent that injured his business, and began to cripple his
resources. Unlike most of his race, however, he did not become wildly
excited when under the influence of liquor.

Se-quo-yah, who never saw his father, and never could utter a word of
the German tongue, still carried, deep in his nature, an odd compound
of Indian and German transcendentalism; essentially Indian in opinion
and prejudice, but German in instinct and thought. A little liquor only
mellowed him--it thawed away the last remnant of Indian reticence. He
talked with his associates upon all the knotty questions of law, art,
and religion. Indian Theism and Pantheism were measured against the
Gospel as taught by the land-seeking, fur-buying adventurers. A good
class of missionaries had, indeed, entered the Cherokee Nation; but the
shrewd Se-quo-yah, and the disciples this stoic taught among his
mountains, had just sense enough to weigh the good and the bad
together, and strike an impartial balance as the footing up for this
new proselyting race.

It has been erroneously alleged that Se-quo-yah was a believer in, or
practiced, the old Indian religious rites. Christianity had, indeed,
done little more for him than to unsettle the pagan idea, but it had
done that.

It was some years after Se-quo-yah had learned to present the bottle to
his friends before he degenerated into a toper. His natural industry
shielded him, and would have saved him altogether but for the vicious
hospitality by which he was surrounded. With the acuteness that came of
his foreign stock, he learned to buy his liquor by the keg. This
species of economy is as dangerous to the red as to the white race. The
auditors who flocked to see and hear him were not likely to diminish
while the philosopher furnished both the dogmas and the whisky. Long
and deep debauches were often the consequence. Still it was not in the
nature of George Gist to be a wild, shouting drunkard. His mild,
philosophic face was kindled to deeper thought and warmer enthusiasm as
they talked about the problem of their race. All the great social
questions were closely analyzed by men who were fast becoming
insensible to them. When he was too far gone to play the mild, sedate
philosopher, he began that monotonous singing whose music carried him
back to the days when the shadow of the white man never darkened the
forests, and the Indian canoe alone rippled the tranquil waters.

Should this man be thus lost? He was aroused to his danger by the
relative to whom he owed so much. His temper was eminently philosophic.
He was, as he proved, capable of great effort and great endurance. By
an effort which few red or white men can or do make, he shook off the
habit, and his old nerve and old prosperity came back to him. It was
during the first few years of this century that he applied to Charles
Hicks, a half-breed, afterward principal chief of the nation, to write
his English name. Hicks, although educated after a fashion, made a
mistake in a very natural way. The real name of Se-quo-yah's father was
George Gist. It is now written by the family as it has long been
pronounced in the tribe when his English name is used--"Guest." Hicks,
remembering a word that sounded like it, wrote it--George Guess. It was
a "rough guess," but answered the purpose. The silversmith was as
ignorant of English as he was of any written language. Being a fine
workman, he made a steel die, a facsimile of the name written by Hicks.
With this he put his "trade mark" on his silver-ware, and it is borne
to this day on many of these ancient pieces in the Cherokee nation.

Between 1809 and 1821, which latter was his fifty-second year, the
great work of his life was accomplished. The die, which was cut before
the former date, probably turned his active mind in the proper
direction. Schools and missions were being established. The power by
which the white man could talk on paper had been carefully noted and
wondered at by many savages, and was far too important a matter to have
been overlooked by such a man as Se-quo-yah. The rude hieroglyphics or
pictoriographs of the Indians were essentially different from all
written language. These were rude representations of events, the
symbols being chiefly the totemic devices of the tribes. A few general
signs for war, death, travel, or other common incidents, and strokes
for numerals, represented days or events as they were perpendicular or
horizontal. Even the wampum belts were little more than helps to
memory, for while they undoubtedly tied up the knots for years, like
the ancient inhabitants of China and Japan, still the meagre record
could only be read by the initiated, for the Indians only intrusted
their history and religion to their best and ablest men. The general
theory with many Indians was, that the written speech of the white man
was one of the mysterious gifts of the Great Spirit. Se-quo-yah boldly
avowed it to be a mere ingenious contrivance that the red man could
master, if he would try.

Repeated discussion on this point at length fully turned his thoughts
in this new channel. He seems to have disdained the acquirement of the
English language. Perhaps he suspected first what he was bound to know
before he completed his task, that the Cherokee language has certain
necessities and peculiarities of its own. It is almost impossible to
write Indian words and names correctly in English. The English alphabet
has not capacity for its expression. If ten white men sat down to write
the word an Indian uttered, the probabilities are that one half of them
would write them differently from the other half. It is this which has
led to such endless confusion in Indian dictionaries. For instance, we
write the word for the tribe Cherokee, and the letter R, or its sound,
is scarcely used in their language. Today a Cherokee always pronounces
it Chalaque, the pronunciation being between that and Shalakke. On
these peculiarities it is not the purpose of this article to enter, but
hasten to George Gist, brooding over a written language for his people.

His first essay was natural enough. He tried to invent symbols to
represent words. These he sometimes cut out of bark with his knife, but
generally wrote, or rather drew. With these symbols he would carry on a
conversation with a person in another apartment. As may be supposed,
his symbols multiplied fearfully and wonderfully. The Indian languages
are rich in their creative power. By using pieces of well-known words
that contain the prominent idea, double or compound words are freely
made. This has been called by writers treating this subject, the
polysynthetic. It is, in fact, a jumbling of sentences into words, by
abbreviation, the omitted parts of words being implied or understood.
There is one important fact which I will merely note here that is
generally overlooked. These compounded words, to a large extent,
represent the intrusive or European idea. The names the Indians gave
many of the European things were mere DEFINITIONS. Such as "Big
Knives," etc. Occasionally they made a dash at the French or English
sounds, as in the word "Yengees" for English, which has finally been
corrupted in our language to Yankees.

Of course an attempt at fixed symbols for words was an unhappy
experiment in a language one prominent element of which is, the
facility of making words out of pieces of words, or compounded words.
Besides this difficulty, no language can be taught successfully by
means of a dictionary, until the human memory acquires more power.
Three years of hopeless struggle with the mighty debris of his symbols
left him, although in the main reticent, a mighty man of words. But his
labors were not lost. Through that heroic, unaided struggle he gained
the first true glimpses into the elements of language. It is a
startling fact, that an uneducated man, of a race we are pleased to
call barbarians, attained in a few years, without books or tutors, what
was developed through several ages of Phoenician, Egyptian, and Greek
wisdom.

Se-quo-yah discovered that the language possessed certain musical
sounds, such as we call vowels, and dividing sounds, styled by us
consonants. In determining his vowels he varied during the progress of
his discoveries, but finally settled on the six--A, E, I, O, U, and a
guttural vowel sounding like U in UNG.

These had long and short sounds, with the exception of the guttural. He
next considered his consonant, or dividing sounds, and estimated the
number of combinations of these that would give all the sounds required
to make words in their language. He first adopted fifteen for the
dividing sounds, but settled on twelve primary, the G and K being one,
and sounding more like K than G, and D like T. These may be represented
in English as G, H, L, M, N, QU, T, DL or TL, TS, W, Y, Z.

It will be seen that if these twelve be multiplied by the six vowels,
the number of possible combinations or syllables would be seventy-two,
and by adding the vowel sounds, which maybe syllables, the number would
be seventy-eight. However, the guttural V, or sound of U in UNG, does
not appear as among the combinations, which make seventy-seven.

Still his work was not complete. The hissing sound of S entered into
the ramifications of so many sounds, as in STA, STU, SPA, SPE, that it
would have required a large addition to his alphabet to meet this
demand. This he simplified by using a distinct character for the S
(OO), to be used in such combinations. To provide for the varying sound
G, K, he added a symbol which has been written in English KA. As the
syllable NA is liable to be aspirated, he added symbols written NAH,
and KNA. To have distinct representatives for the combinations rising
out of the different sounds of D and T, he added symbols for TA, TE,
TI, and another for DLA, thus TLA. These completed the eighty-five
characters of his alphabet, which was thus an alphabet of syllables,
and not of letters.

It was a subject of astonishment to scientific men that a language so
copious only embraced eighty-five syllables. This is chiefly accounted
for by the fact that every Cherokee syllable ends in a vocal or nasal
sound, and that there are no double consonants but those provided for
the TL or DL, and TS, and combinations of the hissing S, with a few
consonants.

The fact is, that many of our combinations of consonants in the English
written language are artificial, and worse than worthless. To indicate
by a familiar illustration the syllabic character of the alphabet of
Se-quo-yah, I will take the name of William H. Seward, which was
appended to the Emancipation Proclamation of Mr. Lincoln, printed in
Cherokee. It was written thus: "O [wi] P[li] 4 [se] G [wa] 6 [te]," and
might be anglicized Will Sewate. As has been observed, there is no R in
the Cherokee language, written or spoken, and as for the middle initial
of Mr. Seward's name, H., there being, of course, no initial in a
syllabic alphabet, the translator, who probably did not know what it
stood for, was compelled to omit it. It was in the year 1821 that the
American Cadmus completed his alphabet.

As will be observed by examining the alphabet, which is on the table in
the engraving, he used many of the letters of the English alphabet,
also numerals. The fact was, that he came across an old English
spelling-book during his labors, and borrowed a great many of the
symbols. Some he reversed, or placed upside down; others he modified,
or added to. He had no idea of either their meaning or sound, in
English, which is abundantly evident from the use he made of them. As
was eminently fitting, the first scholar taught in the language was the
daughter of Se-quo-yah. She, like all the other Cherokees who tried it,
learned it immediately. Having completed it without the white man's
hints or aid, he visited the agent, Colonel Lowry, a gentleman of some
intelligence, who only lived three miles from him, and informed that
gentleman of his invention. It is not wonderful that the agent was
skeptical, and suggested that the whole was a mere act of memory, and
that the symbols bore no relation to the language, or its necessities.
Like all other benefactors of the race, he had to encounter a little of
the ridicule of those who, being too ignorant to comprehend, maintain
their credit by sneering. The rapid progress of the language among the
people settled the matter, however. The astonishing rapidity with which
it is acquired has always been a wonder, and was the first thing about
it that struck the writer of this article. In my own observation,
Indian children will take one or two, at times several, years to master
the English printed and written language, but in a few days can read
and write in Cherokee. They do the latter, in fact, as soon as they
learn to shape letters. As soon as they master the alphabet they have
got rid of all the perplexing questions in orthography that puzzle the
brains of our children. Is it not too much to say that a child will
learn in a month, by the same effort, as thoroughly, in the language of
Se-quo-yah, that which in ours consumes the time of our children for at
least two years.

There has been a great clamor for a universal language. We once had it,
in our learned world, in the Latin, in which books were locked up for
the scholars and dead to the world. Language is the handmaiden of
thought, and to be useful must be obedient to its changes as well as
its elemental characteristics. For the English of three hundred years
ago we need a glossary, and to carry down his immortal thoughts in
their pristine vigor, must have, every two hundred years, a Johnson to
modernize a Shakspeare. To probe the causes of the change of language,
to ascertain why even a WRITTEN language is mutable, to pick up this
garment of thought and run its threads back through all their vagaries
to their origin and points of divergence, is one of the grand tasks for
the intellectual historian. He, indeed, must give us the history of
ideas, of which all art, including language, is but the fructification.
To say, therefore, that the alphabet of Se-quo-yah is better adapted
for his language than our alphabet is for the English, would be to pay
it a very wretched compliment.

George Gist received all honor from his countrymen. A short time after
his invention written communication was opened up by means of it with
that portion of the Cherokee Nation then in their new home west of the
Arkansas. Zealous in his work, he traveled many hundred miles to teach
it to them; and it is no reproach to their intellect to say that they
received it readily.

It has been said the Indians are besotted against all improvements. The
cordiality with which this was received is worthy of attention.

In 1823 the General Council of the Cherokee Nation voted a large silver
medal to George Gist as a mark of distinction for his discovery. On one
side were two pipes, the ancient symbol of Indian religion and law; on
the other a man's head. The medal had the following inscription in
English, also in, Cherokee in his own alphabet:

"Presented to George Gist, by the General Council of the Cherokee
Nation, for his ingenuity in the invention of the Cherokee alphabet."

John Ross, acting as principal chief of the Cherokee Nation, sent it
West to Se-quo-yah, together with an elaborate address, the latter
being at that time in the new nation.

In 1828 Gist went to Washington city as a delegate from the Western
Cherokees. He was then in his fifty-ninth year. At that time the
portrait was taken, an engraving from which we present to our readers.
He is represented with a table containing his alphabet. The
missionaries were not slow to employ it. It was arranged with the
Cherokee, and English sounds and definitions. Rev. S.A. Worcester
endeavored to get the outlines of its grammar, and both he and Mr.
Boudinot prepared vocabularies of it, as did many others. In this way,
by having more and better observers, we know more of this language than
many others, and affinities have been traced between it and some
others, supposed to be radically different, which would have appeared
in the case of some others, had they been as fully or correctly written.

Besides the Scriptures, a very considerable number of books were
printed in it, and parts of several different newspapers existing from
time to time; also almanacs, songs, and psalms.

During the closing portion of his life, the home of Se-quo-yah was near
Brainerd, a mission station in the new nation. Like his countrymen, he
was driven an exile from his old home, from his fields, work-shops, and
orchards by the clear streams flowing from the mountains of Georgia. Is
it wonderful if such treatment should throw a sadder tinge on a
disposition otherwise mild, hopeful, and philosophic?

One of his sons is a very fair artist, using promiscuously pencil, pen,
chalk, or charcoal. He served, as a private soldier, in the Union army
in the late war, and there, in his quarters, made many sketches. His
power of caricaturing was very considerable. If a humorous picture of
some officer who had rendered himself obnoxious was found, chalked in
unmistakable but grotesque lineaments, on the commissary door, it was
said, "It must have been by the son of Se-quo-yah."

In his mature years, at Brainerd, although approaching seventy, the
nerve or fire of the old man was not dead. Some narrow-minded
ecclesiastics, because Gist would not go through the routine of a
Christian profession after the fashion they prescribed, have not
scrupled to intimate that he was a pagan, and grieved that the Bible
was printed in the language he gave. This arose simply from not
comprehending him. They persisted in considering him an ignorant
savage, while he comprehended himself and measured them.

In his old days a new and deeper ambition seized him. He was not in the
habit of asking advice or assistance in his projects. In his journey to
the West, as well as to Washington, he had an opportunity of examining
different languages, of which, as far as lay in his power, he carefully
availed himself. His health had been somewhat affected by rheumatism,
one of the few inheritances he got from the old fur peddler of
Ebenezer; but the strong spirit was slow to break.

He formed a theory of certain relations in the language of the Indian
tribes, and conceived the idea of writing a book on the points of
similarity and divergence. Books were, to a great extent, closed to
him; but as of old, when he began his career as a blacksmith by making
his bellows, so he now fell back on his own resources. This brave
Indian philosopher of ours was not the man to be stopped by obstacles.
He procured some articles for the Indian trade he had learned in his
boyhood, and putting these and his provisions and camping equipage in
an ox-cart, he took a Cherokee boy with him as driver and companion,
and started out among the wild Indians of the plain and mountain, on a
philological crusade such as the world never saw.

One of the most remarkable features of his experience was the uniform
peace and kindness with which his brethren of the prairie received him.
They furnished him means, too, to prosecute his inquiries in each tribe
or clan. That they should be more sullen and reticent to white men is
not wonderful when we reflect that they have a suspicion that all these
pretended inquirers in science or religion have a lurking eye to real
estate. Several journeys were made. The task was so vast it might have
discouraged him. He started on his longest and his last journey. There
was among the Cherokees a tradition that part of their nation was
somewhere in New Mexico, separated from them before the advent of the
whites. Se-quo-yah knew this, and expected in his rambles to meet them.
He had camped on the spurs of the Rocky Mountains; he had threaded the
valleys of New Mexico; looked at the adobe villages of the Pueblos, and
among the race, neither Indian nor Spaniard, with swarthy face and
unkempt hair. He had occasion to moralize over those who had
voluntarily become the slaves of others even meaner than themselves,
who spoke a jargon neither Indian nor Spanish. Catholics in name, who
ate red pepper pies, gambled like the fashionable frequenters of Baden,
and swore like troopers.

It was late in the year 1842 that the wanderer, sick of a fever, worn
and weary, halted his ox-cart near San Fernandino, in Northern Mexico.
Fate had willed that his work should die with him. But little of his
labor was saved, and that not enough to aid any one to develop his
idea. Bad nursing, exposure, and lack of proper medical attendance
finished the work. He sleeps, not far from the Rio Grande, the greatest
of his race.

At one time Congress contemplated having his remains removed and a
monument erected over them; it was postponed, however.

The Legislature of the Little Cherokee Nation every year includes in
its general appropriations a pension of three hundred dollars to his
widow--the only literary pension paid in the United States.









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Se-Quo-Yah; from Harper's New Monthly,
V. 41, 1870, by Unknown

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SE-QUO-YAH ***

***** This file should be named 4241.txt or 4241.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/2/4/4241/

Produced by Robert Rowe, Charles Franks and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team. HTML version by Al Haines.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
