The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Heart-Cry of Jesus, by Byron J. Rees

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Heart-Cry of Jesus

Author: Byron J. Rees

Posting Date: July 25, 2009 [EBook #4323]
Release Date: August, 2003
First Posted: January 5, 2002

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HEART-CRY OF JESUS ***




Produced by Robert Rowe, Charles Franks and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team. HTML version by Al Haines.










The Heart-Cry of Jesus


BY BYRON J. REES,


Author of "Christlikeness," "Hulda, the Pentecostal Prophetess," and
"Hallelujahs from Portsmouth, Nos. 2 and 3."





DEDICATION.

TO MY MASTER, EVEN CHRIST.





INTRODUCTION.

THE NEED OF THE DAY.


The saying, "Necessity is the mother of Invention," finds nowhere a
more vivid illustration of its truth than in the publishing enterprises
of the modern Holiness movement. The onward movement of the Holy Ghost
along Pentecostal lines, convicting of depravity, creating a
clean-reading public, and endueing with power both pulpit and pew, has
resulted in a constant and growing demand for full-salvation
literature. Tens of thousands of pulpits do an active business on both
the wholesale and retail plan, with science and philosophy as stock in
trade. Famishing congregations are proffered the bugs of biology, the
rocks of geology, and the stars of astronomy until their souls revolt,
and they demand bread and meat.

THE NEED BEING SUPPLIED.

The great soul-cry is being met and answered by the publication and
distribution of soul-feeding, spirit-inspiring, health-giving Holiness
books and papers. God is raising up writers and editors from whose pens
pour melted truths, to the edification and blessing of thousands.

THE PURPOSE OF THIS BOOK.

In this little book we have a production in which the author has made
little attempt at the elucidation of doctrine or the waging of
controversy, but in great simplicity and directness he has presented
the truth with a view to helpfulness, desiring to introduce really
hungry souls into the Canaan life, and provide a well-loaded table of
rich provisions for those who are already "in the Land."

READERS WILL BE REFRESHED.

We believe that there is a warmth, fervor and glow about the pages of
this volume which will be most refreshing to many, many readers. May
the Holy Spirit put His seal upon it and give it an extensive
circulation.

SETH C. REES.

PROVIDENCE, R. I., NOVEMBER 15, 1898.





PREFACE.

WHAT IS SANCTIFICATION?


No one who accustoms himself to the observation of spiritual tides,
winds and currents can be ignorant of the fact that the devout men and
women of the present are earnestly inquiring, "What is sanctification?
What does holiness mean?" They are demanding of the pulpit and of the
church editor something more than the time-worn and moth-eaten excuses
for not teaching a deeper work of grace. The "seven thousand" who have
not "bowed the knee" to the modern Baals are insisting that, if God's
Word teaches entire sanctification for the disciple of Christ
obtainable by faith now, they must possess themselves of this heavenly
grace.

THE AUTHOR'S DESIRE.

It is with the purpose and hope that some seeking heart may be helped
that these pages are penned. The author has purposely avoided all
controversial matter. We would not assume the role of the doctrinaire
even were we capable of it. "Not controversy, not theology, but to save
souls," as Lyman Beecher said when dying.

THE NEED OF SPEED.

This book has been written in the midst of laborious and unceasing
revival work. For this reason there has been no time to polish
sentences nor improve style. The object has been to get the truth to
the people in plain language, and to do it with despatch, for the time
is short, and men are being saved or damned with electric speed.

THE BUZZARD AND VULTURE.

The buzzard and the vulture will find food if they look for it, but
with them we are not concerned. We are, however, terribly in earnest to
help hungry souls to a place of blessing and power.

May God take these leaves and make them "leaves of healing," if not for
"nations," at least for individuals.

BYRON J. REES.

NOVEMBER 14, 1898.





CONTENTS.


  DEDICATION
  INTRODUCTION
  PREFACE
  CHRIST'S PRAYER
  CHAPTER    I. A Word in the Prayer
  CHAPTER   II. Some Errors
  CHAPTER  III. Those for Whom Christ Prayed
  CHAPTER   IV. Christ's Prayer Answered
  CHAPTER    V. Christian Unity
  CHAPTER   VI. Fearlessness
  CHAPTER  VII. Responsiveness to Christ
  CHAPTER VIII. Soul-Rest
  CHAPTER   IX. Prayerfulness
  CHAPTER    X. Success
  CHAPTER   XI. Growth in Christliness of Life
  EXPERIENCE





CHRIST'S PRAYER:

"SANCTIFY THEM THROUGH THE TRUTH; THY WORD IS TRUTH."




CHAPTER I.

A WORD IN THE PRAYER.


CHRIST'S WORDS.

All who really love Christ love His words. They may not always fully
understand their meaning, but they never reject any of them. The very
fact that any word has been on the lips of Christ and received His
sanction, gives it a sound of music to all who are truly disciples of
the Nazarene.

MOTHER'S WORDS.

The words that your mother used frequently--are there any words quite
the same to you? She may be resting under the solemn pines of a silent
cemetery, but, to this hour, if anyone uses one of her favorite words,
instantly the heart leaps in answer, and the mind flies back to her,
and the fancy paints her as you knew her in the garden or at the
fireside or by the window. It lies in the power of a single word to
make the eyes fill and the throat ache because of its association with
the voice of a queenly mother.

A MAN'S TESTIMONY.

Thus it is with Christ and HIS words. It matters not where we meet the
word, if it is Christ's we are touched and made tender. An aged man
stands in a prayer-meeting in a bare and cheerless hall, and says in
broken and faltering voice, "The dear Lord has blessedly SANCTIFIED my
heart," and like a flash the room lightens, and the whole place seems
changed and made cheery. The heart cries, "That is my Master's word,"
and the entire being is attentive and interested.

JESUS' LIFE DEAR.

Yes, to the really regenerated soul everything connected with Jesus is
dear. The place of His birth, the land of His ministry, the garden of
His agony, the mount of His crucifixion, the Olivet of His ascension,
all these are illumined with a peculiar and special light. The mind
dwells lovingly on His parables, ponders deeply His sayings, lingers
tenderly over His words.

WE WELCOME THE WORD.

We will NOT therefore shrink from the Word of our Lord: "Sanctify." It
may have been stained by the slime of some unworthy life, or soiled by
the lips of men who prated about sanctification, but knew nothing of
its nature; yet, for all that, since the word is Christ's we hail its
enunciation with gladness.

CHRIST'S BURDEN.

The high-priestly prayer of Christ was distinctively for the disciples.
Indeed, He SAYS: "I pray not for the world." That is to say, the
disciples need a peculiar and special work of grace, one which must
follow, not precede, conversion, and therefore not to be received by
the world. In this prayer the loving Master revealed to His immediate
disciples, and to those of all ages and climes, the burning desire of
His heart concerning His followers. The petition ascends from His
immaculate heart like incense from a golden censer, and it has for its
tone and soul, "Sanctify them through thy truth." His soul longed for
this work to be completed quickly. During the last days of His ministry
He talked frequently of the coming Comforter. He admonished them to
"tarry" until an enduement came to them. He knew that unless they were
energized with a power, to which they were as yet strangers, their work
would be worse than futile.

HE PRAYED FOR SANCTIFICATION.

It is for the SANCTIFICATION of the disciples that Christ prayed. He
did not ask that they might fill positions of honor and trust; He knew
that there is no nobility but that of goodness. It was more important
that the early preachers should be holy men than that they should be
respected and honored. He did not pray for riches for them; He knew too
well the worthlessness of money in itself. He did not desire for them
thrones, nor culture, nor refinement, nor name.

    "'Tis only noble to be good.
     True hearts are more than coronets,
     And simple faith than Norman blood."

So Jesus prayed that these men who had for three years been His daily
and constant companions should receive an experience which should make
them INTENSELY GOOD; not "goody-goody," which is very different, but
heartily and wholly spiritual and godly.

THE MEN WE LOVE.

The men whose names are brightening as the ages fly, were not men who
were always free from prejudices and blunders. They were not men, as a
rule, from university quadrangles nor college cloisters. They were not
the wise, nor the erudite, nor the cultivated, nor the rich. They were
the good men. Brilliant men tire us; wits soon bore us with their
gilt-edged nothings, but men with clean, holy hearts, fixed
convictions, bold antipathies to sin, sympathetic natures and tender
consciences never weary us, and they bear the intimate and familiar
acquaintance which so often causes the downfall of the so-called
"great" in one's estimation.

THE PERSONAL TOUCH.

We may forget an eloquent sermon pilfered from Massillon, but we will
never forget a warm handclasp and a sympathetic word from an humble
servant in God's house. Jesus never went for the crowds--he hunted the
individual. He sat up a whole night with a questioning Rabbi; talked an
afternoon with a harlot who wanted salvation; sought out and found the
man whom they cast out of the synagogue, and saved a dying robber on an
adjacent cross. We do not reach men in great audiences generally. We
reach them by interesting ourselves in them individually; by lending
our interest to their needs; by giving them a lift when they need it.

SANCTIFIED FISHERMEN.

Jesus with divine sagacity knew that if these untutored fishermen were
to light up Europe and Asia with the torch of the gospel they must have
an experience themselves which would transform them from self-seeking,
cowardly men to giants and heroes.

THE CARNAL MIND.

While the true Christian loves Christ and His words, while his higher
and more spiritual nature says "Amen" to the Lord's teaching, yet it
must not be forgotten that the "carnal mind" which remains, "even in
the heart of the regenerate," is "enmity against God." There is a dark
SOMEWHAT in the soul that fairly hates the word "sanctification."
Theologians call it "inbred sin" or "original depravity"; the Bible
terms it the "old man," "the old leaven," "the root of bitterness,"
etc. Whatever its name it abhors holiness and purity, and though the
regenerate man loves Christ and His words, he does so over the vehement
protest of a baser principle chained and manacled in the basement
dungeon of his heart.

GEORGE FOX.

The devout of all churches recognize the existence of an inner enemy
who bars the gate to rapid spiritual progress. George Fox, the pious
founder of the Friends' Society, said in relation to an experience
which came to him: "I knew Jesus, and He was very precious to my soul,
but I found something within me which would not always keep patient and
kind. I did what I could to keep it down, but it was there. I besought
Jesus that He would do something for me, and when I gave Him my will He
came into me and cast out all that would not be patient, and all that
would not be sweet, and that would not be kind, and then He shut the
door."

"SIN IN BELIEVERS."

John Wesley preached a sermon on "Sin in Believers" which is extant and
widely read. All churches recognize it in their creeds, and all have
provision in their dogmas for its expulsion before entrance into
heaven. The Catholics provide a convenient Purgatory; other
denominations glorify Death and ascribe to it a power which they deny
to Christ; while still others rely on growth to cleanse from all sin
and get us ready for the glory-world. The Bible, however, with that
sublime indifference to all human opinions and theories becoming in
divine authority, reveals a SALVATION FROM ALL SIN HERE AND NOW.

The word sanctify means simply "to make holy" (L., sanctificare =
sanctus, holy, + ficare, to make). The work of sanctification removes
all the roots of bitterness and destroys the remains of sin in the
heart.

UNREASONABLE ANTAGONISM.

What sound sense can there be in antagonizing a blessing which is
nothing more or less than cleanness--mental, moral and physical
cleanness. The kind of character that would wittingly fight holiness
would object to a change of linen.

A CHURCH IN JERSEY.

The eagerness with which truly devout people welcome the preaching of
full salvation is refreshing. It was the writer's privilege to hold an
eight-day meeting with a church in Central New Jersey. The church was
in excellent condition, for the pastor, a godly and earnest man, had
faithfully proclaimed justification and its appropriate fruits. Nearly
all the members were praying, conscientious and zealous Christians.
When, at the first meeting, which was the regular Sunday morning
service, the experience of sanctification was presented, over one
hundred persons arose, thus signifying their desire for the precious
grace!

OPEN THE ALTAR!

The language of the child of God is, "Does God want me sanctified? Then
open the altar for I am coming." He does not tarry; he does not higgle
and hesitate; he makes for the "straw pile" if in a New England camp;
the "saw-dust" if down South; the "altar rail" if in a spiritual
church; to his knees at any rate, for God's will he desires and must
have. Thank God he can have it!




CHAPTER II.

SOME ERRORS.


THE BEAR-SKIN.

Satan is very busily engaged in destroying and misrepresenting God's
best experiences. He slanders the work of God in order that His
children may not come into their inheritance. The "bear-skin" frightens
the would-be seeker and keeps him out of the Canaan land.

ROSENTHAL.

Darkness hates light. The Prince of Darkness dreads truth and light,
for he knows that if God's children ever see sanctification as it is,
there will be a general stampede for consecration. If the public really
believed that Rosenthal would play the piano in Infantry Hall on a
certain evening, and that there would be no charge for admittance,
South Main street would be black with people hours before the doors
were opened. If the church really believed that God would let them into
an experience where sonatas and minuets and bridal marches and
"Mondnacht" and the "Etude in C sharp minor" would be heard all the
time, and free of charge, all the bishops and the big preachers and
little evangelists and exhorters and ministers would be besieged by a
grand eager throng of people, crying with one accord, "What must I do
to be sanctified?" Lord, hasten the day!

THE DEVIL STIRRED.

When a man is awakened and says, "What is sanctification anyway?" then
the devil bestirs himself to silence the soul's questionings. Blessed
is the man who will not be satisfied with anything short of "Thus saith
the Lord." Hound the lies of hell to their covert; run down the false
reports, and determine the truth.

A CHIMERA.

One of the lies which Satan is fond of circulating is that
sanctification is a life free from temptation. When this is announced
among those who are awakened on the subject, immediately there is a
great cry, "I don't want to hear any more about sanctification." One
would think by the excitement aroused that people are actually afraid
lest they should by some manner of means be deprived of the privilege
of being tempted. Let all such allay their fears. Jesus was tempted
even on the pinnacle of the temple, and we will never be above our
Lord, and may well expect temptation until we pass from this
world-stage to the other land. No responsible Christian student teaches
any such chimera as a life without temptation obtainable now.

A DIFFERENCE.

Personally, we have never heard anyone make such a claim. What we do
teach, and, better still, far better, WHAT GOD PROMISES, is an
experience where we need not YIELD to temptation. There is a
difference, vast and important, between being tempted and yielding to
temptation.

A TEMPTED PREACHER.

A man is en route from New York to the West via the Pennsylvania
Railroad. The express stops at a junction in the mountains. He leaves
the car and walks up and down on the platform enjoying the view. Near
the station is a park. Beautiful flowering shrubbery, shell walks,
ivy-clad piles of rocks, splashing fountains, majestic shade trees and
well-kept turf make the place attractive. Beyond the pretty village a
wooded mountain rises toward the bluest of skies, enticing to a stroll
amid the beauties of a forest. The preacher is strongly tempted to stop
over a day and enjoy a brief rest. Then he thinks of his word, given in
good faith, to be in a certain place at an appointed hour; he remembers
the souls which God might save through the sermon which he is expected
to preach the next evening. He is tired and jaded and worn. Would he
not be justified in telegraphing that he would not come until a day or
so later than expected? It is a stout temptation; but when the
black-faced porter shouts, "All aboard," and the bell rings he walks
into the hot and dirty car and continues his tiresome journey. Does not
the reader see that a temptation to rest is very different from
stopping and breaking an engagement and disappointing an audience?

A CHARMING COMPANION.

On life's express we are all liable to temptation. We are solicited to
tarry, but we are so intent on our destination, and especially are we
so charmed with our travelling Companion, that we bid farewell to
fountain, and gravelled walks, and towering mountains and push on to
that city.

WHO TEACHES FANATICISM?

Another misrepresentation, the circulation of which Satan delights to
further, is that sanctification is an experience in which we can not
sin, and when through this idea men lift their hands in horror and
desist from seeking this precious grace, all hell chuckles with real
satisfaction. But who teaches such fanaticism? Life is always a
probation. The will is free. The Bible teaches this truth, and we
believe it. The holiest saint on earth may, IF HE CHOOSE, sin and go to
hell. Everything hangs upon the choice. Thank God we NEED not fall.
Falling is possible, but not necessary.

NOT A DAY-DREAM.

A third evil report is that sanctification is an impracticable
day-dream, unfit for everyday life and the common round of duties. "It
is," so it is said, "all very well for ministers, and class leaders,
and superintendents of Sunday-schools, and people who are not very busy
in life to get sanctification, but it will not stand the strain and
tension to which it would be subjected in some lives." But "God is no
respecter of persons," and what He will do for one of His children He
will do for all. And then, if we only knew it, sanctification is just
suited to the life of trial and perplexity.

"BILLY" BRAY AND CARVOSSO.

If there is a man to be found who has to labor hard all day and has a
life full of care, sanctification is just the experience he needs. Read
the life of Mrs. Fletcher, and see how sanctification can help a woman
with multitudinous domestic cares. Study the lives of "Billy" Bray and
William Carvosso, and remember that it was sanctification which helped
these men in their difficulties. If there is a soul anywhere filled
with unspeakable sorrow, shivering alone in the dark, the brightest
light that can come to that stricken soul is full salvation. No matter
how sharp the thorn, nor how galling the fetter, sanctification turns
the thorn into oil, and the fetter into a chain of plaited flowers.

CLANS.

It is said by some that sanctification makes people "clannish."
Clannish is a word with a rather offensive taste on the tongue, and is
altogether too harsh a word to apply to that congregative instinct that
makes pure-minded persons crave the fellowship of kindred spirits.
There is nothing intentionally exclusive about the holiness movement.
If a man is shut out it is because he shuts himself out; if he does not
feel at home in a full salvation service it is because he has not yet
obtained full salvation.

BROWNING CLUBS.

Men who share great truths and principles in common find in each
other's presence and fellowship great help. Admirers of Browning form
"Browning Clubs"; foot-ball men gather themselves into "associations";
ministers meet in "Monday meetings"; Christians organize "churches"; is
it to be thought strange if people who are sanctified wholly delight to
meet for conference and mutual help?

THE SPLITTING OF THE CHURCH

A few uninformed persons say that "holiness splits the church." But
this is false. When men love God with all their heart and their
neighbors as themselves, nothing can separate them. If, however, people
of different sorts and kinds, some saved and some unsaved, are in one
organization, it will not require anything much to make them differ in
opinion. The real ecclesia, the genuine church, is not so easily split.
One of our most brilliant and spiritual holiness writers has remarked
in pleasantry that the anxiety of some in regard to the splitting of
the church would lead one to think that there was something inside
which they were afraid would be seen in case of a cleavage.

KEEP TO THE BIBLE.

Keep to the Bible idea of sanctification. Let not the adversary dupe
you and frighten you from its quest and obtainment. Begin now; seek,
search, pray, consecrate, believe, and soon the blessing will fall upon
your waiting soul.




CHAPTER III.

THOSE FOR WHOM CHRIST PRAYED--"SANCTIFY THEM."


CONVERTED MEN.

The men for whom Christ prayed were converted men, and were living in
justified relation to God. In proof of this statement, let the reader
study the context carefully.

A CLOUDLESS SKY.

In the sixteenth chapter of St. John, the one immediately preceding the
sacerdotal prayer, the conversation which is recorded would be
impossible were the disciples conscious of guilt. One can not read
those sublime verses without the irresistible conviction that the
disciples' sky of soul-consciousness was blue and cloudless. There is
no hint in Christ's discourse that these men are "of the world," but
rather it is taken for granted that they are children of God and heirs
of the kingdom.

A SPECIFIC STATEMENT.

It is the sheerest folly for one to maintain that the conversion of the
disciples did not occur prior to Pentecost. If words mean anything,
Jesus made a specific statement to the contrary. "Rejoice," says He,
"that your names are written in heaven." In His prayer He says to His
Father: "They have kept Thy word"; "they are Thine"; "I pray for them,
I pray not for the world." Notice the distinction which He makes
between "them" and "the world." These men are picked men. They are very
different from the great unpardoned, sinful throng outside the
kingdom--they are CHRISTIANS.

THE CHAMBER OF BLESSING.

A very good evidence of the genuineness of the conversion of the
disciples was their painstaking care to follow out minutely the
directions of their ascended Lord. He had prayed for their
sanctification; they desired it. He had spoken of a coming Comforter,
and they eagerly awaited His advent. He had said, "Tarry in Jerusalem
until" His arrival, and they conscientiously met in an "upper room" for
a ten-day prayer-meeting. "Farewell! friends; farewell! memory-haunted
synagogues; farewell! sacred temple; farewell! long-bearded priests;
farewell all! we must go to prayer: our Lord said that we should be
sanctified." And thus in long line the one hundred and twenty file up
the stairs to the Chamber of Blessing. There is no lightness, no
jesting, no quibbling, no bickering; all are serious, terribly in
earnest, intent on "the promise of the Father." There is Peter,
impulsive and eager, whole-hearted and enthusiastic; there is the meek
and quiet Mary, who sat at Jesus' feet at the old home in Bethany;
there is the child-like saint, the devout and spiritual John; there is
the repentant woman of Magdala; and there are many others who betake
themselves to that sacred place--"the upper room." One all-engrossing
thought fills their minds. "The promise of the Father which ye have
heard of me. The promise of the Father! The promise of the Father! O,
when will He come? We would know more about our departed Lord. He is
gone from us. Our hearts are torn and bleeding and lonely. Jesus said,
'He shall testify of me.' Would that He would come now!"

WHY ONLY THE FEW?

But why are there only one hundred and twenty? Was it not into
Jerusalem that Christ entered riding over a cloak-carpeted way amid the
deafening shouts of "Hosanna"? Did He not teach and instruct and heal
hundreds, if not thousands, in and about Jerusalem? Was He not lionized
at times by an admiring public? Yea, truly; but one may admire Christ
and yet not love Him. There are many who at some "hard saying" refuse
to walk with Him. Thousands who have a keen appreciation of "loaves and
fishes" shrink from "leaving all" and following Jesus. A great
concourse is drawn and held spell-bound by a naive, graceful, eloquent,
artless preacher who uses "lilies," and the "grass of the field," and
the "sower" of seed, and the "sparrow" in the air to enforce his truth.
But one may be interested, and yet not be saved.

THE AESTHETIC ELEMENT.

In some people religion appeals to the aesthetic nature, and to that
only. They festoon the cross with flowers, but never think of dying on
it. They are charmed by Gothic churches filled with "dim, religious
light." The waves of music from the great; sounding organ awe their
souls and fill them with a pensiveness which they mistake for
repentance. Pointed arches, sculptured capitals, fretted altars,
swinging censers, burning candles, white-robed choir-boys, errorless
order in church service--these auxiliaries influence them so strongly
in their sense of the beautiful that they think, "Surely I love God.
Why, of course I love God." But to love God involves something
practical. It means something more than mere profession. It means
rugged self-denial, Spartan heroism, perhaps the loss of an "arm" or
the "plucking out of an eye." Base must have been the soul which was
not attracted by One who "spake as never man spake"; low-minded the man
who did not see in Him imperishable beauty and refinement of soul; but
ah! discipleship means far more than that. Christ had flown up to
heaven. Who now will prove his love for Him by obeying His commands?
Who will tarry in Jerusalem awaiting the coming Spirit, and then, the
Comforter having come, be ready to "Go into all the world, discipling
all nations"? Answer: All who are truly children of God. The preaching
of sanctification is the touchstone by which the genuineness of
conversions can be tested. The truly living "hunger and thirst after
righteousness"; the dead do not "bother their heads about a second
blessing."

THE STEAMER "PURITAN."

Let us illustrate: It was fifteen minutes until the schedule time for
the "Puritan" of the "Fall River Line" to leave her New York pier. The
evening was warm, and the usual crowd filled the decks. Many had come
on board to see their friends off for Newport, Bar Harbor and "the
Pier." Passengers and their friends sat in groups and chatted, talked
about the trip, the weather, the situation at Santiago, the flowers
they held, the concert by the orchestra. It was impossible for an
observer to determine just who were passengers and held tickets, and
who were merely bidding farewell to their friends. Suddenly an officer
in gold-braided cap and blue uniform appeared, and cried out with an
authoritative voice and a look of command, "All ashore who are going
ashore! All ashore who are going ashore!" Immediately there were hasty
hand-clasps and hasty good-byes, and a large part of the company
marched quickly down the stairs and across the gang-plank. Those who
were left held tickets and were "going through."

THE STAMPEDE FOR SHORE.

In a revival of religion it is often a matter of considerable
difficulty to determine the genuinely converted. In the confusion of
large altar services, and the crush of great congregations, who are the
saved? No man can tell. Many are moved by sympathy for their friends.
Others are charmed by the congregational singing and the music of the
organ. Many see that the revival is bound to go, and, like Pliable,
they are swept along for a time with it. But there appears in this
mixed company a man with the stamp of divine authority upon his brow,
the gold braid of full salvation on his helmet, the dialect of Canaan
on his tongue and the air of official appointment about his person:
"Without holiness no man shall see the Lord! All ashore who are going
ashore! All ashore who are going ashore!" Immediately "there is no
small stir." Some leave the boat by way of the gang-plank carping at
the words of the officer and arguing as they go; some in great haste
vault the balustrades and railings and leap for the pier; still others
climb out the windows of staterooms and run screaming toward the
nearest ladder which will enable them to leave the "good ship Zion."
Gradually quiet is restored. The company is smaller, and of whom is it
composed? The genuinely converted. What are they doing? They are asking
the nearest officer how soon the boat leaves for New England. "When can
I be sanctified wholly? O, pray for me! I want the blessing now!" They
are "going through."




CHAPTER IV.

CHRIST'S PRAYER ANSWERED.


GOD LISTENS.

When Christ opens His mouth, God bows down His ear. "I know that thou
hearest me always." The disciples did not wait long until they were
baptized with the Holy Ghost. Christ's prayer found audience and the
answer was not long delayed.

HEART CLEANSING.

The baptism with the Spirit which was administered to the one hundred
and twenty effected their sanctification. The cleansing of their hearts
was one of the effects of the out-pouring of the Spirit. Sanctification
and the baptism with the Spirit are therefore coetaneous--they take
place at the same time.

PETER'S PROOF.

This is proven by an inspired statement made by Peter. Referring to the
Gentiles he says that God "put no difference between them" and us Jews
who were sanctified at Pentecost, "purifying their hearts by faith."

THE MANNER OF CLEANSING.

There need be no confusion as to the manner of cleansing. Jesus prayed,
"Sanctify them THROUGH THY TRUTH." It is by means of the truth preached
of and read, that we first hear of a full deliverance from all sin. It
is "through the truth" that we learn of God's willingness as well as
His power to sanctify. If it had not been for THE BLOOD, Jesus could
never have guaranteed the coming of the Comforter; the blood is "the
procuring cause" of all the blessings which we receive. Everything
comes through the atonement. FAITH is the human condition necessary for
the cleansing of the soul; so that, in a very important sense, we are
sanctified by faith. THE DIVINE OMNIPOTENT HOLY GHOST is the immediate
agency of heart-cleansing. He is the baptizing element administered by
Christ the Divine Baptizer: "He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost."

FIRE!

It would be well for us to notice some of the characteristics of the
Pentecostal anointing. John the Baptist, minister of the gospel and
preacher of genuine regeneration, said of Jesus that "he should baptize
with the Holy Ghost and fire," thus using a most powerful symbol to
characterize the nature of the work of the Holy Ghost. Everyone is
familiar with the action of fire; it burns everything combustible with
which it comes in contact.

CONSEALED SERPENTS.

We submit that no one can tell just how much there is in the heart that
needs to be consumed. There are things dormant in the unsanctified
heart of which the man never dreams. There are serpents coiled in
balls, and vipers spitting poison, and centipedes, and fat blinking
toads, and vampires, and lizards, and tarantulas, that we never suspect
of being in the soul. But they are there.

THE EMBRYOS OF CRIME.

It is God's mercy that says, "Be ye holy," for He knows that unless we
get cleaned out and purified the inner reptiles will poison us to
death. Every unsanctified man carries in his bosom the seeds of all
possible crimes, the embryos of all black actions. There are times when
we half believe that something of the kind is true. Did you ever stand
by the cage of a lion and watch his restless pace and feel that you had
something in you kindred to him? Many a man has gazed into the green
eyes of a wild beast and trembled, feeling a similarity of nature.
Every son of Adam feels the beast stir in him at times, until Pentecost
eradicates the bestial principle.

SMOULDERING EMBERS.

The embers from which hell-fire is kindled smoulder in the unsanctified
heart. It is dangerous to attempt to build a Christian character over a
latent volcano. A once active volcano becomes inactive. The lava cools,
the ashes settle, and the smoke drifts away. An enterprising farmer
covers a considerable space of the once fiery volcanic field with fresh
earth carted from a fertile valley. All goes well for a year or two.
The garden prospers, the vegetables are most encouraging, and the
produce is abundant. But one morning the farmer notices that smoke is
issuing from the crater at the summit of the mountain. The sky blackens
and red flames flash amid the clouds of smoke. The land is shaken with
earthquakes. Suddenly, right in the middle of his verdant field, a
great red-lipped chasm opens and blue flames leap upwards and surge
toward the sky. His crops are blasted with the "fierce heat of the
flame," and the work of years is wrecked in a moment.

BLUE FLAMES OF GEHENNA

No permanent Christian life can be built upon the foundation of an
unsanctified heart. For a time the graces of the Spirit may seem to
grow, but in some sad hour the surface will split open and the man will
leap back aghast at the blue flames of Gehenna, which singe his brows
and blacken his cheeks.

THE PROPHET AND PRINCE.

An old white-haired prophet and a gay young prince are in conversation.
The aged man bows his head upon his staff and weeps.

"For what are you weeping, old man?"

"Ah, I am thinking of the black and dastardly crimes you will commit
when you have once become king."

"Is thy servant a dog, a ruthless town whelp, that he should do such
things?"

PROPHECY FULFILLED

But years roll on and the young man is king, and his hands are stained
with crime, and the old man's predictions come true. God had given the
aged saint a view of the boy's breast, and he saw the embryonic seeds
of sin which, if allowed to remain, would sprout and produce a fruitage
of evil deeds.

THE BROKEN FLOWER

The secret of the downfall of many a brilliant character is a bosom
sinfulness little expected to be in existence. No man saw the black and
ugly thing but it was there. A lady had a tall and graceful plant. The
flowers were white and beautiful and all the town said, "What a fine
flower!" One day a storm swept across the garden. One plant was
injured; it was the one which people had admired and praised. Filled
with grief, the lady stooped to examine the stem, and found that it had
been pierced by a worm-hole. The insect had worked silently and
secretly. No one saw him cutting into the heart of the tall and
magnificent flower, but in a storm, under a test severe and protracted,
the stem snapped and the choice beauty of the garden was a thing of the
past.

THE WORM IN THE HEART.

It is the worm in the heart with his relentless and resistless tooth,
which weakens the character. Under severe and protracted temptation the
will snaps and yields, and the beautiful life is a wreck and fit only
for the dump of the Universe.

STUMPS AND ROOTS.

There are many roots, hidden roots, which bury themselves deep in the
soil of the heart. They extend far below clear cerebration, twisting
and twining themselves in "the fringe of consciousness." It takes the
fire of the Holy Ghost to follow them deep into the ground and destroy
them. It used to be a pastime of the boys in eastern Ohio to pile great
heaps of brush upon huge stumps in newly-cleared land. All the long
October day they would toil, raising a stack of dry limbs upon the
stump which needed to be removed. In the evening when twilight came and
the stars shone out, they would light the brush and watch the flames
greedily devour the pile. In the morning when the lads returned to the
scene of the fire, no sign of the stump was to be seen. Looking closely
they saw great holes as large at the top of the ground as a man's body,
and tapering to a small point as they went deep into the earth. The
fire had found the huge roots, and had tracked them into their retreats
and consumed them.

FIRE OF PENTECOST.

We pile the brush of time and talents and money and name and self upon
the altar, and the fire of Pentecost, which God sends as He sent to
Mount Carmel of old, will destroy not only the brush, but the roots of
sin, one and all.




CHAPTER V.

CHRISTIAN UNITY.


A COMMON PLATFORM.

One of the results spoken of by Christ in His prayer, and brought about
by sanctification, is Christian unity--"that they all may be one."
There is but one remedy for sectism and bigotry, and it is found in the
answer to Christ's petition. When Pentecost comes to us we are all
lifted upon one grand common platform and shake hands and shout and
weep and laugh and get so mixed up that a Presbyterian can not be
distinguished from a Methodist, nor a Friend from an Episcopalian
vestryman.

FALSE UNITY.

We have heard much about the organic union of churches. Many great and
good men have looked forward with sanguine hopes to the day when we
should do away with denominations. In a few cases two churches of
different sects have united and worshipped in one congregation. But the
causes of such unity are frequently far from gratifying. In D----the
Methodists and Primitive Methodists clasp hands and join forces because
they can thus make one preacher do the work which two formerly
performed. In K----the Baptists and Presbyterians unite because the
thirteen members of one church and the seven of the other feel lonely
in their great refrigerators and are inclined to make friends and
preserve life. The cold is most intense. In the far North the weather
is sometimes so severe that wild beasts, ordinarily hostile both toward
each other and man, crowd close together near the campfire of the
explorer.

With many churches it is "unite or die!" The mallet of the auctioneer
threatens the steeple-house, the young folks are off "golfing" or
"hiking," and the gray-beards, lonely and terror-stricken as they see
church extinction approaching, favor "a union of forces with some other
church." In the church magazines of the next month appear sundry
articles on "the broad and liberal spirit of the nineteenth century
church." "A large catholicity is taking the place of the old fogyism of
former days," scribbles the hack-writer.

THE "MILKSOP'S" THEORY.

In a few cases large congregations have united. When we behold it our
hopes rise, but they are doomed to early blight by a careful study of
the situation. The cause of denominationalism is the tenacious clinging
to faith and doctrines. Whether or no we ought to all believe precisely
alike about non-essentials, one thing is sure, the man who does not
cleave to some faith, heart and head and brain and blood, is worthless
in Christ's army. Milksops may be ornamental, they are certainly not
militant, and God wants soldiers. The man who does not know what he
believes, and the man who says "it does not matter what one believes if
one is only sincere," are more despicable than the Yankees who burned
witches in Salem. Better that a man be "narrow" than that he be so
"broad" as to take in "the devil and all his angels." Out upon our
folly when we barter away the truth of God for a flimsy, tissue-paper
bond of so-called "fellowship"!

CHRISTIAN ONENESS.

There is a unity, however, and to it Christ referred, which does not
consist in uniformity of creed but in oneness of heart. When we are
truly sanctified the non-baptizing Quaker, and the trine immersionist,
and the High Church Episcopalian, and the foot-washing Tunker, and the
Methodist, and the Baptist, and the Congregationalist all unite in one
far-reaching melodious chorus,

    "HOLINESS UNTO THE LORD!"

DISTINCTIONS OBLITERATED.

Sanctification destroys sticklerism for non-essentials and the lust for
fine distinctions in dogmatics. It slays the doctrinaire and makes a
red-hot revivalist out of him. The purified soul takes the Bible for
his "credo" and loves God's children of whatever name with a generosity
that overtops every inadequate consideration. The sanctified are united
by a common cause and a common experience. Opinions may differ as to
ecclesiastical polity or the mode of baptism, but the white cord of
sanctification is "the bond of perfectness" which makes them one
bundle. Yale and Cornell are rivals with their "eights" and "shells" on
American Hudson, but men from both colleges join forces to beat the
Britishers at Henley. Holiness people of every church unite to "push
holiness."

THE SPOKES AND THE HUB.

When the glorious grace of full salvation is experienced, love for
Christ is increased and intensified. Everyone wants to magnify Him and
live close to Him: and as we get close to Him, the Hub, the distance
between us, the spokes, is lessened.

THE D.D. AND THE NEGRO.

A D.D. and a negro meet on a Mississippi River boat. They fall into
conversation. The doctor speaks of the Lord. The negro's eyes fill and
he says, "You know my Savior?" and they shake hands and weep and shout.
Why this community of feeling between men of such diverse stations in
life? Both possess the blessing of entire sanctification.

VARIOUS SECTS

The writer has had the privilege of preaching in churches of different
denominations in the work of special evangelism, but never has he known
the falling of Pentecostal fire to fail to burn up sectarianism. It is
no easy matter to find out from the preaching of our holiness preachers
under what denominational flag they sail. Full salvation obliterates
the fences which separate the people of God and makes them really "one
in Christ Jesus."




CHAPTER VI.

FEARLESSNESS.


PETER THE FEARLESS.

There was a man among the one hundred and twenty "upper room believers"
in whom Pentecost effected a most apparent and almost spectacular
change. It was Peter. We remember him as the man at whom the young girl
pointed her finger and laughed. We recall that he was so cowardly that
he denied his Lord on the spot, swearing that he did not know Him.
Behold this same Peter on the day of Pentecost. He is charging home the
murder of Christ. Fear is gone, and gone forever. He faces men and does
not flinch an iota. Carnality, the source of cowardice, has been
removed, and the weakling is turned into a Lord Nelson for bravery, and
a Savonarola for faithfulness to men's souls.

SHALL WE TREMBLE?

Fear of man is one of the most illogical things in the world. Men sell
the blood of Jesus and hope of heaven and eternal happiness because of
"what people say." Think of it, afraid of a man who will die and be
hurried under ground before he rots! Frightened at a thing dressed in a
long black coat and a white cravat with a golden-headed cane and a tall
hat and a frown; a thing which will stop breathing some fine day and
the worms will eat! Shall I tremble when an ecclesiastical Leo utters a
roar? Shall I halt and stammer because a top-heavy lad from a
theological seminary, hopelessly in love with himself, scowls at the
word "sanctification"?

QUEER COURAGE.

There are some who bolster their courage by saying ostentatiously, "I
don't care what folks say," but their very vehemence shows that they DO
care a very great deal. We boys all remember how we used to whistle
when we passed a graveyard after dark to show we "weren't afraid"; and
how hard it was to keep our mouths puckered and how shaky our legs felt!

AFRAID TO BREAK STEP

The folks we are afraid of are afraid of us. What a situation! A great
regiment of people marching straight down to hell, everyone afraid to
break step for fear the others will laugh! That is precisely the
condition of nearly every sinner.

COURAGE OF THERMOPYLAE

Sanctification takes away the shrinking timidity and puts in a courage
like that at Thermopylae. There was once a young man who, previous to
his sanctification, was so timid that he frequently stayed away from
church for no other reason than that he feared God might ask him to
testify. He enjoyed meetings and loved to hear preaching, but the very
idea of testimony would frighten him almost ill. Now he frequently
addresses many hundreds and never feels the slightest embarrassment.

UNMASK PRURIENCY.

The ministry is sadly in need of a blessing which will give it courage
to attack sin of all kinds and degrees. We need men who will rip the
mask off the putrid face of corruption and pronounce God's sentence
upon it; who will lift up the trap-door of the cess-pools of men's
hearts and bid them look within at their own slime and filth; who will
"cry aloud and spare not," though the infuriated cohorts of bat-winged
demons snarl and shriek.

SPEAK PLAINLY.

There will be a day when men will curse us because we have not preached
more plainly. You can call a spade "a spade" or you can designate it as
"an iron utensil employed for excavating purposes," but if you want
folks to understand what you are driving at use the shorter term.

SHOOTING OVER MEN'S HEADS.

There is too little plain Anglo-Saxon preaching. We shoot far over the
heads of our congregations and do not even scar the varnish on the
gallery banister. We dwell on the points of distinction between
Calvinism and Arminianism when the greater part of our people do not
know the difference between an Arminian and an Armenian, and some good
old sister thinks we are preaching on the cruelty of the Turks. Here I
am discussing "The Dangers of Imperialism" and "The Anglo-American
Friendship," while men are starving for the Bread of Life! Brethren in
the ministry, let us be less anxious about the syllogistic accuracy of
our sermons and be more eager to help men live right and quit sin and
go to heaven.

THE PULPIT CANNON.

There are many sins which few men have the courage to antagonize in
public. Theoretically the pulpit is supposed to cannonade all sin of
every variety and species, but, alas, it is usually too cowardly. The
Spirit-filled man fears no one from Sandow down to Tom Thumb, from a
plug-hat Bishop to a little pusilanimous dude preacher.

GHASTLY CRIMES.

It is not that ministers are unawares of the prevalence of black and
ghastly crimes, but that they dare not speak openly against them. Too
many are contaminated with evil and involved in guilt for the preacher
to voice with impunity the truths which burn in his soul. He knows only
too well that if he dares assert his manhood and exercises the
prerogative of Christ's minister, the retribution will be swift and
terrible, viz: ejectment from his pastorate!

MURDER

How ominous is the silence concerning murder. And yet the land is
swarming with crimson-handed murderers and murderesses. Many of them
are members of our "best churches" and move in the most select society.
Some of them read with animation the responses in church service and
repeat the Lord's Prayer with the greatest gusto. A few--not many, we
devoutly trust--talk about "sanctification." Poor, deluded, hoodwinked
souls! they are blinded by Satan. Their hands are red with blood, and
their hearts are black as hell. Were they to ever approach the heaven
of which they sanctimoniously prate, they would be met at the gate with
the curse of murdered infants who never saw the light.

INFANTICIDE

If there is a pitiable sight in all God's great universe, if there is a
scene over which angels shed tears and demons shriek laughter, it is an
old cruel-eyed mother, who has seared her conscience and sinned away
all noble womanliness and blasted her own soul, whispering into the
unsoiled ears of her daughter the way in which to murder her own
offspring; and if there is a hot hell, such a mother will make her bed
in it.

POODLE-DOGS.

The duties and cares of maternity are too irksome, and so the women who
might be the mothers of John Wesleys and Fenelons and Metchers and
Inskips and Cookmans are petting poodle-dogs and rat-terriers.

THE VITRIOL OF WRATH.

How many preachers dare speak in clarion tones what religion and
science concur in asserting concerning vice? But know ye by these
presents, all of Adam's race, that what depraved humanity pronounces
all right and harmless, the Almighty God who whirls the worlds will
corrode and scald with the burning vitriol of His wrath, and woe! woe!
woe! to the man or woman with whom is found sin.

GILT-EDGED FRAUDS.

Any tyro knows who drowned Morgan, but the clergyman who "opens up" on
Masonry is a curiosity. Why, how can the ministers say anything when
they are the chaplains of these gilt-edged frauds called "lodges"? It
does not take much calculation to show that an institution which spends
three dollars in giving away one has no right to exist. Some of the
more weak-minded and puerile of the clergy are doubtless in fear lest
their "tongues should be torn out by the roots and their hearts buried
in the rough sands of the seashore." Brave men are not so easily scared.

BOLOGNA SAUSAGE.

Secretism in itself is suspicious. Solon said that he wanted his house
so constructed that the people could see him at all hours and thus know
him to be a good man. A system which is so built that the public is
kept in the dark is entitled to the attention of a Pinkerton. Bologna
sausage made in a factory at the door of which is a huge sign, "No
Admittance," may be all right, but you can not make people think so.

THE ENTERTAINMENT.

There are few preachers so foolish and illogical as to believe that the
entertainment plan is the best way to raise money for church work, yet
scarcely one of them declares his honest straight-forward conviction
about it. Now and then a Hale, more daring than the rest, writes a
remonstrative article for the Forum, but the great mass keep quiet. A
Pentecostal ministry will wheel its guns into position and load and
fire into the supper and festival crowd notwithstanding the voices of
objectors.

HEROISM.

Whatever may be the matter under consideration the sanctified man dares
anything right. God is with him, and he feels His presence. Right is
right, and by the grace of God he will stand by it though all the world
howl and roar.




CHAPTER VII.

RESPONSIVENESS TO CHRIST.


A COAL AND A FLAME.

Among the results of the coming of the Comforter is an increase in warm
personal love for Jesus. Conversion plants divine love (agape) in the
heart, but sanctification quickens and intensifies it. Conversion drops
a coal into the breast; the fuller grace fans it into a flame.

SOUNDING STRINGS.

There is a place in experience where Christ's voice sets the whole
being vibrating. The soul is so in tune with Him that the cadences of
His tones fill the soul with a tremor of glee and gladness. If you sing
the scale in a room where there is a piano the corresponding strings of
the instrument will sound. Thus it is with Jesus and the sanctified
soul. When Christ speaks the heart answers spontaneously.

REGENERATION

Regeneration does much for us. But there is that even in the heart of
the regenerate which is antagonistic to Christ. The whole man does not
say instinctively, "Thy will be done"; yet there is something within to
which the Lord can appeal. Consult Peter. He tells us of "exceeding
great and precious promises by which we become partakers of the Divine
nature." We "take a part" (partakers) of the divine Shekinah into our
hearts. We are not only "adopted" but born of God, and by a divine
heredity we possess His character.

SAMUEL.

We see this beautifully illustrated in the case of Samuel. Given in
covenant to God from his birth, and early taught the word of the Lord,
he possessed the changed heart and the attuned ear. When God's voice
fell out of the skies that night something in Samuel heard what aged
and mitred Eli could not hear. Eli had the theory and reasoned out who
the speaker must be, but the heart of Samuel awoke intuitively at the
sound of that voice.

THE VOICE FROM THE SKY.

As Jesus taught in the temple God spoke, and many whose ears were dull
because their hearts were hard and unchanged said, "It thundered."
Others saw that something extraordinary had occurred and admitted that
"an angel spoke to Him." But the disciples whose "names were written in
heaven," and who had regenerated hearts, knew it was the voice of God.

THE FLINTY WORLD.

But while the child of God is in sympathy with God he must be
sanctified wholly to be fully, constantly and completely responsive to
Christ. Jesus wants a bride who will live His life with Him and enter
into all His plans and sorrows, ambitions and trials, aims and
purposes. There are many people who are glad Jesus died for them who
know nothing about "suffering with Christ." Yet the Bible is filled
with allusions to it. The Heavenly Bridegroom wants a companion who
will understand Him. This cold, hard, flinty, wicked world does not.
"He came unto His own and His own received Him not." He knocked at the
door of His own vineyard and the husband-men said, "Come, let us kill
the Son." The divine Lord hungers for some one who will not misjudge
His purposes nor impute to Him base motives.

THE UNAPPRECIATED.

We have all seen people who were never appreciated. Those who were near
to them by blood and kindred always thought them strange and visionary.
What a sad thing if Christ's bride does not appreciate His aims for the
world, His sorrow over perishing souls, His heart-ache over dying men!
"The fellowship of His sufferings"--what can it mean? It means that we
mourn over the sin in the world which makes Christ weep; sob over the
evil that makes Him hang His fair head and groan. It means that ever
and always we shall look at things from the Christ standpoint.

THE SHEEP AND THE SHEPHERD.

"My sheep know [recognize] my voice," says the Shepherd. He states the
principle that "sheep" always hear when He speaks. "Lambs" may be at
times mistaken as to the voices that cry in the soul, but Christians
whose experience entitles them to the designation, "sheep," do not err
as to the speaker. Watch a good shepherd collect his flock at evening.
Every sheep knows him. It is getting dark, and the quiet animals are
busily feeding in the fragrant clover, but the tender cadences of the
voice of their guide and protector pierce their delicate ears and enter
their gentle hearts, and the white flock comes bounding toward the
shepherd. A sportsman in golf suit and plaid cap and with a fine
baritone voice may call earnestly, but "a stranger will they not
follow." The shepherd holds the key to their confidence, and no one
else can unlock the door to their love.

CHRIST HAS THE KEY.

Christ has the key to our hearts. He stands in the dusk of evening in
the falling dew and sends His sweet voice out across the billowing
fields of clover, and all His sheep leap toward "the Good Shepherd."

THE COW AND THE SUNSET.

Sanctification brings out the power of appreciation in the soul. What
God does for you fills your soul with gratitude, and you can get
blessed any time of day or night by simply reflecting on the mercies
and lovingkindnesses of the Lord. The natural human heart does not
appreciate God, and sees nothing especially lovely in Him. A cow and
the man who owns the cow may stand side by side and look at the same
sunset. The cow sees a big splotch of crimson and gold; the other sees
one of God's sky-paintings, and is inspired to holy living and
self-denial and fidelity to the Master. You must have a "sunset nature"
to appreciate a sunset, and you must be sanctified wholly to see in
Christ a beauty and loveliness which no Murillo and no Raphael and no
Del Sarto have yet put on canvas.

THE LOVELY CHRIST.

O the lovely Christ! How the heart aches to go to Him! We get so
homesick for Jesus. People are so dull and uninteresting and vapid and
stupid--so precisely like ourselves--we get weary of the world and its
emptiness, and yearn to fly away to be with the spotless Christ and
live in that

    "Undiscovered country, from whose bourne
     No traveller returns"

Some day, thank God! the Bridegroom will step out upon the balcony of
heaven and look at us and speak to us in a tone inaudible to all but
ourselves, and our souls will bound with rapture and the earthen vessel
will crumble and we will spread snowy pinions and wing our flight up to
the presence of our soul's King!




CHAPTER VIII.

SOUL-REST.


AN EFFECT.

One of the beatific effects of the cleansing of the heart from all sin
is soul-rest. It always accompanies the glorious experience of entire
purity.

FACIAL INSCRIPTIONS.

This poor tired world of ours needs rest. Study the faces of the people
you meet in the streets, in the markets, in the cars, in the churches,
and there is one word NOT written on them, and that word is "Rest." You
will find many other words written on them. On some faces you see
"Selfishness" in crabbed, crooked letters; on others "Lust" in
bold-faced type; on others "Gluttony"; on others, "Self-Conceit"; on
others, "Craftiness"; and on through a thousand unworthy legends; but
the one thing which makes life worth living is not found except among
the sanctified.

VAMPIRES AND BATS.

It is wonderful how elusive rest is. You may search for it all your
days and grow gray and haggard, and sit down in the evening of life
with the vampires circling about you and be forced to confess, "I have
not found rest!" You may retire from business and say, "I will spend my
declining years in peace," but as the sun goes down the bats come out
and flap the black skinny wings of the sins of other days in your
affrighted face. If you are a student you may drop your books like Dr.
Faust and hurry to the country, but the imp of restlessness will dog
your steps and snare your pathway and you will carry home with you a
Mephisto who will never leave you.

THE SEEDS OF ANARCHY.

Some Christian people seek rest in changing preachers, but there is
nothing in that to bring it. You may leave the minister who thumps the
desk and listen to a man with a nasal twang, but you are still restive
and unsatisfied. You think the reason your peace of soul is disturbed
is that Mrs. Garrulous talked about you, or that the weather is rainy
and disagreeable, or that the meetings are dull, or that people are
selfish. The real reason is that you have a restlessness in your heart
characteristic of inbred sin. You possess the seeds of dissatisfaction,
and lawlessness, and anarchy, and nothing but holiness of heart will
expel them.

THE OCEAN DEPTHS.

Down in the unfathomed depths of old Ocean there is no movement, no
disturbance. Gigantic "Majesties" and "Kaiser Wilhelms" and "Oregons"
and "Vizcayas" plow and whiten the surface; tempests rage and
Euroclydons roar and currents change and tides ebb and flow, but the
great depth knows no ripple. It is said that down there the most
fragile of frail and delicate organisms grow in safety. In the depths
of the sanctified heart there is no storm and no breaker. Trials may
come and leave white scars; billows may beat and surges may roll, and
water-spouts and tornadoes may make the upper sea boil with anguish and
sorrow and grief, but deep in the heart there is calm. There the
delicate graces of the Spirit thrive and luxuriate. Great, soulless,
iron-keeled, worldly institutions and sharp-prowed cutters may ride
over your sensibilities, but the inner placidity is unbroken.

THE ETERNAL SABBATH.

God's plan is to rest us so we can work for Him with ease and success.
He institutes an everlasting Sabbath in the spirit that we may be
ceaseless in sanctified activities. If a man is always jaded and tired
he can not take hold of his work with much enthusiasm.

SPIRITUAL POISE.

There is no mistaking the man or woman who has found the second rest.
There is a poise of spirit and a sweet serious balance of soul which
can not be counterfeited. The preacher who appreciates spirituality
sees no sight more beautiful than the serene, calm faces of auditors
from whose souls the tempests have been cast. Life's toils and
distractions and disappointments have all been negatived by the power
of the all-conquering Christ.

A SCENE AT ALLENTOWN.

These words are being written in the city of Allentown, Pa., where the
writer is spending ten days in a series of Pentecostal services. Last
evening we saw a symbol of the rest Christ gives. We strolled along the
east bank of the Lehigh River about half an hour after sunset. All the
western sky was beautiful with an afterglow. The water of the river,
silver near the shore and golden toward the west, was as still as the
face of a mirror. The trees on the shore leaned over perfect pictures
of themselves. The hills, which fell back gracefully from the valley,
were covered with cloaks of gold and vermillion and emerald, and not a
leaf stirred in the evening air. Far up the river the tiny bell of a
canal-mule tinkled drowsily. On the veranda of a little cottage a young
mother crooned a lullaby to a slumbering child, and a little bird in a
thick grove called, "Peace! Peace!"

CALM.

If God can make so beautiful a scene in the physical world, what can He
not make in the spiritual? Thank God! He can excel anything the natural
eye ever beheld. He can hang the soul with paintings and turn the
"River of Life clear as crystal" through it, and fill the chambers of
the heart with lullabies and the song of birds crying, "Peace!" If
there are times when we are awed and charmed by

    "All the beauty of the world"

let us remember that what we see is only a type of the grandeur and
glory and splendor He will put in our spirit-nature if we but permit
Him to sanctify us and cast out the storms and tempests.

THE PAIN OF SYMPATHY.

While we may possess and enjoy "the second rest" here and now, we need
not forget that another is promised to us. We get weary physically
sometimes here. The days frequently seem long and trying. There are
hours and hours of labor, and nights and nights of toil, but, thank
God! we can say at each sunset, "I am one day nearer rest." For while a
sanctified man is always at rest spiritually, he can not rest
physically to much satisfaction. In his dreams he can see the white,
drawn faces of the doomed, and hear the wild uncouth shriek of the
tormented. He remembers with horror that one hundred thousand souls are
rolled off into Eternity while the earth makes one revolution! He
thinks of cheerless homes, and torn and bleeding hearts, and wives
waiting for the sound of unsteady steps, and children friendless and
hungry, and figures leaping from bridges, and shaking hands holding
poison, and maniacs behind the bars glaring with wild eye-balls through
dishevelled hair! And he leaps from the couch with the cry, "O the pity
of it all!" And he can not be still, he can not be idle, but is
constrained to do his utmost by word and pen to save a sinking,
gurgling, drowning humanity.

WHEN IT IS ALL OVER.

But one day it will all be over. Soon we shall all have preached our
last sermon and prayed our last prayer and spoken our last word. Our
lives will soon have passed into history. That blessed hour will soon
be here in which we shall "lay down the silver trumpet of ministry and
take up the golden harp of praise." Hallelujah, it is coming! it is
coming! Praise the Lord!




CHAPTER IX.

PRAYERFULNESS.


DELIGHT IN PRAYER.

The precious grace of entire sanctification brings to the heart a
prayerful spirit. Prayer becomes the normal occupation of the soul. One
is surprised to discover that while it was formerly difficult, if not
irksome, to pray at times, now one prays because it is delightful and
easy.

DE RENTY.

Many of us have been surprised to read in the biographies of pious men
and women that they frequently spent hours in prayer. But the
sanctified man understands all that now. He can readily believe that De
Renty heard not the voice of his servant, so intent was he gazing into
the Father's face. He does not doubt that Whitefield in his college
room was "prostrate upon the floor many days, praying for the baptism
with the Holy Ghost."

J.W. REDFIELD.

The writer remembers of reading when just a child the thrilling life of
John Wesley Redfield. There was nothing which struck the boy-reader
with greater force than the prayerfulness of the man. It awed him, and
made him long to enjoy such an experience as would make prayer so
delightful. In the golden experience of sanctification he found that
prayer was delightsome and blessed. Such is the uniform testimony of
all who have been cleansed from depravity and anointed with the Holy
Ghost.

PRAYER HAS ITS ANSWER.

God means true prayer to have audience. We can not understand how God
can vouchsafe to us such tremendous effects as He asserts shall follow
prayer. We can not defend prayer philosophically; but either "he that
asketh receiveth," or the Bible is misleading and untrustworthy.

TRUE PRAYER.

But what is "true prayer"? In the first place, it is prayer which says,
"Thy will be done." If we pray selfishly, "asking amiss," we can hope
for no answer. We will get no hearing. We must ask with the thought,
"What is the Father's will? What does He consider best?"

DESPERATION.

True prayer must be earnest. It was the IMPORTUNATE widow that was
heard, and it is the importunate seeker that never fails of an answer.
If when sinners, backsliders, or believers come to the altar they would
pray with earnestness and desperation, there would be a far larger PER
CENT. of them who would go away fully satisfied. God never gives great
blessings to indifferent people. When He sees a man in an agony of
desire and longing, then He hastens to gladden his heart with an answer.

FAITH.

Prayer must be full of faith. James makes this clear to us. "Let him
ask in faith nothing wavering." God cannot bestow a blessing upon us if
we doubt Him. If a neighbor doubts your character, how much of your
heart do you let him see? If a fellow-preacher imputes selfish motives
to your acts, how often do you go to him and pour your heart out to
him? But those who believe in us--how frequently we run to them, unlock
our hearts and tell them all! It is thus with God. If we believe His
word, if we are sure of the veracity of His promise, and are
confidently expecting an answer, He will not, can not disappoint us.

THE FORGIVING SPIRIT.

There must be in us a forgiving spirit if our prayers are to be heard.
Forgiveness of our enemies precedes blessing for ourselves. "If ye
forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive
your trespasses." If I am bitter in my heart toward any creature, God
can not but be deaf to all my cries. If I nourish hatred, or meditate
revenge, or plot the downfall of any man, my prayers are vain; yea, all
my hope in Christ is futile!

GOSSIPING PREACHERS.

O that God may send us all the prayerful blessing! It is better that we
pray than that we discuss politics or talk "shop," or gossip or jest.
If we preachers and evangelists at camps and conventions would pray
more instead of getting in groups and talking about a world of
nothings, our sermons would mean full as much to those whom we address.

UNBROKEN CONNECTION.

Sanctification makes it possible for us to "pray without ceasing." The
indwelling Paraclete keeps the heart in a constant spirit of prayer, so
that at all hours and in all places prayers ascend. Communication is
kept up between the heart and the throne of Grod. No snows break the
wires. No floods wash away the poles. From the pulpit, from the
sidewalk, from the counter, from the railway coach, from the sick bed,
an ever-steady stream of prayer is kept up. They may befoul our names,
but they can not stop our praying. They may "cast us out as evil," and
may deny us pulpit privileges, and take away our salaries, but prayer
and praise they can not stifle nor hinder.

INCENSE AND THUNDER.

The prayers of God's people are sweet to Him. "With much incense"
burning in a golden censer (Rev. viii. 3) they float to His throne. But
notice the effect of the prayers of saints. Not only is there a silence
of an half-hour but "voices and thunderings and lightnings and an
earthquake" are observed in the earth. The children of God, if they but
pray and believe, can pull spiritual fire and earthquakes down upon
earth and effect great things for God and His Church.




CHAPTER X.

SUCCESS.


SUCCESS INTENDED.

Nothing is clearer in the Acts of the Apostles than that the disciples
after Pentecost had success in gospel service. Everywhere they went God
rained fire upon their Word and sanctioned the truth which they
preached by tremendous moral and spiritual upheavals.

B. T. ROBERTS.

Bishop Roberts has put the matter of success very succinctly: "If the
lawyer must win his case and the doctor cure his patient in order to be
successful, the minister and worker must save souls if they in their
calling are to be said to be successful." But alas, saving souls is
precisely what we are not doing. Thank God! there is here and there a
man who stands out as a soul-saver. But the average minister is not
distinguished for revivalism so much as proficiency in making a church
social a "blooming success."

FALLEN SAMSONS.

We all want to seem to succeed. We shun and dread the appearance of
failure. When a church begins to rot instead of grow it is natural for
us to do our utmost to find out some way of excusing the retrogression
without admitting our failure to reach men with the gospel. There are
evangelists, who in the palmy days of their power had wonderful,
heaven-gladdening revivals, who have ceased to wield "the sword of the
Lord and of Gideon," and, in order to cover their spiritual nakedness,
are forced to resort to finger-raising, card-signing methods for
stuffing and expanding "the big revival." There is no more sobbing, no
more desperate praying, no more shouting; all is "decent and in order,"
as well it may be, for all is dead.

QUESTION OF EVANGELISM.

Honor to soul-saving! Show us the man who wins men to our Master, that
we may clasp his hand and look into his face. Right here hangs all the
discussion about evangelism. If the evangelist gets men soundly and
scripturally converted and sanctified, let us bid him Godspeed! If he
only amuses them and deals in paltry three-cent sensationalism, away
with more of the same sort of stuff which we already have in so many
pastors!

THE DIVINE RECIPE.

One thing is certain: God intends success and only success for His
people. If, as His children, we fail, it must be because we have not
followed the divine recipe for power and accomplishment. It was because
the one hundred and twenty obeyed Christ and tarried at Jerusalem that
God used the early Church to whip the Roman Empire.

"HOW TO SUCCEED"

"How to Succeed," used as the title for a book, will make any book
sell, though it be as dry as a patent-office report. People want to
know how to succeed in the world. How strange then that ministers and
churches who are brilliant and conspicuous failures should shun the
preaching of Pentecost--the one cure for failure and the sole guarantee
of success.

EMPTY COMFORT.

How many times some of us have sighed over our inefficiency! How
frequently, in default of apparent results, we have been forced to
console ourselves with the thought that we are "sowing seed" and that
there will be an abundant harvest at no distant date! Thank God! there
is success for us all. Pentecost will give it to us.

JOHN THE BAPTIST.

We do not mean by success financial opulence. A man may be a success
and yet as poor as John the Baptist lunching on dried locusts and
honey-comb. One may be as wealthy as Croesus and yet be an awful
failure. A church may be rich and increased with goods and incur the
Laodicean curse.

PADDED STATISTICS.

Neither does success mean a great and highly-trumpeted statistical
report to lug to conference. Some of our most inspiring "successes" are
all right on paper, but in reality they are stuffed and padded
scandalously. No, success in Christian work is to "turn many to
righteousness," save souls, and secure the sanctification of believers.
If we do not see such results following our labor, we have either
missed God's plan as to our selection of a field or we are not living
in the present enjoyment of the Pentecostal Baptism.

THE EPOCHAL EXPERIENCE.

The preachers and evangelists who have won great successes in the
calling of sinners to repentance have almost without exception
testified to having received an "enduement" or "anointing" subsequent
to their conversion. The Caugheys, the Moodys, the Whitefields, the
Wesleys, the Foxes, the Earles, though in some instances they have not
believed in holiness according to the Wesleyan view, have all had an
epochal event after which their work and works were effective and
startling.

THE EFFECT OF PENTECOST.

Pentecost coming to a mission-worker will fill his heart with
enthusiasm and energy, and give him a host of jewels washed from the
mire and shining like meteors. The same experience coming to a mechanic
will fire him with a love for Jesus and a solicitude for souls that
will make him pray and fast and weep and work for his fellow-laborers,
for his neighbors, and for his friends. The Spirit coming to a gifted
singer will cause her to consecrate her voice, like Rachel Winslow in
Sheldon's "In His Steps," so that with holy melody she will reach
hearts hitherto hard and untouched.

THE PASSION FOR SOULS.

One of the conditions of success in soul-saving is a passion for the
salvation of immortal men and women. Full salvation always brings this,
and as long as a worker lives in its plentitude and enjoyment he is
consumed with a burning, longing, panting thirst for souls.

THE GIGANTIC LANDSLIDE.

The ministers of early Methodism and early Quakerism were not of the
sort who congregate in groups and discuss the relative desirability of
various appointments. They did not spend their leisure in jesting,
punning and guffawing, but in praying, studying, and working, for even
their vacations were turned into days of toil. They spent their all in
one endeavor--to save men from a yawning Pit and a lurid Hell. Nowadays
we live in perpetual relaxation and recreation. Smooth, insipid
preachers talk to shallow, giddy audiences, and the whole thing is on a
gigantic landslide. Lord, save! or death and damnation are sure.

THE UNCERTAIN FAITH.

There can be no successful denial of the assertion that real
soul-absorbing earnestness in religion is dying out. We sometimes mock
at the Herculean labors of men like Owen, and Baxter, and Calvin, and
Edwards. But though these men were perhaps more or less legalistic and
at times a little narrow, yet one thing is sure, they made religion the
business of life, and went at it with zest, enthusiasm, and
determination. Your modern "Christian" has "certain intellectual
difficulties"; is "not fixed in belief concerning Socinianism"; does
"not like the old idea of the Atonement"; in fact, is in a state of
fusion so far as his belief and faith are concerned. Men do not give
their life's blood for matters in which they have only a half-faith.
But when one is convinced that men are dying in the dark and that their
salvation depends in a measure on one's activity and fidelity, then one
is hot with zeal and fire from hat to heel and set to working for God
and eternal souls.

WEEPING OVER CHORAZIN.

This is the explanation of the zeal of men who are "burning for Jesus."
This is the reason men so frequently wear out in short order after they
are sanctified. They are dipped in fellowship with Christ's sorrow, and
beholding Him weeping over modern Capernaums and Chorazins their hearts
are melted at the sight, and they speed away to preach the gospel of
the lovely Son of God.

SANCTIFIED SUCCESS.

No wonder success comes to the sanctified man. Indwelt by the Shekinah,
filled with the Holy Ghost, his whole being energized with power and
force, "whatsoever he doeth prospers."




CHAPTER XI.

VISITS OF ANGELS.


DESCRIPTIVE PSALM.

The ninety-first Psalm is a painstaking description of the blessings
and benefits bestowed upon the man that "dwelleth in the secret place
of the Most High." Without doubt the entire chapter should be taken as
a photograph of the sanctified man. Among other things, this fortunate
and favored person is told that he is to have angelic guards and
ministers who will protect him and keep him "in all his ways."

GOD'S OWN.

The sanctified are in a peculiar sense God's own, and all the resources
of heaven are pledged to their protection. All the fire companies of
the firmament will turn out to extinguish a fire if it kindle on God's
saints. If need be, Jehovah will empty His balm jars but the wounds of
warriors shall be healed. Angels are detailed for our protection:
heavenly visitants hover near us lest the fires of affliction destroy
us.

UNDERSTANDING CHRIST.

The moment the soul is sanctified, it begins to understand Christ in a
new and delightful sense. It is given unto it to not only sit at His
feet in the temple, but to groan with Him in Grethsemane. It
understands Him, and, in suffering, is "as He is in this world."

A DARK HOUR.

It was a dark, dark hour for the Master. He had been praying a long
while, perhaps for several hours. The place was one familiar to Him.
Many a night after a long, wearisome day of teaching in the temple, He
had labored painfully up the slope of the Mount of Olives in search of
the quiet of "the Garden." Here the Savior had His oratory. Sometimes
the disciples were with Him; at other times He was alone.

A NIGHT OF CRISIS.

But this night was a night of crisis. The old olive trees, in all their
centuries of life, had never witnessed so intense a struggle as that
which took place on the night of His passion. Alive to all the pathos
of the hour, awake to all the gravity of the situation, sensitive to
the slightest breath, He prays to "the Father" with that desperation in
which the flight of time and the doings of the world are all forgotten.

UNCERTAINTY.

There was much about the hour which made it a painful one. There was,
first of all, an uncertainty concerning the will of "the Father." With
a great cry the lonely Christ fell to the ground: "If it be thy will
let this cup pass, nevertheless" let thy will, whatsoever it is, "be
done." Evidently He was not at that time really sure what the plan of
"the Father" was in regard to Him.

A BITTER CUP.

Uncertainty is a fearful test, when it comes to the soul of a man of
great and energetic purpose. So long as there is no doubt about the
course to be taken, so long as the plan is plainly revealed, it is easy
for a courageous man to advance. But to such a one uncertainty is like
a shock to the body, palsying the form and changing a strong arm into a
nerveless, useless stick of bone and tissue. A cup may be very bitter,
salt with the brine of tears and hot with the fire of vitriol, and yet,
if all the ingredients in that cup are known to him who drinks it,
grief has not reached its superlative. Socrates' duty was plain to him.
Hemlock was in the cup, and he knew it. But the liquor with which God
fills the tumblers of His people is brewed from a thousand elements.

A TEST.

To trust in the dark, to believe in a rayless midnight, to cling to a
thread well-nigh invisible, to say "Amen" to God when one has no idea
of the greatness of the meaning of "His will," that is the supremest
test of loyalty.

THE NIGHT PICKET.

The night picket stationed far out from the camp has need of much
greater courage than the soldier in battle ranks rushing on toward the
enemy. The man at the lonely picket post, cloaked in darkness, is
guarding against uncertainty. He can not tell at once whether a dark
object is a dangerous spy or a browsing Brindle. Sounds must be noted
and sorted lest the enemy steal up to the slumbering army and destroy
it. The snapping of twigs, the low whistle of a bird, the groan of the
wind, the murmur of a waterfall must all be listened to with care.

EVIL TIDINGS.

It is suspense and a nameless dread and fear that sap many a mind and
heart. Moments of breathless expectancy of evil tidings are like years
in the life, bringing ashes to the hair, lines to the cheek and
listlessness to the eye.

THE PALLED FACE.

"Be sure you are right, then go ahead," said Tennesseean Crockett; but
supposing that one can not "be sure" of anything except the love of
God, supposing that one looks out through the tangled limbs of the
olive trees of a Gethsemane to a sky studded with pitiless stars,
supposing that the future is obscure and the present black as Styx,
supposing that even the face of the Father Himself is palled and
curtained--then must one be content to trust and only trust.

THREE DISCIPLES

There was another cause for pain in "the Garden." The three disciples,
whom He had chosen to accompany Him in His dark and lonely vigil, slept
as He prayed. We can bring ourselves to overlook the negligence and
apathy of Nicodemus and Lazarus and Simon the leper and Zaccheus and
the crowds who had merely heard Him preach. We are willing perhaps to
excuse eight of the twelve for their drowsiness--perchance they did not
apprehend the full meaning of the hour to the Master. But there were
three disciples to whom Christ had ever laid bare His heart. With Him
they stood in the death chamber in the house of Jairus. To them it was
given to behold "the vision splendid" on the mount of transfiguration,
and these alone Jesus chose to enter into the fellowship of his Garden
sufferings.

NO EXCUSE.

These men did not nod and sleep ignorant of Christ's need of them. With
that tender confidence with which a truly great and colossal man
sometimes honors his friends, He had said, "My soul is exceeding
sorrowful, even unto death." He had warned them with the words, "Watch
and pray lest ye enter into temptation," and yet they slept!

"OUR OWN AFFAIRS."

It must have been a keen disappointment to Jesus to find His most
trusted friends so indifferent to His needs. Is there anything in life
sadder than the discovery that our own affairs are really only our own
affairs? We had thought that they were our friends', as well as our
own. We had supposed that our griefs were theirs also, but when
Grethsemane comes into our lives, and we writhe and twist among the
gnarled and knotted roots, when we turn with blanched, tear-sprinkled
faces to our chosen James and trusted Peter and beloved John to gasp in
their ears the story of our agony, we hear only the heavy breathing of
sound sleepers.

COLD, HARSH FACT.

If there is a sharper pang than this, man's heart has not found it. We
are by nature social beings. We crave fellowship and love and sympathy,
and it is so hard for us to realize that our choicest friends are
really "asleep" to our heart cries and heart interests. The cold, harsh
fact can be believed but slowly. Even the Lord seemed to find it hard
to convince His own heart that the John who had leaned at supper upon
His breast, was resting while his Master was sweating blood. He prayed
awhile and then, as if to see whether it was indeed true that no one
watched to help Him, "He came and found them sleeping." Sad, cruel
disappointment, and yet is it so rare that any one of us has not felt
its sadness and cruelty?

AN ANGEL.

But while men forgot the Nazarene and His troubles, Grod did not
forget. The Father was not negligent nor careless. "There appeared an
angel unto him from heaven strengthening him." The night was not too
dark for the angel to find Jesus, and the night of our troubles is
never too thick and black for the angels to find us. The paths of "the
Garden" may be grown up in weeds, the rough, scabeous limbs of the
trees may hang close to the ground, the driving clouds may hide the
moon and stars, but some celestial messenger will search us out and
find us.

IN MANY FORMS.

God has many angels, and they come in many forms. Sometimes the
solitary sufferer sees only a tiny flower, but love is in the flower,
and he knows he is not utterly forgotten. It may be only an hand clasp,
but warmth and sympathy are in it, and behold it is straightway "an
angel strengthening him." Perchance it is a letter with a foreign
postmark, but in it is nectar and ambrosia for a drooping spirit. Or
the angel may come enveloped in a text of Scripture or flying on the
wings of the music of some old hymn, such as:

    "Fear not! I am with thee.
      Oh, be not dismayed,
    For I am thy God!
      I will still give thee aid."

In whatever role the angel may come, God sent him, and his mission is
one of blessing and encouragement.

HEAVENLY VISITANTS.

We can well afford to suffer in the darkness, alone and uncomforted, if
angels will but visit us. John Bunyan can well be content in Bedford
gaol, if God but puts a dream in his head and heart that will last in
the memories and characters of men, when the sun is a burned-out cinder
and the stars are dying ash heaps. We can well be satisfied to have
sorrows unutterable and griefs inexpressible, if heavenly visitants
will but come to us.




CHAPTER XII.

GROWTH IN CHRISTLINESS OF LIFE.


MAKING A BOTCH.

One may have a clean, pure heart and yet be far from possessing a
matured Christian character. A man may love God with all his heart, and
yet not be wise in his selection of the things that will always please
God. Frequently the preacher may come down from the pulpit having made
a horrible botch of his attempt to serve God in the ministry. He may
feel the fact keenly, and be even more conscious of it than any of his
hearers. And yet that preacher may have a heart as white as Gabriel's
wing and a soul full of love to God and man. But as time goes on, and
he lingers repeatedly at the feet of Christ in prayer, God will show
him how he can serve Him more effectively and without the objectionable
features.

UNJUST CRITICISM.

The fact that purity is not maturity has given rise to misapprehension
on the part of many people. Indeed, many of God's dear children have
been misjudged and condemned because they did not have in addition to
pure hearts sound and solid judgment. As soon as a man professes the
blessing of perfect love, the sharp-eyed critics of the neighborhood
look out for "perfect sense," and "perfect manners," and "perfect
life," and when the subject of observation fails to meet the
expectation of the aforesaid critics, there is a great hue and cry that
"Sister A. or Brother B. has not got what is professed," when God knows
they HAVE got JUST what they profess--namely, perfect love, full
salvation. The Lord has never guaranteed a perfect head to any man that
breathes. We will make mistakes as long as we hang around this old
world, and it is injustice to exalted spirits who have this precious
grace, and an insult to the God who gave the grace, to condemn
sanctification because those who profess it are not angels, but simply
men and women cleansed and filled with the Spirit.

REPEATING MISTAKES.

But while God makes allowance for our weakness and our frailty, we
ought not to expect Him to indulge us in avoidable and needless errors.
We made a mistake. Very well. We knew no better than to make it. But
now that we do know better, we have no business repeating it. And right
along here comes a great expanse of territory which holiness people
need to cover. Here there is infinite room for advancement and progress.

"THE IMITATION OF CHRIST"

Thomas A'Kempis wrote a wonderful book on "The Imitation of Christ."
The failure in so many quarters in becoming Christlike is due to the
false method pursued. First, get a Christlike heart, and then let that
heart govern your life and actions. "Work OUT your own salvation," said
Paul, "for it is God that worketh IN you." Precisely! God puts a holy
heart into a man's breast, and his business from thence on is to bring
his life into line with the heart. The old life-habits may cling to him
for a time, but it is the business of the sanctified soul to free
itself from all that Jesus would not do were He on earth. Imitation of
Christ comes after sanctification, and not before. You simply can not
imitate Jesus if you have a reptile heart in you. If you have a filthy
mind you will talk "smut" and think "smut" in spite of yourself. You
may hide your bad self from the world, but your wife, or your husband,
or your family, those who are acquainted with you intimately, know that
you are base and coarse.

DANTE.

A glutton may stand and look at the thin, austere, ascetic face of
Dante and say within himself, "I will be a Dante," but all the world
knows that in a few hours he will be gourmandizing as swinishly as
before. And men look at the beautiful Jesus held up in Unitarian
pulpits and resolve to act like Him, and go right on being selfish, and
proud, and deceitful, and devilish. There must be a moral miracle,
there must be a spiritual upsetting and overturning, before a carnal
heart can begin to imitate the pure and spotless Son of God.

KINDNESS.

After we are sanctified, we ought to imitate Christ in kindness. How
kind He was! Where did He abuse anyone? He preached the truth, but He
never maligned any of His auditors.

THE "LITTLE THINGS"

It is the "little things" that make up the mosaic of life. Our friends
know us, not by the speeches we deliver, nor the sermons we preach, nor
the books we write, but by the tones of our voices, and the letters we
pen, and the words we use in daily life. Introduce kindness into a
discordant family and how Eden-like the home becomes! Why are we not as
considerate and polite to those who are all the world to us as we are
to strangers and neighbors? Christlike kindness would fill our hearts
with thoughtfulness for those about us. It would bid us carry a torch
to many a darkened life, and incite us to share the burden pressing
upon many an aching shoulder.

TRUE HUMILITY.

Christ had great charity for the faults of those with whom He was
associated. How He bore with the dull and almost stupid disciples! How
He bears with us in our worse and more inexcusable blockheadedness!
And, if He is so charitable and patient with our faults, how ought we
to be with others? There comes a time in our lives when we are simply
astonished that people pay any attention to us at all. We are so
conscious of our short-comings, and so keenly aware of our mistakes,
that it seems to us that surely no one is quite so blundering and
fallible as we are. How easy it is then to bear with one another!

LOOKING-GLASS HUMILITY.

We ought to work humility out into our lives. Jesus lived an humble
life--a life of the truest and deepest humility. Not a humility
conscious of itself and ever gazing at itself through the fancied eyes
of others, but a humility that was real and unaffected.

A CHRISTLIKE MAN.

The writer has in mind a man of deep and earnest piety, a scholar, a
successful preacher and author. With all his learning and scholarship
he is as humble as a child, and one can not look at him without
feeling, "There is a Christ-man." Often as the pen flies quickly across
the page, or as the lips are moving in the delivery of a sermon, or as
an altar service is in progress, the slight, thin figure of that man
flashes to the brain, and the eye grows dim and the heart-prayer rises,
"Lord, make me an humble man." There are so many great men, eloquent
men, learned men, dignified men, but so few humble men. God, increase
their number in the land!

ACTIVITY.

Another thing in Jesus' life which sanctified people ought to learn to
imitate was His activity. His days, and even His nights, frequently,
were filled with service. After long days of teaching and preaching, He
would seek out some quiet nook and spend the still and lonely hours of
night in prayer to the Father.

THE INDIVIDUAL VISION.

Men who come into close touch and communion with Christ are impelled
irresistibly to earnest and ceaseless service. They see needs which no
one else seems to see. They hear the plaintive voices of dying men, and
the tearful cries of despondent women, and the helpless moans of
unloved children. They have visions which others never understand, and
dream of things with which their dearest friends can not sympathize.
They have given their all that they may know Christ, and He has
rewarded them by disclosing His heart to them. They know why His face
is tearful, and His voice is filled with sadness. They know why He is
"a man of sorrows and acquainted with grief." They are baptized into a
baptism of love for souls, and compassion for the sorrowing, similar to
that in which He is plunged. It is for this reason that men hear the
voice of God calling them away from the hearth-stone out into the
desolate earth.

ST. TELEMACHUS.

St. Telemachus heard the voice of God, and straightway "followed the
sphere of westward wheeling stars," and journeyed on to Rome muttering,
"The call of God! The call of God!" Not on a foolish errand did he go,
for, after his visit to the Eternal City, gladiatorial combats ceased.

"HE THAT WARRETH"

Brethren, be true to Christ. Let not even those who love you best draw
you from a steadfast purpose to spend your life and all for the
Galilean. Flee ease and luxury and comfort, and impose hard tasks upon
yourselves. Your friends may seek to hinder you with cries of, "Rest!
Tarry!" but like Christian in Bunyan's dream stop your ears and go
quickly on your journey.

THE HOME COMING.

Some day your little service will be complete. Your sun will set. The
west will be filled with beauty, and the birds will twitter softly in
the trees as you trudge the last mile into the City; and as the shades
deepen, and the air grows chill, the Master Himself will meet you, take
you to His heart, wipe the tear from your cheek, the dust of the road
from your brow, and the sorrow from your heart, and lead you to the
court, where with those whom you love, and those who love you, Eternity
will be spent in the light of His pure and shining face.




EXPERIENCE


THE VALUE OF TESTIMONY.

It has pleased God to place in our hands two weapons by which we are to
overcome Satan--"the blood of the Lamb, and the word of our testimony."
It was the narrated experiences of the people of God, and the modest
declarations of the saving power of Christ, which convicted me of my
need and led me to seek the grace of God. Very briefly, therefore, I
will sketch God's dealings with my own soul.

EARLY PRAYER.

I was born September 30th, 1877, at Westfield, Indiana. My parents were
both ministers in the Society of Friends, and I can not remember When I
first began to pray, for my mother taught me to go to God with
everything, even when a very small child. When I was five and a half
years of age we moved to Walnut Ridge, Indiana, where there was a
Friends' meeting of more than ordinary size and activity. It was here
that my conversion took place. I remember the event as distinctly as if
it were yesterday.

CONVICTION.

I always prayed at the family altar, and that was an institution which
was never neglected for anything in our home, and I had never omitted
my evening devotions; but one summer day while playing by myself under
the trees in the front yard, a great fear came upon me lest I had never
had a change of heart. Though less than six years old, I had sat in the
"gallery" behind my father as he preached too often to be ignorant of
the necessity of the new birth. It was a perfect day, but conviction
settled upon me more and more deeply, and a dark shadow seemed to take
the brightness from everything. Unable to endure the heartache any
longer, I ran into the house and sat down with my father and mother,
waiting in silence for some time. Finally I asked them if I had "ever
been converted," told them I "wanted to be," and immediately we knelt
in prayer. How I did weep, and how badly I felt! I can see the back of
that little sewing-rocker now swimming in my tears. (I wonder where
that rocking-chair is now! The last I knew it was in California, having
left us at an auction--an occasion not unfamiliar to most of
preacher-families.) They told me to pray, and I prayed with all my
heart. If ever there was a little boy who felt that he was a great
sinner, I was the boy. I remembered all the things I ever did that I
knew were wrong. My boyish wickednesses, things that seem a rather
absurd lot now in the light of the sins of the average lad of six that
I know to-day, caused me great pain. Soon peace came, and what
happiness! When I went out doors again the very birds twittered with
increased gladness, and the sky seemed a far deeper blue, and the grass
and flowers rejoiced with me in my new-found experience.

RETROGRESSION.

Would God I had retained my simple faith in Jesus! But it was not long
before I wandered away from Christ, and the life of prayerfulness and
obedience. For years my religious experience was most unsatisfactory. I
was under frequent convictions, and knew that the Spirit was striving
with me persistently, but I hardened my heart and would not yield
completely to God. As I look back at those years of restlessness and
rebellion, I recall with gratitude the forbearance and long-suffering
of a now sainted mother. How she carried her proud, stubborn boy on her
heart, and how she held onto God's skirt and tugged away until He
answered.

THE STRIVING OF THE SPIRIT.

During the winter of 1891-1892 I became almost wretched on account of
conviction. The Holy Ghost fairly dogged my steps and whispered in my
ear at every turn. There were many things which He used to convict me
of--my unfaithfulness and aridity of soul and life. My junior year at
Oak Grove Seminary is distinctly remembered as a time of continuous
conviction and unrest. Now and then I would find peace and comfort for
a time, but they remained only for a time. I kept up secret devotions
very carefully. I never missed my daily prayers, but my life was
inconsistent and God-dishonoring. The lives of real Christians rebuked
me, and the mockery of my empty profession haunted me like a spectre.

RECLAMATION.

In the summer of 1892 I began to seek God earnestly, and was not long
in finding pardon and reclamation. No sooner was I at peace with God
than I began to hunger for holiness. O, how my heart longed for full
salvation! I saw much about me that was an indication that there was an
experience enjoyed by some of which I was not possessed. My mother's
calm, victorious life, and her constant unwavering Christian faith,
convicted me. I was proud and selfish, and hypersensitive and
ambitious. She was restful, contented, loving, meek. How frequently I
gave way to some temptation, and how mortified I was to be so
humiliated by the Adversary.

HUNGER FOR HOLINESS.

Many of the members of my father's church at Portsmouth had an
experience of freedom and liberty which I craved. In July my father, my
mother, and I spent a couple of days at Douglas camp-meeting. I
remember so well every incident of the trip--my deep unrest as we
entered the grounds, my aversion to certain "boisterous persons" who
said "Bless the Lord" so frequently, my disrelish for food, my dislike
of taking a front seat in the audience. Two old sisters sat facing the
preacher one evening. Their faces were full of joy, and they seemed to
overflow with joy and spiritual exhilaration. I inwardly said, "I wish
I had an experience like they seem to have." I made up my mind I would
seek. I can not recall a word of the sermon. I do not think I heard it
at the time--my mind was so full of an inward struggle.

CANDIDATE FOR SANCTIFICATION.

When the call was made, I went forward and consecrated myself and all
my hopes and desires and longings and all to God. How in the world I
had ever acquired so low a desire I do not know, but my chief ambition
had been to be a professor of science in some college. But the Lord put
me through a series of questions:

"Will you be my property henceforth?"

"Yes, Lord."

"Are you willing that people should call you a 'holiness crank'?"

"Yes, Lord."

"Supposing I should ask you to shout, would you?"

"I would do my best at it."

"Will you give up all your plans and be a one-horse preacher of
holiness if I want you to?"

Ah, here was a rub, indeed. Preaching was precisely what I did not
relish. Anything rather than that. I had visions of small salaries, and
country churches, and long, cold rides. I had seen the life of the
preacher ever since I could remember. I debated the question. Then I
answered, "Yes." The audience was singing:

    "Here I give my all to Thee--
      Friends and time and earthly store.
    Soul and body then to be
      Wholly Thine forever more."

They told us seekers to raise our hands if we meant it. I meant it, so
up went a hand. Instantly faith got an answer, and the witness came,
and I knew that I was sanctified wholly.

A DULL SCHOLAR

But I was a dull scholar, and had to learn many lessons after my
Jordan-crossing. Owing to my failure in definite testimony, my
experience suffered partial eclipse, and my last year at Oak Grove was
more or less dark and unhappy. I was much helped, however, by the
reading of holiness books sent me by a sanctified music-teacher, who
had interest enough in me to write me real Fenelon letters and keep me
supplied with holiness reading. During the summer of 1893 I was more
fully established in the grace, and in the autumn began to preach.

THE ABIDING CHRIST.

I have frequently erred in judgment, and made most stupid blunders, but
the perpetual spring experience of full salvation has been my greatest
comfort and blessing. The abiding Christ gives zest and spice to life,
and makes the ministry of holiness delightful and joyous.

GOD ALWAYS ANSWERS.

God has blessed my ministry, and given me success. It is all of Him.
What a wonderful God we have! He never leaves us. I have called upon
Him when preaching, and He has always answered. I have cried to Him in
hours of loneliness and discouragement, and He has replied like a
flash. I stood by a cot and watched a saintly mother slip away to the
"undiscovered bourn," and He did not fail me. Hallelujah! He can not
only sanctify, but He can preserve, sustain and keep. Whatever may come
to us, Christ will not forsake us. As we look down the vista of years
to come, and remember that life is swift and serious, we can only lean
hard on the Son of God and push on, confident that His promise, "Lo, I
am with you alway," can not fail. Praise the Lord!



THE END.










End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Heart-Cry of Jesus, by Byron J. Rees

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HEART-CRY OF JESUS ***

***** This file should be named 4323.txt or 4323.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/3/2/4323/

Produced by Robert Rowe, Charles Franks and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team. HTML version by Al Haines.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
