The Project Gutenberg Etext of God's Country--And the Woman
by James Oliver Curwood
(#3 in our series by James Oliver Curwood)

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing
this or any other Project Gutenberg file.

Please do not remove this header information.

This header should be the first thing seen when anyone starts to
view the eBook. Do not change or edit it without written permission.
The words are carefully chosen to provide users with the information
needed to understand what they may and may not do with the eBook.
To encourage this, we have moved most of the information to the end,
rather than having it all here at the beginning.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**eBooks Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*****These eBooks Were Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers!*****

Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get eBooks, and
further information, is included below.  We need your donations.

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a 501(c)(3)
organization with EIN [Employee Identification Number] 64-6221541
Find out about how to make a donation at the bottom of this file.


Title: God's Country--And the Woman

Author: James Oliver Curwood

Release Date: October, 2003  [Etext #4585]
[Yes, we are more than one year ahead of schedule]
[This file was first posted on February 12, 2002]

Edition: 10

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

The Project Gutenberg Etext of God's Country--And the Woman
by James Oliver Curwood
******This file should be named 4585.txt or 4585.zip******

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the US
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we usually do not
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

The "legal small print" and other information about this book
may now be found at the end of this file.  Please read this
important information, as it gives you specific rights and
tells you about restrictions in how the file may be used.

***
Robert Rowe, Charles Franks and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.

God's Country--And the Woman

By James Oliver Curwood

Author of "The Honor of the Big Snows," "Philip Steele," Etc.





CHAPTER ONE


Philip Weyman's buoyancy of heart was in face of the fact that he
had but recently looked upon Radisson's unpleasant death, and that
he was still in a country where the water flowed north. He laughed
and he sang. His heart bubbled over with cheer. He talked to
himself frankly and without embarrassment, asked himself
questions, answered them, discussed the beauties of nature and the
possibilities of storm as if there were three or four of him
instead of one.

At the top end of the world a man becomes a multiple being--if he
is white. Two years along the rim of the Arctic had taught Philip
the science by which a man may become acquainted with himself, and
in moments like the present, when both his mental and physical
spirits overflowed, he even went so far as to attempt poor
Radisson's "La Belle Marie" in the Frenchman's heavy basso,
something between a dog's sullen growl and the low rumble of
distant thunder. It made him cough. And then he laughed again,
scanning the narrowing sweep of the lake ahead of him.

He felt like a boy, and he chuckled as he thought of the definite
reason for it. For twenty-three months he had been like a piece of
rubber stretched to a tension--sometimes almost to the snapping
point. Now had come the reaction, and he was going HOME. Home! It
was that one word that caused a shadow to flit over his face, and
only once or twice had he forgotten and let it slip between his
lips. At least he was returning to civilization--getting AWAY from
the everlasting drone of breaking ice and the clack-clack tongue
of the Eskimo.

With the stub of a pencil Philip had figured out on a bit of paper
about where he was that morning. The whalebone hut of his last
Arctic camp was eight hundred miles due north. Fort Churchill,
over on Hudson's Bay, was four hundred miles to the east, and Fort
Resolution, on the Great Slave, was four hundred miles to the
west. On his map he had drawn a heavy circle about Prince Albert,
six hundred miles to the south. That was the nearest line of rail.
Six days back Radisson had died after a mouth's struggle with that
terrible thing they called "le mort rouge," or the Red Death.
Since then Philip had pointed his canoe straight UP the Dubawnt
waterways, and was a hundred and twenty miles nearer to
civilization. He had been through these waterways twice before,
and he knew that there was not a white man within a hundred and
fifty miles of him. And as for a white woman--

Weyman stopped his paddling where there was no current, and leaned
back in his canoe for a breathing space, and to fill his pipe. A
WHITE WOMAN! Would he stare at her like a fool when he saw her
again for the first time? Eighteen months ago he had seen a white
woman over at Fort Churchill--the English clerk's wife, thirty,
with a sprinkle of gray in her blond hair, and pale blue eyes.
Fresh from the Garden of Eden, he had wondered why the half-dozen
white men over there regarded her as they did. Long ago, in the
maddening gloom of the Arctic night, he had learned to understand.
At Fond du Lac, when Weyman had first come up into the forest
country, he had said to the factor: "It's glorious! It's God's
Country!" And the factor had turned his tired, empty eyes upon him
with the words: "It was--before SHE went. But no country is God's
Country without a woman," and then he took Philip to the lonely
grave under a huge lob-stick spruce, and told him in a few words
how one woman had made life for him. Even then Philip could not
fully understand. But he did now.

He resumed his paddling, his gray eyes alert. His aloneness and
the bigness of the world in which, so far as he knew, he was the
only human atom, did not weigh heavily upon him. He loved this
bigness and emptiness and the glory of solitude. It was middle
autumn, and close to noon of a day unmarred by cloud above, and
warm with sunlight. He was following close to the west shore of
the lake. The opposite shore was a mile away. He was so near to
the rock-lined beach that he could hear the soft throat-cries of
the moose-birds. And what he saw, so far as his eyes could see in
all directions, was "God's Country"--a glory of colour that was
like a great master painting. The birch had turned to red and
gold. From out of the rocks rose trees that were great crimson
splashes of mountain-ash berries framed against the dark lustre of
balsam and cedar and spruce.

Without reason, Philip was listening again to the quiet lifeless
words of Jasper, the factor over at Fond du Lac, as he described
the day when he and his young wife first came up through the
wonderland of the North. "No country is God's Country without a
woman!" He found the words running in an unpleasant monotone
through his brain. He had made up his mind that he would strike
Fond du Lac on his way down, for Jasper's words and the hopeless
picture he had made that day beside the little cross under the
spruce had made them brothers in a strange sort of way. Besides,
Jasper would furnish him with a couple of Indians, and a sledge
and dogs if the snows came early.

In a break between the rocks Philip saw a white strip of sand, and
turned his canoe in to shore. He had been paddling since five
o'clock, and in the six hours had made eighteen miles. Yet he felt
no fatigue as he stood up and stretched himself. He remembered how
different it had been four years ago when Hill, the Hudson's Bay
Company's man down at Prince Albert, had looked him over with
skeptical and uneasy eyes, encouraging him with the words: "You're
going to a funeral, young man, and it's your own. You won't make
God's House, much less Hudson's Bay!"

Weyman laughed joyously.

"Fooled 'em--fooled 'em all!" he told himself. "We'll wager a
dollar to a doughnut that we're the toughest looking specimen that
ever drifted down from Coronation Gulf, or any other gulf. A
DOUGHNUT! I'd trade a gold nugget as big as my fist for a doughnut
or a piece of pie right this minute. Doughnuts an' pie--real old
pumpkin pie--an' cranberry sauce, 'n' POTATOES! Good Lord, and
they're only six hundred miles away, carloads of 'em!"

He began to whistle as he pulled his rubber dunnage sack out of
the canoe. Suddenly he stopped, his eyes staring at the smooth
white floor of sand. A bear had been there before him, and quite
recently. Weyman had killed fresh meat the day before, but the
instinct of the naturalist and the woodsman kept him from singing
or whistling, two things which he was very much inclined to do on
this particular day. He had no suspicion that a bear which he was
destined never to see had become the greatest factor in his life.
He was philosopher enough to appreciate the value and importance
of little things, but the bear track did not keep him silent
because he regarded it as significant, because he wanted to kill.
He would have welcomed it to dinner, and would have talked to it
were it as affable and good-mannered as the big pop-eyed moose-
birds that were already flirting about near him.

He emptied a half of the contents of the rubber sack out on the
sand and made a selection for dinner, and he chuckled in his big
happiness as he saw how attenuated his list of supplies was
becoming. There was still a quarter of a pound of tea, no sugar,
no coffee, half a dozen pounds of flour, twenty-seven prunes
jealously guarded in a piece of narwhal skin, a little salt and
pepper mixed, and fresh caribou meat.

"It's a lovely day, and we'll have a treat for dinner," he
informed himself. "No need of starving. We'll have a real feast.
I'll cook SEVEN prunes instead of five!"

He built a small fire, hung two small pots over it, selected his
prunes, and measured out a tablespoonful of black tea. In the
respite he had while the water heated he dug a small mirror out of
the sack and looked at himself. His long, untrimmed hair was
blond, and the inch of stubble on his face was brick red. There
were tiny creases at the corners of his eyes, caused by the
blistering sleet and cold wind of the Arctic coast. He grimaced as
he studied himself. Then his face lighted up with sudden
inspiration.

"I've got it!" he exclaimed. "I need a shave! We'll use the prune
water."

From the rubber bag he fished out his razor, a nubbin of soap, and
a towel. For fifteen minutes after that he sat cross-legged on the
sand, with the mirror on a rock, and worked. When he had finished
he inspected himself closely.

"You're not half bad," he concluded, and he spoke seriously now.
"Four years ago when you started up here you were thirty--and you
looked forty. Now you're thirty-four, and if it wasn't for the
snow lines in your eyes I'd say you were a day or two younger.
That's pretty good."

He had washed his face and was drying it with the towel when a
sound made him look over beyond the rocks. It was the crackling
sound made by a dead stick stepped upon, or a sapling broken down.
Either meant the bear.

Dropping the towel, he unbuttoned the flap to the holster of his
revolver, took a peep to see how long he could leave the water
before it would boil, and stepped cautiously in the direction of
the sound. A dozen paces beyond the bulwark of rocks he came upon
a fairly well-worn moose trail; surveying its direction from the
top of a boulder, he made up his mind that the bear was dining on
mountain-ash berries where he saw one of the huge crimson splashes
of the fruit a hundred yards away.

He went on quietly. Under the big ash tree there was no sign of a
feast, recent or old. He proceeded, the trail turning almost at
right angles from the ash tree, as if about to bury itself in the
deeper forest. His exploratory instinct led him on for another
hundred yards, when the trail swung once more to the left. He
heard the swift trickling run of water among rocks, and again a
sound. But his mind did not associate the sound which he heard
this time with the one made by the bear. It was not the breaking
of a stick or the snapping of brush. It was more a part of the
musical water-sound itself, a strange key struck once to interrupt
the monotone of a rushing stream.

Over a gray hog-back of limestone Philip climbed to look down into
a little valley of smooth-washed boulders and age-crumbled rock
through which the stream picked its way. He descended to the white
margin of sand and turned sharply to the right, where a little
pool had formed at the base of a huge rock. And there he stopped,
his heart in his throat, every fibre in his body charged with a
sudden electrical thrill at what he beheld. For a moment he was
powerless to move. He stood--and stared.

At the edge of the pool twenty steps from him was kneeling a
woman. Her back was toward him, and in that moment she was as
motionless as the rock that towered over her. Along with the
rippling drone of the stream, without reason on his part--without
time for thought-there leaped through his amazed brain the words
of Jasper, the factor, and he knew that he was looking upon the
miracle that makes "God's Country"--a white woman!

The sun shone down upon her bare head. Over her slightly bent
shoulders swept a glory of unbound hair that rippled to the sand.
Black tresses, even velvety as the crow's wing, might have meant
Cree or half-breed. But this at which he stared--all that he saw
of her--was the brown and gold of the autumnal tintings that had
painted pictures for him that day.

Slowly she raised her head, as if something had given her warning
of a presence behind, and as she hesitated in that birdlike,
listening poise a breath of wind from the little valley stirred
her hair in a shimmering veil that caught a hundred fires of the
sun. And then, as he crushed back his first impulse to cry out, to
speak to her, she rose erect beside the pool, her back still to
him, and hidden to the hips in her glorious hair.

Her movement revealed a towel partly spread out on the sand, and a
comb, a brush, and a small toilet bag. Philip did not see these.
She was turning, slowly, scanning the rocks beyond the valley.

Like a thing carven out of stone he stood, still speechless, still
staring, when she faced him.





CHAPTER TWO


A face like that into which Philip looked might have come to him
from out of some dream of paradise. It was a girl's face. Eyes of
the pure blue of the sky above met his own. Her lips were a little
parted and a little laughing. Before he had uttered a word, before
he could rise out of the stupidity of his wonder, the change came.
A fear that he could not have forgotten if he had lived through a
dozen centuries leaped into the lovely eyes. The half-laughing
lips grew tense with terror. Quick as the flash of powder there
had come into her face a look that was not that of one merely
startled. It was fear--horror--a great, gripping thing that for an
instant seemed to crush the life from her soul. In another moment
it was gone, and she swayed back against the face of the rock,
clutching a hand at her breast.

"My God, how I frightened you!" gasped Philip.

"Yes, you frightened me," she said.

Her white throat was bare, and he could see the throb of it as she
made a strong effort to speak steadily. Her eyes did not leave
him. As he advanced a step he saw that unconsciously she cringed
closer to the rock.

"You are not afraid--now?" he asked. "I wouldn't have frightened
you for the world. And sooner than hurt you I'd--I'd kill myself.
I just stumbled here by accident. And I haven't seen a white
woman--for two years. So I stared--stared--and stood there like a
fool."

Relief shot into her eyes at his words.

"Two years? What do you mean?"

"I've been up along the rim of h--I mean the Arctic, on a
government wild-goose chase," he explained. "And I'm just coming
down."

"You're from the North?"

There was an eager emphasis in her question.

"Yes. Straight from Coronation Gulf. I ran ashore to cook a mess
of prunes. While the water was boiling I came down here after a
bear, and found YOU! My name is Philip Weyman; I haven't even an
Indian with me, and there are three things in the world I'd trade
that name for just now: One is pie, another is doughnuts, and the
third--"

She brushed back her hair, and the fear went from her eyes as she
looked at him.

"And the third?" she asked.

"Is the answer to a question," he finished. "How do YOU happen to
be here, six hundred miles from anywhere?"

She stepped out from the rock. And now he saw that she was almost
as tall as himself, and that she was as slim as a reed and as
beautifully poised as the wild narcissus that sways like music to
every call of the wind. She had tucked up her sleeves, baring her
round white arms close to the shoulders, and as she looked
steadily at him before answering his question she flung back the
shining masses of her hair and began to braid it. Her fear for him
was entirely gone. She was calm. And there was something in the
manner of her quiet and soul-deep study of him that held back
other words which he might have spoken.

In those few moments she had taken her place in his life. She
stood before him like a goddess, tall and slender and unafraid,
her head a gold-brown aureole, her face filled with a purity, a
beauty, and a STRENGTH that made him look at her speechless,
waiting for the sound of her voice. In her look there was neither
boldness nor suspicion. Her eyes were clear, deep pools of velvety
blue that defied him to lie to her, He felt that under those eyes
he could have knelt down upon the sand and emptied his soul of its
secrets for their inspection.

"It is not very strange that I should be here" she said at last.
"I have always lived here. It is my home."

"Yes, I believe that," breathed Philip. "It is the last thing in
the world that one would believe--but I do; I believe it.
Something--I don't know what--told me that you belonged to this
world as you stood there beside the rock. But I don't understand.
A thousand miles from a city--and you! It's unreal. It's almost
like the dreams I've been dreaming during the past eighteen
months, and the visions I've seen during that long, maddening
night up on the coast, when for five months we didn't see a glow
of the sun. But--you understand--it's hard to comprehend."

From her he glanced swiftly over the rocks of the coulee, as if
expecting to see some sign of the home she had spoken of, or at
least of some other human presence. She understood his questioning
look. "I am alone," she said.

The quality of her voice startled him more then her words. There
was a deeper, darker glow in her eyes as she watched their effect
upon him. She swept out a gleaming white arm, still moist with the
water of the pool, taking in the wide, autumn-tinted spaces about
them.

"I am alone," she repeated, still keeping her eyes on his face.
"Entirely alone. That is why you startled me--why I was afraid.
This is my hiding-place, and I thought--"

He saw that she had spoken words that she would have recalled. She
hesitated. Her lips trembled. In that moment of suspense a little
gray ermine dislodged a stone from the rock ridge above them, and
at the sound of it as it struck behind her the girl gave a start,
and a quick flash of the old fear leaped for an instant into her
face. And now Philip beheld something in her which he had been too
bewildered and wonder-struck to observe before. Her first terror
had been so acute that he had failed to see what remained after
her fright had passed. But it was clear to him now, and the look
that came into his own face told her that he had made the
discovery.

The beauty of her face, her eyes, her hair--the wonder of her
presence six hundred miles from civilization--had held him
spellbound. He had seen only the deep lustre and the wonderful
blue of her eyes. Now he saw that those eyes, exquisite in their
loveliness, were haunted by something which she was struggling to
fight back--a questing, hunted look that burned there steadily,
and of which he was not the cause. A deep-seated grief, a terror
far back, shone through the forced calmness with which she was
speaking to him. He knew that she was fighting with herself, that
the nervously twitching fingers at her breast told more than her
lips had confessed. He stepped nearer to her and held out a hand,
and when he spoke his voice was vibrant with the thing that made
men respect him and women have faith in him.

"Tell me--what you started to say," he entreated quietly. "This is
your hiding-place, and you thought--what? I think that I can
guess. You thought that I was some one else, whom you have reason
to fear."

She did not answer. It was as if she had not yet completely
measured him. Her eyes told him that. They were not looking AT
him, but INTO him. And they were softly beautiful as wood violets.
He found himself looking steadily into them--close, so close that
he could have reached out and touched her. Slowly there came over
them a filmy softness. And then, marvellously, he saw the tears
gathering, as dew might gather over the sweet petals of a flower.
And still for a moment she did not speak. There came a little
quiver at her throat, and she caught herself with a quick, soft
breath.

"Yes, I thought you were some one else--whom I fear," she said
then. "But why should I tell you? You are from down there, from
what you please to call civilization. I should distrust you
because of that. So why--why should I tell you?"

In an instant Philip was at her side. In his rough, storm-beaten
hand he caught the white fingers that trembled at her breast. And
there was something about him now that made her completely
unafraid.

"Why?" he asked. "Listen, and I will tell you. Four years ago I
came up into this country from down there--the world they call
Civilization. I came up with every ideal and every dream I ever
had broken and crushed. And up here I found God's Country. I found
new ideals and new dreams. I am going back with them. But they can
never be broken as the others were--because--now--I have found
something that will make them live. And that something is YOU!
Don't let my words startle you. I mean them to be as pure as the
sun that shines over our heads. If I leave you now--if I never see
you again--you will have filled this wonderful world for me. And
if I could do something to prove this--to make you happier--why,
I'd thank God for having sent me ashore to cook a mess of prunes."

He released her hand, and stepped back from her.

"That is why you should tell me," he finished.

A swift change had come into her eyes and face. She was breathing
quickly. He saw the sudden throbbing of her throat. A flush of
colour had mounted into her cheeks. Her lips were parted, her eyes
shone like stars.

"You would do a great deal for me?" she questioned breathlessly.
"A great deal--and like--A MAN?"

"Yes."

"A MAN--one of God's men?" she repeated.

He bowed his head.

Slowly, so slowly that she scarcely seemed to move, she drew
nearer to him.

"And when you had done this you would be willing to go away, to
promise never to see me again, to ask no reward? You would swear
that?"

Her hand touched his arm. Her breath came tense and fast as she
waited for him to answer. "If you wished it, yes," he said.

"I almost believe," he heard, as if she were speaking the words to
herself. She turned to him again, and something of faith, of hope
transfigured her face.

"Return to your fire and your prunes," she said quickly, and the
sunlight of a smile passed over her lips. "Then, half an hour from
now, come up the coulee to the turn in the rocks. You will find me
there."

She bent quickly and picked up the little bag and the brush from
the sand. Without looking at him again she sped swiftly beyond the
big rock, and Philip's last vision of her was the radiant glory of
her hair as it rippled cloudlike behind her in the sunlight.





CHAPTER THREE


That he had actually passed through the experience of the last few
minutes, that it was a reality and not some beautiful phantasm of
the red and gold world which again lay quiet and lifeless about
him, Philip could scarcely convince himself as he made his way
back to the canoe and the fire. The discovery of this girl, buried
six hundred miles in a wilderness that was almost a terra
incognita to the white man, was sufficient to bewilder him. And
only now, as he kicked the burning embers from under the pails,
and looked at his watch to time himself, did he begin to realize
that he had not sensed a hundredth part of the miracle of it.

Now that he was alone, question after question leapt unanswered
through his mind, and every vein in his body throbbed with strange
excitement. Not for an instant did he doubt what she had said.
This world--the forests about him, the lakes, the blue skies
above, were her home. And yet, struggling vainly for a solution of
the mystery, he told himself in the next breath that this could
not be possible. Her voice had revealed nothing of the wilderness
--except in its sweetness. Not a break had marred the purity of
her speech. She had risen before him like the queen of some
wonderful kingdom, and not like a forest girl. And in her face he
had seen the soul of one who had looked upon the world as the
world lived outside of its forest walls. Yet he believed her. This
was her home. Her hair, her eyes, the flowerlike lithesomeness of
her beautiful body--and something more, something that he could
not see but which he could FEEL in her presence, told him that
this was so. This wonder-world about him was her home. But why--
how?

He seated himself on a rock, holding the open watch in his hand.
Of one thing he was sure. She was oppressed by a strange fear. It
was not the fear of being alone, of being lost, of some happen-
chance peril that she might fancy was threatening her. It was a
deeper, bigger thing than that. And she had confessed to him--not
wholly, but enough to make him know--that this fear was of man. He
felt at this thought a little thrill of joy, of undefinable
exultation. He sprang from the rock and went down to the shore of
the lake, scanning its surface with eager, challenging eyes. In
these moments he forgot that civilization was waiting for him,
that for eighteen months he had been struggling between life and
death at the naked and barbarous end of the earth. All at once, in
the space of a few minutes, his world had shrunken until it held
but two things for him--the autumn-tinted forests, and the girl.
Beyond these he thought of nothing except the minutes that were
dragging like thirty weights of lead.

As the hand of his watch marked off the twenty-fifth of the
prescribed thirty he turned his steps in the direction of the
pool. He half expected that she would be there when he came over
the ridge of rock. But she had not returned. He looked up the
coulee, end then at the firm white sand close to the water. The
imprints of her feet were there--small, narrow imprints of a
heeled shoe. Unconsciously he smiled, for no other reason than
that each surprise he encountered was a new delight to him. A
forest girl as he had known them would have worn moccasins--six
hundred miles from civilization.

As he was about to leap across the narrow neck of the pool he
noticed a white object almost buried in the dry sand, and picked
it up. It was a handkerchief; and this, too, was a surprise. He
had not particularly noticed her dress, except that it was soft
and clinging blue. The handkerchief he looked at more closely. It
was of fine linen with a border of lace, and so soft that he could
have hidden it in the palm of his hand. From it rose a faint,
sweet scent of the wild rock violet. He knew that it was rock
violet, because more than once he had crushed the blossoms between
his hands. He thrust the bit of fabric in the breast of his
flannel shirt, and walked swiftly up the coulee.

A hundred yards above him the stream turned abruptly, and here a
strip of forest meadow grew to the water's edge. He sprang up the
low bank, and stood face to face with the girl.

She had heard his approach, and was waiting for him, a little
smile of welcome on her lips. She had completed her toilet. She
had braided her wonderful hair, and it was gathered in a heavy,
shimmering coronet about her head. There was a flutter of lace at
her throat, and little fluffs of it at her wrists. She was more
beautiful, more than ever like the queen of a kingdom as she stood
before him now. And she was alone. He saw that in his first swift
glance.

"You didn't eat the prunes?" she asked, and for the first time he
saw a bit of laughter in her eyes.

"No--I--I kicked the fire from under them," he said.

He caught the significance of her words, and her sudden sidewise
gesture. A short distance from them was a small tent, and on the
grass in front of the tent was spread a white cloth, on which was
a meal such as he had not looked upon for two years.

"I am glad," she said, and again her eyes met his with their glow
of friendly humour. "They might have spoiled your appetite, and I
have made up my mind that I want you to have dinner with me. I
can't offer you pie or doughnuts. But I have a home-made fruit
cake, and a pot of jam that I made myself. Will you join me?"

They sat down, with the feast between them, and the girl leaned
over to turn him a cup of tea from a pot that was already made and
waiting. Her lovely head was near him, and he stared with hungry
adoration at the thick, shining braids, and the soft white contour
of her cheek and neck. She leaned back suddenly, and caught him.
The words that were on her lips remained unspoken. The laughter
went from her eyes. In a hot wave the blood flushed his own face.

"Forgive me if I do anything you don't understand," he begged.
"For weeks past I have been wondering how I would act when I met
white people again. Perhaps you can't understand. But eighteen
months up there--eighteen months without the sound of a white
woman's voice, without a glimpse of her face, with only dreams to
live on--will make me queer for a time. Can't you understand--a
little?"

"A great deal," she replied so quickly that she put him at ease
again. "Back there I couldn't quite believe you. I am beginning to
now. You are honest. But let us not talk of ourselves until after
dinner. Do you like the cake?"

She had given him a piece as large as his fist, and he bit off the
end of it.

"Delicious!" he cried instantly. "Think of it--nothing but
bannock, bannock, bannock for two years, and only six ounces of
that a day for the last six months! Do you care if I eat the whole
of it--the cake, I mean?"

Seriously she began cutting the remainder of the cake into
quarters.

"It would be one of the biggest compliments you could pay me," she
said. "But won't you have some boiled tongue with it, a little
canned lobster, a pickle--"

"Pickles!" he interrupted. "Just cake and pickles--please! I've
dreamed of pickles up there. I've had 'em come to me at night as
big as mountains, and one night I dreamed of chasing a pickle with
legs for hours, and when at last I caught up with the thing it had
turned into an iceberg. Please let me have just pickles and cake!"

Behind the lightness of his words she saw the truth--the craving
of famine. Ashamed, he tried to hide it from her. He refused the
third huge piece of cake, but she reached over and placed it in
his hand. She insisted that he eat the last piece, and the last
pickle in the bottle she had opened.

When he finished, she said:

"Now--I know."

"What?"

"That you have spoken the truth, that you have come from a long
time in the North, and that I need not fear--what I did fear."

"And that fear? Tell me--"

She answered calmly, and in her eyes and the lines of her face
came a look of despair which she had almost hidden from him until
now.

"I was thinking during those thirty minutes you away," she said.
"And I realized what folly it was in me to tell you as much as I
have. Back there, for just one insane moment, I thought that you
might help me in a situation which is as terrible as any you may
have faced in your months of Arctic night. But it is impossible.
All that I can ask of you now--all that I can demand of you to
prove that you are the man you said you were--is that you leave
me, and never whisper a word into another ear of our meeting. Will
you promise that?"

"To promise that--would be lying," he said slowly, and his hand
unclenched and lay listlessly on his knee. "If there is a reason--
some good reason why I should leave you--then I will go."

"Then--you demand a reason?"

"To demand a reason would be--"

He hesitated, and she added:

"Unchivalrous."

"Yes--more than that," he replied softly. He bowed his head, and
for a moment she saw the tinge of gray in his blond hair, the
droop of his clean, strong shoulders, the SOMETHING of
hopelessness in his gesture. A new light flashed into her own
face. She raised a hand, as if to reach out to him, and dropped it
as he looked up.

"Will you let me help you?" he asked.

She was not looking at him, but beyond him. In her face he saw
again the strange light of hope that had illumined it at the pool.

"If I could believe," she whispered, still looking beyond him. "If
I could trust you, as I have read that the maidens of old trusted
their knights. But--it seems impossible. In those days, centuries
and centuries ago, I guess, womanhood was next to--God. Men fought
for it, and died for it, to keep it pure and holy. If you had come
to me then you would have levelled your lance and fought for me
without asking a question, without demanding a reward, without
reasoning whether I was right or wrong--and all because I was a
woman. Now it is different. You are a part of civilization, and if
you should do all that I might ask of you it would be because you
have a price in view. I know. I have looked into you. I
understand. That price would be--ME!"

She looked at him now, her breast throbbing, almost a sob in her
quivering voice, defying him to deny the truth of her words.

"You have struck home," he said, and his voice sounded strange to
himself. "And I am not sorry. I am glad that you have seen--and
understand. It seems almost indecent for me to tell you this, when
I have known you for such a short time. But I have known you for
years--in my hopes and dreams. For you I would go to the end of
the world. And I can do what other men have done, centuries ago.
They called them knights. You may call me a MAN!"

At his words she rose from where she had been sitting. She faced
the radiant walls of the forests that rolled billow upon billow in
the distance, and the sun lighted up her crown of hair in a glory.
One hand still clung to her breast. She was breathing even more
quickly, and the flush had deepened in her cheek until it was like
the tender stain of the crushed bakneesh. Philip rose and stood
beside her. His shoulders were back. He looked where she looked,
and as he gazed upon the red and gold billows of forest that
melted away against the distant sky he felt a new and glorious
fire throbbing in his veins. From the forests their eyes turned--
and met. He held out his hand. And slowly her own hand fluttered
at her breast, and was given to him.

"I am quite sure that I understand you now," he said, and his
voice was the low, steady, fighting voice of the man new-born. "I
will be your knight, as you have read of the knights of old. I
will urge no reward that is not freely given. Now--will you let me
help you?"

For a moment she allowed him to hold her hand. Then she gently
withdrew it and stepped back from him.

"You must first understand before you offer yourself," she said.
"I cannot tell you what my trouble is. You will never know. And
when it is over, when you have helped me across the abyss, then
will come the greatest trial of all for you. I believe--when I
tell you that last thing which you must do--that you will regard
me as a monster, and draw back. But it is necessary. If you fight
for me, it must be in the dark. You will not know why you are
doing the things I ask you to do. You may guess, but you would not
guess the truth if you lived a thousand years. Your one reward
will be the knowledge that you have fought for a woman, and that
you have saved her. Now, do you still want to help me?'

"I can't understand," he gasped. "But--yes--I would still accept
the inevitable. I have promised you that I will do as you have
dreamed that knights of old have done. To leave you now would be"
--he turned his head with a gesture of hopelessness--"an empty
world forever. I have told you now. But you could not understand
and believe unless I did. I love you."

He spoke as quietly and with as little passion in his voice as if
he were speaking the words from a book. But their very quietness
made them convincing. She started, and the colour left her face.
Then it returned, flooding her cheeks with a feverish glow.

"In that is the danger," she said quickly. "But you have spoken
the words as I would have had you speak them. It is this danger
that must be buried--deep--deep. And you will bury it. You will
urge no questions that I do not wish to answer. You will fight for
me, blindly, knowing only that what I ask you to do is not sinful
nor wrong. And in the end--"

She hesitated. Her face had grown as tense as his own.

"And in the end," she whispered, "your greatest reward can be only
the knowledge that in living this knighthood for me you have won
what I can never give to any man. The world can hold only one such
man for a woman. For your faith must be immeasurable, your love as
pure as the withered violets out there among the rocks if you live
up to the tests ahead of you. You will think me mad when I have
finished. But I am sane. Off there, in the Snowbird Lake country,
is my home. I am alone. No other white man or woman is with me. As
my knight, the one hope of salvation that I cling to now, you will
return with me to that place--as my husband. To all but ourselves
we shall be man and wife. I will bear your name--or the one by
which you must be known. And at the very end of all, in that hour
of triumph when you know that you have borne me safely over that
abyss at the brink of which I am hovering now, you will go off
into the forest, and--"

She approached him, and laid a hand on his arm. "You will not come
back," she finished, so gently that he scarcely heard her words.
"You will die--for me--for all who have known you."

"Good God!" he breathed, and he stared over her head to where the
red and gold billows of the forests seemed to melt away into the
skies.





CHAPTER FOUR


Thus they stood for many seconds. Never for an instant did her
eyes leave his face, and Philip looked straight over her head into
that distant radiance of the forest mountains. It was she whose
emotions revealed themselves now. The blood came and went in her
cheeks. The soft lace at her throat rose and fell swiftly. In her
eyes and face there was a thing which she had not dared to reveal
to him before--a prayerful, pleading anxiety that was almost ready
to break into tears.

At last she had come to see and believe in the strength and wonder
of this man who had come to her from out of the North, and now he
stared over her head with that strange white look, as if the
things she had said had raised a mountain between them. She could
feel the throb of his arm on which her hand rested. All at once
her calm had deserted her. She had never known a man like this,
had never expected to know one; and in her face there shone the
gentle loveliness of a woman whose soul and not her voice was
pleading a great cause. It was pleading for her self. And then he
looked down.

"You want to go--now," she whispered. "I knew that you would."

"Yes, I want to go," he replied, and his two hands took hers, and
held them close to his breast, so that she felt the excited
throbbing of his heart. "I want to go--wherever you go. Perhaps in
those years of centuries ago there lived women like you to fight
and die for. I no longer wonder at men fighting for them as they
have sung their stories in books. I have nothing down in that
world which you have called civilization--nothing except the
husks of murdered hopes, ambitions, and things that were once
joys. Here I have you to love, to fight for. For you cannot tell
me that I must not love you, even though I swear to live up to
your laws of chivalry. Unless I loved you as I do there would not
be those laws."

"Then you will do all this for me--even to the end--when you must
sacrifice all of that for which you have struggled, and which you
have saved?"

"Yes."

"If that is so, then I trust you with my life and my honour. It is
all in your keeping--all."

Her voice broke in a sob. She snatched her hands from him, and
with that sob still quivering on her lips she turned and ran
swiftly to the little tent. She did not look back as she
disappeared into it, and Philip turned like one in a dream and
went to the summit of the bare rock ridge, from which he could
look over the quiet surface of the lake and a hundred square miles
of the unpeopled world which had now become so strangely his own.
An hour--a little more than that--had changed the course of his
life as completely as the master-strokes of a painter might have
changed the tones of a canvas epic. It did not take reason or
thought to impinge this fact upon him. It was a knowledge that
engulfed him overwhelmingly. So short a time ago that even now he
could not quite comprehend it all, he was alone out on the lake,
thinking of the story of the First Woman that Jasper had told him
down at Fond du Lac. Since then he had passed through a lifetime.
What had happened might well have covered the space of months--or
of years. He had met a woman, and like the warm sunshine she had
become instantly a part of his soul, flooding him with those
emotions which make life beautiful. That he had told her of this
love as calmly as if she had known of it slumbering within his
breast for years seemed to him to be neither unreal nor
remarkable.

He turned his face back to the tent, but there was no movement
there. He knew that there--alone--the girl was recovering from
the tremendous strain under which she had been fighting. He sat
down, facing the lake. For the first time his mental faculties
began to adjust themselves and his blood to flow less heatedly
through his veins. For the first time, too, the magnitude of his
promise--of what he had undertaken--began to impress itself upon
him. He had thought that in asking him to fight for her she had
spoken with the physical definition of that word in mind. But at
the outset she had plunged him into mystery. If she had asked him
to draw the automatic at his side and leap into battle with a
dozen of his kind he would not have been surprised. He had
expected something like that. But this other--her first demand
upon him! What could it mean? Shrouded in mystery, bound by his
oath of honour to make no effort to uncover her secret, he was to
accompany her back to her home AS HER HUSBAND! And after that--at
the end--he was to go out into the forest, and die--for her, for
all who had known him. He wondered if she had meant these words
literally, too. He smiled, and slowly his eyes scanned the lake.
He was already beginning to reason, to guess at the mystery which
she had told him he could not unveil if he lived a thousand years.
But he could at least work about the edges of it.

Suddenly he concentrated his gaze at a point on the lake three
quarters of a mile away. It was close to shore, and he was certain
that he had seen some movement there--a flash of sunlight on a
shifting object. Probably he had caught a reflection of light from
the palmate horn of a moose feeding among the water-lily roots. He
leaned forward, and shaded his eyes. In another moment his heart
gave a quicker throb. What he had seen was the flash of a paddle.
He made out a canoe, and then two. They were moving close in-
shore, one following the other, and apparently taking advantage of
the shadows of the forest. Philip's hand shifted to the butt of
his automatic. After all there might be fighting of the good old-
fashioned kind. He looked back in the direction of the tent.

The girl had reappeared, and was looking at him. She waved a hand,
and he ran down to meet her. She had been crying. The dampness of
tears still clung to her lashes; but the smile on her lips was
sweet and welcoming, and now, so frankly that his face burned with
pleasure, she held out a hand to him.

"I was rude to run away from you in that way," she apologized.
"But I couldn't cry before you. And I wanted to cry."

"Because you were glad, or sorry?" he asked.

"A little of both," she replied. "But mostly glad. A few hours ago
it didn't seem possible that there was any hope for me. Now--"

"There is hope," he urged.

"Yes, there is hope."

For an instant he felt the warm thrill of her fingers as they
clung tighter to his. Then she withdrew her hand, gently, smiling
at him with sweet confidence. Her eyes were like pure, soft
violets. He wanted to kneel at her feet, and cry out his thanks to
God for sending him to her. Instead of betraying his emotion, he
spoke of the canoes.

"There are two canoes coming along the shore of the lake," he
said. "Are you expecting some one?"

The smile left her lips. He was startled by the suddenness with
which the colour ebbed from her face and the old fear leapt back
into her eyes.

"Two? You are sure there are two?" Her fingers clutched his arm
almost fiercely. "And they are coming this way?"

"We can see them from the top of the rock ridge," he said. "I am
sure there are two. Will you look for yourself?"

She did not speak as they hurried to the bald cap of the ridge.
From the top Philip pointed down the lake. The two canoes were in
plain view now. Whether they contained three or four people they
could not quite make out. At sight of them the last vestige of
colour had left the girl's cheeks. But now, as she stood there
breathing quickly in her excitement, there came a change in her.
She threw back her head. Her lips parted. Her blue eyes flashed a
fire in which Philip in his amazement no longer saw fear, but
defiance. Her hands were clenched. She seemed taller. Back into
her cheeks there burned swiftly two points of flame. All at once
she put out a hand and drew him back, so that the cap of the ridge
concealed them from the lake.

"An hour ago those canoes would have made me run off into the
forest--and hide," she said. "But now I am not afraid! Do you
understand?"

"Then you trust me?"

"Absolutely."

"But--surely--there is something that you should tell me: Who they
are, what your danger is, what I am to do."

"I am hoping that I am mistaken," she replied. "They may not be
those whom I am dreading--and expecting. All I can tell you is
this: You are Paul Darcambal. I am Josephine, your wife. Protect
me as a wife. I will be constantly at your side. Were I alone I
would know what to expect. But--with you--they may not offer me
harm. If they do not, show no suspicion. But be watchful. Don't
let them get behind you. And be ready always--always--to use
that--if a thing so terrible must be done!" As she spoke she lay a
hand on his pistol. "And remember: I am your wife!"

"To live that belief, even in a dream, will be a joy as
unforgettable as life itself," he whispered, so low that, in
turning her head, she made as if she had not heard him.

"Come," she said. "Let us follow the coulee down to the lake. We
can watch them from among the rocks."

She gave him her hand as they began to traverse the boulder-strewn
bed of the creek. Suddenly he said:

"You will not suspect me of cowardice if I suggest that there is
not one chance in a hundred of them discovering us?"

"No," she replied, with a glance so filled with her confidence and
faith that involuntarily he held her hand closer in his own. "But
I want them to find us--if they are whom I fear. We will show
ourselves on the shore."

He looked at her in amazement before the significance of her words
had dawned upon him. Then he laughed.

"That is the greatest proof of your faith you have given me," he
said. "With me you are anxious to face your enemies. And I am as
anxious to meet them."

"Don't misunderstand me," she corrected him quickly. "I am praying
that they are not the ones I suspect. But if they are--why, yes, I
want to face them--with you."

They had almost reached the lake when he said:

"And now, I may call you Josephine?"

"Yes, that is necessary."

"And you will call me--"

"Paul, of course--for you are Paul Darcambal."

"Is that quite necessary?" he asked. "Is it not possible that you
might allow me to retain at least a part of my name, and call me
Philip? Philip Darcambal?"

"There really is no objection to that," she hesitated. "If you
wish I will call you Philip, But you must also be Paul--your
middle name, perhaps."

"In the event of certain exigencies," he guessed.

"Yes."

He had still assisted her over the rocks by holding to her hand,
and suddenly her fingers clutched his convulsively. She pointed to
a stretch of the open lake. The canoes were plainly visible not
more than a quarter of a mile away. Even as he felt her trembling
slightly he laughed.

"Only three!" he exclaimed. "Surely it is not going to demand a
great amount of courage to face that number, Josephine?"

"It is going to take all the courage in the world to face one of
them," she replied in a low, strained voice. "Can you make them
out? Are they white men or Indians?"

"The light is not right--I can't decide," he said, after a
moment's scrutiny. "If they are Indians--"

"They are friends," she interrupted. "Jean--my Jean Croisset--left
me hiding here five days ago. He is part French and part Indian.
But he could not be returning so soon. If they are white--"

"We will expose ourselves on the beach," he finished
significantly.

She nodded. He saw that in spite of her struggle to remain calm
she was seized again by the terror of what might be in the
approaching canoes. He was straining his eyes to make out their
occupants when a low cry drew his gaze to her.

"It is Jean," she gasped, and he thought that he could hear her
heart beating. "It is Jean--and the others are Indians! Oh, my
God, how thankful I am--"

She turned to him.

"You will go back to the camp--please. Wait for us there, I must
see Jean alone. It is best that you should do this."

To obey without questioning her or expostulating against his
sudden dismissal, he knew was in the code of his promise to her.
And he knew by what he saw in her face that Jean's return had set
the world trembling under her feet, that for her it was charged
with possibilities as tremendous as if the two canoes had
contained those whom she had at first feared.

"Go," she whispered. "Please go."

Without a word he returned in the direction of the camp.





CHAPTER FIVE


Close to the tent Philip sat down, smoked his pipe, and waited.
Not only had the developments of the last few minutes been
disappointing to him, but they had added still more to his
bewilderment. He had expected and hoped for immediate physical
action, something that would at least partially clear away the
cloud of mystery. And at this moment, when he was expecting things
to happen, there had appeared this new factor, Jean, to change the
current of excitement under which Josephine was fighting. Who
could Jean be? he asked himself. And why should his appearance at
this time stir Josephine to a pitch of emotion only a little less
tense than that roused by her fears of a short time before? She
had told him that Jean was part Indian, part French, and that he
"belonged to her." And his coming, he felt sure, was of tremendous
significance to her.

He waited impatiently. It seemed a long time before he heard
voices and the sound of footsteps over the edge of the coulee. He
rose to his feet, and a moment later Josephine and her companion
appeared not more than a dozen paces from him. His first glance
was at the man. In that same instant Jean Croisset stopped in his
tracks and looked at Philip. Steadily, and apparently oblivious of
Josephine's presence, they measured each other, the half-breed
bent a little forward, the lithe alertness of a cat in his
posture, his eyes burning darkly. He was a man whose age Philip
could not guess. It might have been forty. Probably it was close
to that. He was bareheaded, and his long coarse hair, black as an
Indian's, was shot with gray. At first it would have been
difficult to name the blood that ran strongest in his veins. His
hair, the thinness of his face and body, his eyes, and the tense
position in which he had paused, were all Indian. Then, above
these things, Philip saw the French. Swiftly it became the
dominant part of the man before him, and he was not surprised when
Jean advanced with outstretched hand, and said:

"M'sieur Philip, I am Jean--Jean Jacques Croisset--and I am glad
you have come."

The words were spoken for Philip alone, and where she stood
Josephine did not catch the strange flash of fire in the half-
breed's eyes, nor did she hear his still more swiftly spoken
words: "I am glad it is YOU that chance has sent to us, M'sieur
Weyman!"

The two men gripped hands. There was something about Jean that
inspired Philip's confidence, and as he returned the half-breed's
greeting his eyes looked for a moment over the other's shoulder
and rested on Josephine. He was astonished at the change in her.
Evidently Jean had not brought her bad news. She held the pages of
an open letter in her hand, and as she caught Philip's look she
smiled at him with a gladness which he had not seen in her face
before. She came forward quickly, and placed a hand on his arm.

"Jean's coming was a surprise," she explained. "I did not expect
him for a number of days, and I dreaded what he might have to tell
me. But this letter has brought me fresh cause for thankfulness,
though it may enslave you a little longer to your vows of
knighthood. We start for home this afternoon. Are you ready?"

"I have a little packing to do," he said, looking after Jean, who
was moving toward the tent. "Twenty-seven prunes and--"

"Me," laughed Josephine. "Is it not necessary that you make room
in your canoe for me?"

Philip's face flushed with pleasure.

"Of course it is," he cried. "Everything has seemed so wonderfully
unreal to me that for a moment I forgot that you were my--my wife.
But how about Jean? He called me M'sieur Weyman."

"He is the one other person in the world who knows what you and I
know," she explained. "That, too, was necessary. Will you go and
arrange your canoe now? Jean will bring down my things and
exchange them for some of your dunnage." She left him to run into
the tent, reappearing quickly with a thick rabbit-skin blanket and
two canoe pillows.

"These make my nest--when I'm not working," she said, thrusting
them into Philip's arms. "I have a paddle, too. Jean says that I
am as good as an Indian woman with it."

"Better, M'sieur," exclaimed Jean, who had come out of the tent.
"It makes you work harder to see her. She is--what you call it--
gwan-auch-ewin--so splendid! Out of the Cree you cannot speak it."

A tender glow filled Josephine's eyes as Jean began pulling up the
pegs of the tent.

"A little later I will tell you about Jean," she whispered. "But
now, go to your canoe. We will follow you in a few minutes."

He left her, knowing that she had other things to say to Jean
which she did not wish him to hear. As he turned toward the coulee
he noticed that she still held the opened letter in her hand.

There was not much for him to do when he reached his canoe. He
threw out his sleeping bag and tent, and arranged Josephine's robe
and pillows so that she would sit facing him. The knowledge that
she was to be with him, that they were joined in a pact which
would make her his constant companion, filled him with joyous
visions and anticipations. He did not stop to ask himself how long
this mysterious association might last, how soon it might come to
the tragic end to which she had foredoomed it. With the spirit of
the adventurer who had more than once faced death with a smile, he
did not believe in burning bridges ahead of him. He loved
Josephine. To him this love had come as it had come to Tristan and
Isolde, to Paola and Francesca--sudden and irresistible, but,
unlike theirs, as pure as the air of the world which he breathed.
That he knew nothing of her, that she had not even revealed her
full name to him, did not affect the depth or sincerity of his
emotion. Nor had her frank avowal that he could expect no reward
destroyed his hope. The one big thought that ran through his brain
now, as he arranged the canoe, was that there was room for hope,
and that she had been free to accept the words he had spoken to
her without dishonour to herself. If she belonged to some other
man she would not have asked him to play the part of a husband.
Her freedom and his right to fight for her was the one consuming
fact of significance to him just now. Beside that all others were
trivial and unimportant, and every drop of blood in his veins was
stirred by a strange exultation.

He found himself whistling again as he refolded his blankets and
straightened out his tent. When he had finished this last task he
turned to find Jean standing close behind him, his dark eyes
watching him closely. As he greeted the half-breed, Philip looked
for Josephine.

"I am alone, M'sieur," said Jean, coming close to Philip. "I
tricked her into staying behind until I could see you for a moment
as we are, alone, man to man. Why is it that our Josephine has
come to trust you as she does?"

His voice was low--it was almost soft as a woman's, but deep in
his eyes Philip saw the glow of a strange, slumbering fire.

"Why is it?" he persisted.

"God only knows," exclaimed Philip, the significance of the
question bursting upon him for the first time. "I hadn't thought
of it, Jean. Everything has happened so quickly, so strangely,
that there are many things I haven't thought of. It must be
because--she thinks I'm a MAN!"

"That is it, M'sieur," replied Jean, as quietly as before. "That,
and because you have come from two years in the North. I have been
there. I know that it breeds men. And our Josephine knows. I could
swear that there is not one man in a million she would trust as
she has put faith in you. Into your hands she has given herself,
and what you do means for her life or death. And for you--"

The fires in his eyes were nearer the surface now.

"What?" asked Philip tensely.

"Death--unless you play your part as a man," answered Jean. There
was neither threat nor excitement in his voice, but in his eyes
was the thing that Philip understood. Silently he reached out and
gripped the half-breed's hand, For an instant they stood, their
faces close, looking into each other's eyes. And as men see men
where the fires of the earth burn low, so they read each other's
souls, and their fingers tightened in a clasp of understanding.

"What that part is to be I cannot guess," said Philip, then. "But
I will play it, and it is not fear that will hold me to my promise
to her. If I fail, why--kill me!"

"That is the North," breathed Jean, and in his voice was the
thankfulness of prayer.

Without another word he stooped and picked up the tent and
blankets. Philip was about to stop him, to speak further with him,
when he saw Josephine climbing over the bulwark of rocks between
them and the trail. He hurried to meet her. Her arms were full,
and she allowed him to take a part of her load. With what Jean had
brought this was all that was to go in Philip's canoe, and the
half-breed remained to help them off.

"You will go straight across the lake," he said to Philip. "If you
paddle slowly, I will catch up with you."

Philip seated himself near the stern, facing Josephine, and Jean
gave the canoe a shove that sent it skimming like a swallow on the
smooth surface of the lake. For a moment Philip did not dip his
paddle. He looked at the girl who sat so near to him, her head
bent over in pretence of seeing that all was right, the sun
melting away into rich colours in the thick coils of her hair.
There filled him an overwhelming desire to reach over and touch
the shining braids, to feel the thrill of their warmth and
sweetness, and something of this desire was in his face when she
looked up at him, a look of gentle thankfulness disturbed a little
by anxiety in her eyes. He had not noticed fully how wonderfully
blue her eyes were until now, and soft and tender they were when
free of the excitement of fear and mental strain. They were more
than ever like the wild wood violets, flecked with those same
little brown spots which had made him think sometimes that the
flowers were full of laughter. There was something of wistfulness,
of thought for him in her eyes now, and in pure joy he laughed.

"Why do you laugh?" she asked.

"Because I am happy," he replied, and sent the canoe ahead with a
first deep stroke. "I have never been happier in my life. I did
not know that it was possible to feel as I do."

"And I am just beginning to feel my selfishness," she said. "You
have thought only of me. You are making a wonderful sacrifice for
me. You have nothing to gain, nothing to expect but the things
that make me shudder. And I have thought of myself alone,
selfishly, unreasonably. It is not fair, and yet this is the only
way that it can be."

"I am satisfied," he said. "I have nothing much to sacrifice,
except myself."

She leaned forward, with her chin in the cup of her hands, and
looked at him steadily.

"You have people?"

"None who cares for me. My mother was the last. She died before I
came North."

"And you have no sisters--or brothers?"

"None living."

For a moment she was silent. Then she said gently, looking into
his eyes:

"I wish I had known--that I had guessed--before I let you come
this far. I am sorry now--sorry that I didn't send you away. You
are different from other men I have known--and you have had your
suffering. And now--I must hurt you again. It wouldn't be so bad
if you didn't care for me. I don't want to hurt you--because--I
believe in you."

"And is that all--because you believe me?"

She did not answer. Her hands clasped at her breast. She looked
beyond him to the shore they were leaving.

"You must leave me," she said then, and her voice was as lifeless
as his had been. "I am beginning to see now. It all happened so
suddenly that I could not think. But if you love me you must not
go on. It is impossible. I would rather suffer my own fate than
have you do that. When we reach the other shore you must leave
me."

She was struggling to keep back her emotion, fighting to hold it
within her own breast.

"You must go back," she repeated, staring into his set face. "If
you don't, you will be hurt terribly, terribly!"

And then, suddenly, she slipped lower among the cushions he had
placed for her, and buried her face in one of them with a moaning
grief that cut to his soul. She was sobbing now, like a child. In
this moment Philip forgot all restraint. He leaned forward and put
a hand on her shining head, and bent his face close down to hers.
His free hand touched one of her hands, and he held it tightly.

"Listen, my Josephine," he whispered. "I am not going to turn
back, I am going on with you. That is our pact. At the end I know
what to expect. You have told me; and I, too, believe. But
whatever happens, in spite of all that may happen, I will still
have received more than all else in the world could give me. For I
will have known you, and you will be my salvation. I am going on."

For an instant he felt the fluttering pressure of her fingers on
his. It was an answer a thousand times more precious to him than
words, and he knew that he had won. Still lower he bent his head,
until for an instant his lips touched the soft, living warmth of
her hair. And then he leaned back, freeing her hand, and into his
face had leaped soul and life and fighting strength; and under his
breath he gave new thanks to God, and to the sun, and the blue sky
above, while from behind them came skimming over the water the
slim birchbark canoe of Jean Jacques Croisset.





CHAPTER SIX


At the touch of Weyman's lips to her hair Josephine lay very
still, and Philip wondered if she had felt that swift, stolen
caress. Almost he hoped that she had. The silken tress where for
an instant his lips had rested seemed to him now like some
precious communion cup in whose sacredness he had pledged himself.
Yet had he believed that she was conscious of his act he would
have begged her forgiveness. He waited, breathing softly, putting
greater sweep into his paddle to keep Jean well behind them.

Slowly the tremulous unrest of Josephine's shoulders ceased. She
raised her head and looked at him, her lovely face damp with
tears, her eyes shimmering like velvety pools through their mist.
She did not speak. She was woman now--all woman. Her strength, the
bearing which had made him think of her as a queen, the fighting
tension which she had been under, were gone. Until she looked at
him through her tears her presence had been like that of some
wonderful and unreal creature who held the control to his every
act in the cup of her hands. He thought no longer of himself now.
He knew that to him she had relinquished the mysterious fight
under which she had been struggling. In her eyes he read her
surrender. From this hour the fight was his. She told him, without
speaking. And the glory of it all thrilled him with a sacred
happiness so that he wanted to drop his paddle, draw her close
into his arms, and tell her that there was no power in the world
that could harm her now. But instead of this he laughed low and
joyously full into her eyes, and her lips smiled gently back at
him. And so they understood without words.

Behind them, Jean had been coming up swiftly, and now they heard
him break for an instant into the chorus of one of the wild half-
breed songs, and Philip listened to the words of the chant which
is as old in the Northland as the ancient brass cannon and the
crumbling fortress rocks at York Factory:

    "O, ze beeg black bear, he go to court,
    He go to court a mate;
    He court to ze Sout',
    He court to ze Nort',
    He court to ze shores of ze Indian Lake."

And then, in the moment's silence that followed, Philip threw back
his head, and in a voice almost as wild and untrained as Jean
Croisset's, he shouted back:

    "Oh! the fur fleets sing on Temiskaming,
      As the ashen paddles bend,
    And the crews carouse at Rupert's House,
      At the sullen winter's end.
    But my days are done where the lean wolves run,
      And I ripple no more the path
    Where the gray geese race 'cross the red moon's face
      From the white wind's Arctic wrath."

The suspense was broken. The two men's voices, rising in their
crude strength, sending forth into the still wilderness both
triumph and defiance, brought the quick flush of living back into
Josephine's face. She guessed why Jean had started his chant--to
give her courage. She KNEW why Philip had responded. And now Jean
swept up beside them, a smile on his thin, dark face.

"The Good Virgin preserve us, M'sieur, but our voices are like
those of two beasts," he cried.

"Great, true, fighting beasts," whispered Josephine under her
breath. "How I would hate almost--"

She had suddenly flushed to the roots of her hair.

"What?" asked Philip.

"To hear men sing like women," she finished.

As swiftly as he had come up Jean and his canoe had sped on ahead
of them.

"You should have heard us sing that up in our snow hut, when for
five months the sun never sent a streak above the horizon," said
Philip. "At the end--in the fourth month--it was more like the
wailing of madmen. MacTavish died then: a young half Scot, of the
Royal Mounted. After that Radisson and I were alone, and sometimes
we used to see how loud we could shout it, and always, when we
came to those two last lines--"

She interrupted him:

    "Where the gray geese race 'cross the red moon's face
    From the white wind's Arctic wrath."


"Your memory is splendid!" he cried admiringly.

"Yes, always when we came to the end of those lines, the white
foxes would answer us from out on the barrens, and we would wait
for the sneaking yelping of them before we went on. They haunted
us like little demons, those foxes, and never once could we catch
a glimpse of them during the long night. They helped to drive
MacTavish mad. He died begging us to keep them away from him. One
day I was wakened by Radisson crying like a baby, and when I sat
up in my ice bunk he caught me by the shoulders and told me that
he had seen something that looked like the glow of a fire
thousands and thousands of miles away. It was the sun, and it came
just in time."

"And this other man you speak of, Radisson?" she asked.

"He died two hundred miles back," replied Philip quietly. "But
that is unpleasant to speak of. Look ahead. Isn't that ridge of
the forest glorious in the sunlight?"

She did not take her eyes from his face.

"Do you know, I think there is something wonderful about you," she
said, so gently and frankly that the blood rushed to his cheeks.
"Some day I want to learn those words that helped to keep you
alive up there. I want to know all of the story, because I think I
can understand. There was more to it--something after the foxes
yelped back at you?"

"This," he said, and ahead of them Jean Croisset rested on his
paddle to listen to Philip's voice:

    "My seams gape wide, and I'm tossed aside
      To rot on a lonely shore,
    While the leaves and mould like a shroud enfold,
      For the last of my trails are o'er;
    But I float in dreams on Northland streams
      That never again I'll see,
    As I lie on the marge of the old Portage,
      With grief for company."

"A canoe!" breathed the girl, looking back over the sunlit lake.

"Yes, a canoe, cast aside, forgotten, as sometimes men and women
are forgotten when down and out."

"Men and women who live in dreams," she added. "And with such
dreams there must always be grief."

There was a moment of the old pain in her face, a little catch in
her breath, and then she turned and looked at the forest ridge to
which he had called her attention.

"We go deep into that forest," she said. "We enter a creek just
beyond where Jean is waiting for us, and Adare House is a hundred
miles to the south and east." She faced him with a quick smile.
"My name is Adare," she explained, "Josephine Adare."

"Is--or was?" he asked.

"Is," she said; then, seeing the correcting challenge in his eyes
she added quickly: "But only to you. To all others I am Madame
Paul Darcambal."

"Paul?"

"Pardon me, I mean Philip."

They were close to shore, and fearing that Jean might become
suspicious of his tardiness, Philip bent to his paddle and was
soon in the half-breed's wake. Where he had thought there was only
the thick forest he saw a narrow opening toward which Jean was
speeding in his canoe. Five minutes later they passed under a
thick mass of overhanging spruce boughs into a narrow stream so
still and black in the deep shadows of the forest that it looked
like oil. There was something a little awesome in the suddenness
and completeness with which they were swallowed up. Over their
heads the spruce and cedar tops met and shut out the sunlight. On
both sides of them the forest was thick and black. The trail of
the stream itself was like a tunnel, silent, dark, mysterious. The
paddles dipped noiselessly, and the two canoes travelled side by
side.

"There are few who know of this break into the forest," said Jean
in a low voice. "Listen, M'sieur!"

From out of the gloom ahead of them there came a faint, oily
splashing.

"Otter," whispered Jean. "The stream is like this for many miles,
and it is full of life that you can never see because of the
darkness."

Something in the stillness and the gloom held them silent. The
canoes slipped along like shadows, and sometimes they bent their
heads to escape the low-hanging boughs. Josephine's face shone
whitely in the dusk. She was alert and listening. When she spoke
it was in a voice strangely subdued.

"I love this stream," she whispered. "It is full of life. On all
sides of us, in the forest, there is life. The Indians do not come
here, because they have a superstitious dread of this eternal
gloom and quiet. They call it the Spirit Stream. Even Jean is a
little oppressed by it. See how closely he keeps to us. I love it,
because I love everything that is wild. Listen! Did you hear
that?"

"Mooswa," spoke Jean out of the gloom close to them.

"Yes, a moose," she said. "Here is where I saw my first moose, so
many years ago that it is time for me to forget," she laughed
softly. "I think I had just passed my fourth birthday."

"You were four on the day we started, ma Josephine," came Jean's
voice as his canoe shot slowly ahead where the stream narrowed;
and then his voice came back more faintly: "that was sixteen years
ago to-day."

A shot breaking the dead stillness of the sunless world about him
could not have sent the blood rushing through Philip's veins more
swiftly than Jean's last words. For a moment he stopped his
paddling and leaned forward so that he could look close into
Josephine's face.

"This is your birthday?"

"Yes. You ate my birthday cake."

She heard the strange, happy catch in his breath as he
straightened back and resumed his work. Mile after mile they wound
their way through the mysterious, subterranean-like stream,
speaking seldom, and listening intently for the breaks in the
deathlike stillness that spoke of life. Now and then they caught
the ghostly flutter of owls in the gloom, like floating spirits;
back in the forest saplings snapped and brush crashed underfoot as
caribou or moose caught the man-scent; they heard once the
panting, sniffing inquiry of a bear close at hand, and Philip
reached forward for his rifle. For an instant Josephine's hand
fluttered to his own, and held it back, and the dark glow of her
eyes said: "Don't kill." Here there were no big-eyed moose-birds,
none of the mellow throat sounds of the brush sparrow, no harsh
janglings of the gaudily coloured jays. In the timber fell the
soft footpads of creatures with claw and fang, marauders and
outlaws of darkness. Light, sunshine, everything that loved the
openness of day were beyond. For more than an hour they had driven
their canoes steadily on, when, as suddenly as they had entered
it, they slipped out from the cavernous gloom into the sunlight
again.

Josephine drew a deep breath as the sunlight flooded her face and
hair.

"I have my own name for that place," she said. "I call it the
Valley of Silent Things. It is a great swamp, and they say that
the moss grows in it so deep that caribou and deer walk over it
without breaking through."

The stream was swelling out into a narrow, finger-like lake that
stretched for a mile or more ahead of them, and she turned to nod
her head at the spruce and cedar shores with their colourings of
red and gold, where birch, and poplar, and ash splashed vividly
against the darker background.

"From now on it is all like that." she said. "Lake after lake,
most of them as narrow as this, clear to the doors of Adare House.
It is a wonderful lake country, and one may easily lose one's
self--hundreds of lakes, I guess, running through the forests like
Venetian canals."

"I would not be surprised if you told me you had been in Venice,"
he replied. "To-day is your birthday--your twentieth. Have you
lived all those years here?"

He repressed his desire to question her, because he knew that she
understood that to be a part of his promise to her. In what he now
asked her he could not believe that he was treading upon
prohibited ground, and in the face of their apparent innocence he
was dismayed at the effect his words had upon her. It seemed to
him that her eyes flinched when he spoke, as if he had struck at
her. There passed over her face the look which he had come to
dread: a swift, tense betrayal of the grief which he knew was
eating at her soul, and which she was fighting so courageously to
hide from him. It had come and gone in a flash, but the pain of it
was left with him. She smiled at him a bit tremulously.

"I understand why you ask that," she said, "and it is no more than
fair that I should tell you. Of course you are wondering a great
deal about me. You have just asked yourself how I could ever hear
of such a place as Venice away up here among the Indians. Why, do
you know"--she leaned forward, as if to whisper a secret, her blue
eyes shilling with a sudden laughter--"I've even read the 'Lives'
of Plutarch, and I'm waiting patiently for the English to bang a
few of those terrible Lucretia Borgias who call themselves
militant suffragettes!"

"I--I--beg your pardon," he stammered helplessly.

She no longer betrayed the hurt of his question, and so sweet was
the laughter of her eyes and lips that he laughed back at her, in
spite of his embarrassment. Then, all at once, she became serious.

"I am terribly unfair to you," she apologized gently; and then,
looking across the water, she added: "Yes, I've lived almost all
of those twenty years up here--among the forests. They sent me to
the Mission school at Fort Churchill, over on Hudson's Bay, for
three years; and after that, until I was seventeen, I had a little
white-haired English governess at Adare House. If she had lived--
" Her hands clenched the sides of the canoe, and she looked
straight away from Philip. She seemed to force the words that came
from her lips then: "When I was eighteen I went to Montreal--and
lived there a year, That is all--that one year--away from--my
forests--"

He almost failed to hear the last words, and he made no effort to
reply. He kept his canoe nearer to Jean's, so that frequently they
were running side by side. In the quick fall of the early northern
night the sun was becoming more and more of a red haze in the sky
as it sank farther toward the western forests. Josephine had
changed her position, so that she now sat facing the bow of the
canoe. She leaned a little forward, her elbows resting in her lap,
her chin tilted in the cup of her hands, looking steadily ahead,
and for a long time no sound but the steady dip, dip, dip of the
two paddles broke the stillness of their progress. Scarcely once
did Philip take his eyes from her. Every turn, every passing of
shadow and light, each breath of wind that set stirring the
shimmering tresses of her hair, made her more beautiful to him.
From red gold to the rich and lustrous brown of the ripened wintel
berries he marked the marvellous changing of her hair with the
setting of the sun. A quick chill was growing in the air now and
after a little he crept forward and slipped a light blanket about
the slender shoulders. Even then Josephine did not speak, but
looked up at him, and smiled her thanks. In his eyes, his touch,
even his subdued breath, were the whispers of his adoration.

Movement roused Jean from his Indian-like silence. As Philip moved
back, he called:

"It is four o'clock, M'sieur. We will have darkness in an hour.
There is a place to camp and tepee poles ready cut on the point
ahead of us."

Fifteen minutes later Philip ran his canoe ashore close to Jean
Croisset's on a beach of white sand. He could not help seeing
that, from the moment she had answered his question out on the
lake, a change had come over Josephine. For a short time that
afternoon she had risen from out of the thing that oppressed her,
and once or twice there had been almost happiness in her smile and
laughter. Now she seemed to have sunk again under its smothering
grip. It was as if the chill and dismal gloom of approaching night
had robbed her cheeks of colour, and had given a tired droop to
her shoulders as she sat silently, and waited for them to make her
tent comfortable. When it was up, and the blankets spread, she
went in and left them alone, and the last glimpse that he had of
her face left with Philip a cameo-like impression of hopelessness
that made him want to call out her name, yet held him speechless.
He looked closely at Jean as they put up their own tent, and for
the first time he saw that the mask had fallen from the half-
breed's face, and that it was filled with that same mysterious
hopelessness and despair. Almost roughly he caught him by the
shoulder.

"See here, Jean Croisset," he cried impatiently, "you're a man.
What are you afraid of?"

"God," replied Jean so quietly that Philip dropped his hand from
his shoulder in astonishment. "Nothing else in the world am I
afraid of, M'sieur!"

"Then why--why in the name of that God do you look like this?"
demanded Philip. "You saw her go into the tent. She is
disheartened, hopeless because of something that I can't guess at,
cold and shivering and white because of a FEAR of something. She
is a woman. You are a man. Are YOU afraid?"

"No, not afraid, M'sieur. It is her grief that hurts me, not fear.
If it would help her I would let you take this knife at my side
and cut me into pieces so small that the birds could carry them
away. I know what you mean. You think I am not a fighter. Our Lady
in Heaven, if fighting could only save her!"

"And it cannot?"

"No, M'sieur. Nothing can save her. You can help, but you cannot
save her. I believe that nothing like this terrible thing that has
come to her has happened before since the world began. It is a
mistake that it has come once. The Great God would not let it
happen twice."

He spoke calmly. Philip could find no words with which to reply.
His hand slipped from Jean's arm to his hand, and their fingers
gripped. Thus for a space they stood. Philip broke the silence.

"I love her, Jean," he spoke softly.

"Every one loves her, M'sieur. All our forest people call her
'L'Ange.'"

"And still you say there is no hope?"

"None."

"Not even--if we fight--?"

Jean's fingers tightened about his like cords of steel.

"We may kill, M'sieur, but that will not save hearts crushed like
--See!--like I crush these ash berries under my foot! I tell you
again, nothing like this has ever happened before since the world
began, and nothing like it will ever happen again!"

Steadily Philip looked into Jean's eyes.

"You have seen something of the world, Jean?"

"A good deal, M'sieur. For seven years I went to school at
Montreal, and prepared myself for the holy calling of Missioner.
That was many years ago. I am now simply Jean Jacques Croisset, of
the forests."

"Then you know--you must know, that where there is life there is
hope," argued Philip eagerly, "I have promised not to pry after
her secret, to fight for her only as she tells me to fight. But if
I knew, Jean. If I knew what this trouble is--how and where to
fight! Is this knowledge--impossible?"

"Impossible, M'sieur!"

Slowly Jean withdrew his hand.

"Don't take it that way, man," exclaimed Philip quickly. "I'm not
ferreting for her secret now. Only I've got to know--is it
impossible for her to tell me?"

"As impossible, M'sieur, as it would be for me. And Our Lady
herself could not make me do that if I heard Her voice commanding
me out of Heaven. All that I can do is to wait, and watch, and
guard. And all that you can do, M'sieur, is to play the part she
has asked of you. In doing that, and doing it well, you will keep
the last bit of life in her heart from being trampled out. If you
love her"--he picked up a tepee pole before he finished, and then,
said--"you will do as you have promised!"

There was a finality in the shrug of Jean's shoulders which Philip
did not question. He picked up an axe, and while Jean arranged the
tepee poles began to chop down a dry birch. As the chips flew his
mind flew faster. In his optimism he had half believed that the
cloud of mystery in which Josephine had buried him would, in time,
be voluntarily lifted by her. He had not been able to make himself
believe that any situation could exist where hopelessness was as
complete as she had described. Without arguing with himself he had
taken it for granted that she had been labouring under a
tremendous strain, and that no matter what her trouble was it had
come to look immeasurably darker to her than it really was. But
Jean's attitude, his low and unexcited voice, and the almost
omniscient decisiveness of his words had convinced him that
Josephine had not painted it as blackly as she might. She, at
least, had seemed to see a ray of hope. Jean saw none, and Philip
realized that the half-breed's calm and unheated judgment was more
to be reckoned with than hers. At the same time, he did not feel
dismayed. He was of the sort who have born in them the fighting
instinct, And with this instinct, which is two thirds of life's
battle won, goes the sort of optimism that has opened up raw
worlds to the trails of men. Without the one the other cannot
exist.

As the blows of his axe cut deep into the birch, Philip knew that
so long as there is life and freedom and a sun above it is
impossible for hope to become a thing of char and ash. He did not
use logic. He simply LIVED! He was alive, and he loved Josephine.

The muscles of his arms were like sinews of rawhide. Every fibre
in his body was strung with a splendid strength. His brain was as
clear as the unpolluted air that drifted over the cedar and
spruce. And now to these tremendous forces had come the added
strength of the most wonderful thing in the world: love of a
woman. In spite of all that Josephine and Jean had said, in spite
of all the odds that might be against him, he was confident of
winning whatever fight might be ahead of him.

He not only felt confident, but cheerful. He did not try to make
Jean understand what it meant to be in camp with the company of a
woman for the first time in two years. Long after the tents were
up and the birch-fire was crackling cheerfully in the darkness
Josephine still remained in her tent. But the mere fact that she
was there lifted Philip's soul to the skies.

And Josephine, with a blanket drawn about her shoulders, lay in
the thick gloom of her tent and listened to him. His far-reaching,
exuberant whistling seemed to warm her. She heard him laughing and
talking with Jean, whose voice never came to her; farther back,
where he was cutting down another birch, she heard him shout out
the words of a song between blows; and once, sotto voce, and close
to her tent, she quite distinctly heard him say "Damn!" She knew
that he had stumbled with an armful of wood, and for the first
time in that darkness and her misery she smiled. That one word
alone Philip had not intended that she should hear. But when it
was out he picked himself up and laughed.

He did not meddle with Jean's cook-fire, but he built a second
fire where the cheer of it would light up Josephine's tent, and
piled dry logs on it until the flame of it lighted up the gloom
about them for a hundred feet. And then, with a pan in one hand
and a stick in the other, he came close and beat a din that could
have been heard a quarter of a mile away.

Josephine came out full in the flood-light of the fire, and he saw
that she had been crying. Even now there was a tremble of her lips
as she smiled her gratitude. He dropped his pan and stick, and
went to her. It seemed as if this last hour in the darkness of
camp had brought her nearer to him, and he gently took her hands
in his own and held them for a moment close to him. They were cold
and trembling, and one of them that had rested under her cheek was
damp with tears.

"You mustn't do this any more," he whispered.

"I'll try not to," she promised. "Please let me stand a little in
the warmth of the fire. I'm cold."

He led her close to the flaming birch logs and the heat soon
brought a warm flush into her cheeks. Then they went to where Jean
had spread out their supper on the ground. When she had seated
herself on the pile of blankets they had arranged for her,
Josephine looked across at Philip, squatted Indian-fashion
opposite her, and smiled apologetically.

"I'm afraid your opinion of me isn't getting better," she said.
"I'm not much of a--a--sport--to let you men get supper by
yourselves, am I? You see--I'm taking advantage of my birthday."

"Oui, ma belle princesse," laughed Jean softly, a tender look
coming into his thin, dark face. "And do you remember that other
birthday, years and years ago, when you took advantage of Jean
Croisset while he was sleeping? Non, you do not remember?"

"Yes, I remember."

"She was six, M'sieur," explained Jean, "and while I slept,
dreaming of one gr-r-rand paradise, she cut off my moustaches.
They were splendid, those moustaches, but they would never grow
right after that, and so I have gone shaven."

In spite of her efforts to appear cheerful, Philip could see that
Josephine was glad when the meal was over, and that she was
forcing herself to sip at a second cup of tea on their account. He
accompanied her back to the tent after she had bade Jean good-
night, and as they stood for a moment before the open flap there
filled the girl's face a look that was partly of self-reproach and
partly of wistful entreaty for his understanding and forgiveness.

"You have been good to me," she said. "No one can ever know how
good you have been to me, what it has meant to me, and I thank
you."

She bowed her head, and again he restrained the impulse to gather
her close up in his arms. When she looked up he was holding
something toward her in the palm of his hand. It was a little
Bible, worn and frayed at the edges, pathetic in its raggedness.

"A long time ago, my mother gave me this Bible," he said. "She
told me that as long as I carried it, and believed in it, no harm
could come to me, and I guess she was right. It was her first
Bible, and mine. It's grown old and ragged with me, and the water
and snow have faded it. I've come to sort of believe that mother
is always near this Book. I'd like you to have it, Josephine. It's
the only thing I've got to offer you on your birthday."

While he was speaking he had taken one of her hands and thrust his
precious gift into it. Slowly Josephine raised the little Bible to
her breast. She did not speak, but for a moment Philip saw in her
eyes the look for which he would have sacrificed the world; a look
that told him more than all the volumes of the earth could have
told of a woman's trust and faith.

He bent his head lower and whispered:

"To-night, my Josephine--just this night--may I wish you all the
hope and happiness that God and my Mother can bring you, and kiss
you--once--"

In that moment's silence he heard the throbbing of her heart. She
seemed to have ceased breathing, and then, slowly, looking
straight into his eyes, she lifted her lips to him, and as one who
meets a soul of a thing too sanctified to touch with hands, he
kissed her. Scarcely had the warm sweetness of her lips thrilled
his own than she had turned from him, and was gone.





CHAPTER SEVEN


For a time after they had cleared up the supper things Philip sat
with Jean close to the fire and smoked. The half-breed had lapsed
again into his gloom and silence. Two or three times Philip caught
Jean watching him furtively. He made no effort to force a
conversation, and when he had finished his pipe he rose and went
to the tent which they were to share together. At last he found
himself not unwilling to be alone. He closed the flap to shut out
the still brilliant illumination of the fire, drew a blanket about
him, and stretched himself out on the top of his sleeping bag. He
wanted to think.

He closed his eyes to bring back more vividly the picture of
Josephine as she had given him her lips to kiss. This, of all the
unusual happenings of that afternoon, seemed most like a dream to
him, yet his brain was afire with the reality of it. His mind
struggled again with the hundred questions which he had asked
himself that day, and in the end Josephine remained as completely
enshrouded in mystery as ever. Yet of one thing was he convinced.
The oppression of the thing under which Jean and the girl were
fighting had become more acute with the turning of their faces
homeward. At Adare House lay the cause of their hopelessness, of
Josephine's grief, and of the gloom under which the half-breed had
fallen so completely that night. Until they reached Adare House he
could guess at nothing. And there--what would he find?

In spite of himself he felt creeping slowly over him a shuddering
fear that he had not acknowledged before. The darkness deepening
as the fire died away, the stillness of the night, the low wailing
of a wind growing out of the north roused in him the unrest and
doubt that sunshine and day had dispelled. An uneasy slumber came
at last with this disquiet. His mind was filled with fitful
dreams. Again he was back with Radisson and MacTavish, listening
to the foxes out on the barrens. He heard the Scotchman's moaning
madness and listened to the blast of storm. And then he heard a
cry--a cry like that which MacTavish fancied he had heard in the
wind an hour before he died. It was this dream-cry that roused
him.

He sat up, and his face and hands were damp. It was black in the
tent. Outside even the bit of wind had died away. He reached out a
hand, groping for Jean. The half-breed's blankets had not been
disturbed. Then for a few moments he sat very still, listening,
and wondering if the cry had been real. As he sat tense and still
in the half daze of the sleep it came again. It was the shrill
laughing carnival of a loon out on the lake. More than once he had
laughed at comrades who had shivered at that sound and cowered
until its echoes had died away in moaning wails. He understood
now. He knew why the Indians called it moakwa--"the mad thing." He
thought of MacTavish, and threw the blanket from his shoulders,
and crawled out of the tent.

Only a few faintly glowing embers remained where he had piled the
birch logs. The sky was full of stars. The moon, still full and
red, hung low in the west. The lake lay in a silvery and unruffled
shimmer. Through the silence there came to him from a great
distance the coughing challenge of a bull moose inviting a rival
to battle. Then Philip saw a dark object huddled close to
Josephine's tent.

He moved toward it, his moccasined feet making no sound. Something
impelled him to keep as quiet as the night itself. And when he
came near--he was glad. For the object was Jean. He sat with his
back to a block of birch twenty paces from the door of Josephine's
tent. His head had fallen forward on his chest. He was asleep, but
across his knees lay his rifle, gripped tightly in both hands.
Quick as a flash the truth rushed upon Philip. Like a faithful dog
Jean was guarding the girl. He had kept awake as long as he could,
but even in slumber his hands did not give up their hold on the
rifle.

Against whom was he guarding her? What danger could there be in
this quiet, starlit night for Josephine? A sudden chill ran
through Philip. Did Jean mistrust HIM? Was it possible that
Josephine had secretly expressed a fear which made the Frenchman
watch over her while she slept? As silently as he had approached
he moved away until he stood in the sand at the shore of the lake.
There he looked back. He could just see Jean, a dark blot; and all
at once the unfairness of his suspicion came upon him. To him
Josephine had given proofs of her faith which nothing could
destroy. And he understood now the reason for that tired, drawn
look in Jean's face. This was not the first night he had watched.
Every night he had guarded her until, in the small hours of dawn,
his eyes had closed heavily as they were closed now.

The beginning of the gray northern dawn was not far away. Philip
knew that without looking at the hour. He sensed it. It was in the
air, the stillness of the forest, in the appearance of the stars
and moon. To prove himself he looked at his watch with the match
with which he lighted his pipe. It was half-past three. At this
season of the year dawn came at five.

He walked slowly along the strip of sand between the dark wall of
the forest and the lake. Not until he was a mile away from the
camp did he stop. Then something happened to betray the uneasy
tension to which his nerves were drawn. A sudden crash in the
brush close at hand drew him about with a start, and even while he
laughed at himself he stood with his automatic in his hand.

He heard the whimpering, babyish-like complaint of the porcupine
that had made the sound, and still chuckling over his nervousness
he seated himself on a white drift-log that had lain bleaching for
half a century in the sand.

The moon had fallen behind the western forests; the stars were
becoming fainter in the sky, and about him the darkness was
drawing in like a curtain. He loved this hour that bridged the
northern night with the northern day, and he sat motionless and
still, covering the glow of fire in his pipe bowl with the palm of
his hand.

Out of the brush ambled the porcupine, chattering and talking to
itself in its queer and good-humoured way, fat as a poplar bud
ready to burst, and so intent on reaching the edge of the lake
that it passed in its stupid innocence so close that Philip might
have struck it with a stick. And then there swooped down from out
of the cover of the black spruce a gray cloudlike thing that came
with the silence and lightness of a huge snowflake, hovered for an
instant over the porcupine, and disappeared into the darkness
beyond. And the porcupine, still oblivious of danger and what the
huge owl would have done to him had he been a snowshoe rabbit
instead of a monster of quills, drank his fill leisurely and
ambled back as he had come, chattering his little song of good-
humour and satisfaction.

One after another there came now the sounds that merged dying
night into the birth of day, and for the hundredth time Philip
listened to the wonders that never grew old for him. The laugh of
the loon was no longer a raucous, mocking cry of exultation and
triumph, but a timid, question note--half drowsy, half filled with
fear; and from the treetops came the still lower notes of the
owls, their night's hunt done, and seeking now the densest covers
for the day. And then, from deep back in the forests, came a cry
that was filled with both hunger and defiance--the wailing howl of
a wolf. With these night sounds came the first cheep, cheep, cheep
of the little brush sparrow, still drowsy and uncertain, but
faintly heralding the day. Wings fluttered in the spruce and cedar
thickets. From far overhead came the honking of Canada geese
flying southward. And one by one the stars went out, and in the
south-eastern skies a gray hand reached up slowly over the forests
and wiped darkness from the earth. Not until then did Philip rise
from his seat and turn his face toward camp.

He tried to throw off the feeling of oppression that still clung
to him. By the time he reached camp he had partly succeeded. The
fire was burning brightly again, and Jean was busy preparing
breakfast. To his surprise he saw Josephine standing outside of
her tent. She had finished brushing her hair, and was plaiting it
in a long braid. He had wondered how they would meet that morning.
His face flushed warm as he approached her. The thrill of their
kiss was still on his lips, and his heart sent the memory of it
burning in his eyes as he came up, Josephine turned to greet him.
She was pale and calm. There were dark lines under her eyes, and
her voice was steady and without emotion as she said "Good
morning." It was as if he had dreamed the thing that had passed
the night before. There was neither glow of tenderness, of regret,
nor of memory in her eyes. Her smile was wan and forced. He knew
that she was calling upon his chivalry to forget that one moment
before the door of her tent. He bowed, and said simply:

"I'm afraid you didn't sleep well, Josephine. Did I disturb you
when I stole out of camp?"

"I heard nothing," she replied. "Nothing but the cries of that
terrible bird out on the lake. I'm afraid I didn't sleep much."

The atmosphere of the camp that morning weighted Philip's heart
with a heaviness which he could not throw off. He performed his
share of the work with Jean, and tried to talk to him, but
Croisset would only reply to his most pointed remarks. He
whistled. He shouted out a song back in the timber as he cut an
armful of dry birch, and he returned to Jean and the girl
laughing, the wood piled to his chin and the axe under his arm.
Neither showed that they had heard him. The meal was eaten in a
chilly silence that filled him with deepest foreboding. Josephine
seemed at ease. She talked with him when he spoke to her, but
there seemed now to be a mysterious restraint in every word that
she uttered. She excused herself before Jean and he were through,
and went to her tent. A moment later Philip rose and went down to
his canoe.

In the rubber sack was the last of his tobacco. He was fumbling
for it when his heart gave a great jump. A voice had spoken softly
behind him:

"Philip."

Slowly, unbelieving, he turned. It was Josephine. For the first
time she had called him by his name. And yet the speaking of it
seemed to put a distance between them, for her voice was calm and
without emotion, as she might have spoken to Jean.

"I lay awake nearly all of the night, thinking," she said. "It was
a terrible thing that we did, and I am sorry--sorry--"

In the quickening of her breath he saw how heroically she was
fighting to speak steadily to him.

"You can't understand," she resumed, facing him with the
steadiness of despair. "You cannot understand--until you reach
Adare House. And that is what I dread, the hour when you will know
what I am, and how terrible it was for me to do what I did last
night. If you were like most other men, I wouldn't care so much.
But you have been different."

He replied in words which he would not dare to have uttered a few
hours before.

"And yet, back there when you first asked me to go with you as
your husband, you knew what I would find at Adare House?" he
asked, his voice low and tense. "You knew?"

"Yes."

"Then what has produced the change that makes you fear to have me
go on? Is it because"--he leaned toward her, and his face was
bloodless--"Is it because you care a little for me?"

"Because I respect you, yes," she said in a voice that
disappointed him. "I don't want to hurt you. I don't want you to
go back into the world thinking of me as you will. You have been
honest with me. I do not blame you for what happened last night.
The fault was mine. And I have come to you now, so that you will
understand that, no matter how I may appear and act, I have faith
and trust in you. I would give anything that last night might be
wiped out of our memories. That is impossible, but you must not
think of it and you must not talk to me any more as you have,
until we reach Adare House. And then--"

Her white face was pathetic as she turned away from him.

"You will not want to," she finished. "After that you will fight
for me simply because you are a knight among men, and because you
have promised. There will not even be the promise to bind you, for
I release you from that."

Philip stood silent as she left him. He knew that to follow her
and to force further conversation upon her after what she had said
would be little less than brutal. She had given him to understand
that from now on he was to hold himself toward her with greater
restraint, and the blood flushed hot and uncomfortable into his
face as he realized for the first time how he had overstepped the
bounds.

All his life womanhood had been the most beautiful thing in the
world to him. And now there was forced upon him the dread
conviction that he had insulted it. He did not stop to argue that
the overwhelming completeness of his love had excused him. What he
thought of now was that he had found Josephine alone, had declared
that love for her before he knew her name, and had followed it up
by act and word which he now felt to be dishonourable. And yet,
after all, would he have recalled what had happened if he could?
He asked himself that question as he returned to help Jean. And he
found no answer to it until they were in their canoes again and
headed up the lake, Josephine sitting with her back to him, her
thick silken braid falling in a sinuous and sunlit rope of red
gold over her shoulders. Then he knew that he would not.

Jean gave little rest that day, and by noon they had covered
twenty miles of the lake-way. An hour for dinner, and they went
on. At times Josephine used her paddle, and not once during the
day did she sit with her face to Philip. Late in the afternoon
they camped on a portage fifty miles from Adare House.

There were no stars or moon in the sky this night. The wind had
changed, and came from the north. In it was the biting chill of
the Arctic, and overhead was a gray-dun mass of racing cloud. A
dozen times Jean turned his face anxiously from the fire into the
north, and held wet fingers high over his head to see if in the
air was that peculiar sting by which the forest man forecasts the
approach of snow.

At last he said to Philip: "The wind will grow, M'sieur," and
picked up his axe.

Philip followed with his own, and they piled about Josephine's
tent a thick protection of spruce and cedar boughs. Then together
they brought three or four big logs to the fire. After that Philip
went into their own tent, stripped off his outer garments, and
buried himself in his sleeping bag. For a long time he lay awake
and listened to the increasing wail of the wind in the tall spruce
tops. It was not new to him. For months he had fallen asleep with
the thunderous crash of ice and the screaming fury of storm in his
ears. But to-night there was something in the sound which sunk him
still deeper into the gloom which he had found it impossible to
throw off. At last he fell asleep.

When he awoke he struck a match and looked at his watch. It was
four o'clock, and he dressed and went outside. The wind had died
down. Jean was already busy over the cook-fire, and in Josephine's
tent he saw the light of a candle. She appeared a little later,
wrapped close in a thick red Hudson's Bay coat, and with a marten-
skin cap on her head. Something in her first appearance, the
picturesqueness of her dress, the jauntiness of the little cap,
and the first flush of the fire in her face filled him with the
hope that sleep had given her better spirit. A closer glance
dashed this hope. Without questioning her he knew that she had
spent another night of mental torture. And Jean's face looked
thinner, and the hollows under his eyes were deeper.

All that day the sky hung heavy and dark with cloud, and the water
was rough. Early in the afternoon the wind rose again, and
Croisset ran alongside them to suggest that they go ashore. He
spoke to Philip, but Josephine interrupted quickly:

"We must go on, Jean," she demanded. "If it is not impossible we
must reach Adare House to-night."

"It will be late--midnight," replied Jean. "And if it grows
rougher--"

A dash of spray swept over the bow into the girl's face.

"I don't care for that," she cried. "Wet and cold won't hurt us."
She turned to Philip, as if needing his argument against Jean's.
"Is it not possible to get me home to-night?" she asked.

"It is two o'clock," said Philip. "How far have we to go, Jean?"

"It is not the distance, M'sieur--it is that," replied Jean, as a
wave sent another dash of water over Josephine. "We are twenty
miles from Adare House."

Philip looked at Josephine.

"It is best for you to go ashore and wait until to-morrow,
Josephine. Look at that stretch of water ahead--a mass of
whitecaps."

"Please, please take me home," she pleaded, and now she spoke to
Philip alone. "I'm not afraid. And I cannot live through another
night like last night. Why, if anything should happen to us"--she
flung back her head and smiled bravely at him through the mist of
her wet hair and the drenching spray--"if anything should happen I
know you'd meet it gloriously. So I'm not afraid. And I want to go
home."

Philip turned to the half-breed, who had drifted a canoe length
away.

"We'll go on, Jean," he called. "We can make it by keeping close
inshore. Can you swim?"

"Oui, M'sieur; but Josephine--"

"I can swim with her," replied Philip, and Josephine saw the old
life and strength in his face again as she turned to the white-
capped seas ahead of them.

Hour after hour they fought their way on after that, the wind
rising stronger in their faces, the seas burying them deeper; and
each time that Josephine looked back she marvelled at the man
behind her, bare-headed, his hair drenched, his arms naked to the
elbows, and his clear gray eyes always smiling confidence at her
through the gloom of mist. Not until darkness was falling about
them did Jean drop near enough to speak again. Then he shouted:

"Another hour and we reach Snowbird River, M'sieur. That is four
miles from Adare House. But ahead of us the wind rushes across a
wide sweep of the lake. Shall we hazard it?"

"Yes, yes," cried the girl, answering for Philip. "We must go on!"

Without another word Croisset led the way. The wind grew stronger
with each minute's progress. Shouting for Jean to hold his canoe
for a space, Philip steadied his own canoe while he spoke to the
girl.

"Come back to me as quietly as you can, Josephine," he said. "Pass
the dunnage ahead of you to take the place of your weight. If
anything happens, I want you near me."

Cautiously Josephine did as he bade her, and as she added slowly
to the ballast in the bow she drew little by little nearer to
Philip, Her hand touched an object in the bottom of the canoe as
she came close to him. It was one of his moccasins. She saw now
his naked throat and chest. He had stripped off his heavy woollen
shirt as well as his footwear. He reached out, and his hand
touched her lightly as she huddled down in front of him.

"Splendid!" he laughed. "You're a little brick, Josephine, and the
best comrade in a canoe that I ever saw. Now if we go over all
I've got to do is to swim ashore with you. Is it good walking to
Adare House?"

He did not hear her reply; but a fresh burst of the wind sent a
loose strand of her hair back into his face, and he was happy.
Happy in spite of a peril which neither he nor Jean would have
thought of facing alone. In the darkness he could no longer see
Croisset or his canoe. But Jean's shout came back to him every
minute on the wind, and over Josephine's head he answered. He was
glad that it was so dark the girl could not see what was ahead of
them now. Once or twice his own breath stopped short, when it
seemed that the canoe had taken the fatal plunge which he was
dreading. Every minute he figured the distance from the shore, and
his chances of swimming it if they were overturned. And then,
after a long time, there came a sudden lull in the wind, and the
seas grew less rough. Jean's voice came from near them, filled
with a thrill of relief.

"We are behind the point," he shouted. "Another mile and we will
enter the Snowbird, M'sieur!"

Philip leaned forward in the gloom. Josephine's cap had fallen
off, and for a moment his hand rested on her wet and wind-blown
hair.

"Did you hear that?" he cried. "We're almost home."

"Yes," she shivered. "And I'm glad--glad--"

Was it an illusion of his own, or did she seem to shiver and draw
away from him AT THE TOUCH OF HIS HAND? Even in the blackness he
could FEEL that she was huddled forward, her face in her hands.
She did not speak to him again. When they entered the smooth water
of the Snowbird, Jean's canoe drew close in beside them, but not a
word fell from Croisset. Like shadows they moved up the stream
between two black walls of forest. A steadily increasing
excitement, a feeling that he was upon the eve of strange events,
grew stronger in Philip. His arms and back ached, his legs were
cramped, the last of his splendid strength had been called upon in
the fight with wind and seas, but he forgot this exhaustion in
anticipation of the hour that was drawing near. He knew that Adare
House would reveal to him things which Josephine had not told him.
She had said that it would, and that he would hate her then. That
they were burying themselves deeper into the forest he guessed by
the lessening of the wind.

Half an hour passed, and in that time his companion did not move
or speak. He heard faintly a distant wailing cry. He recognized
the sound. It was not a wolf-cry, but the howl of a husky. He
fancied then that the girl moved, that she was gripping the sides
of the canoe with her hands. For fifteen minutes more there was
not a sound but the dip of the paddles and the monotone of the
wind sweeping through the forest tops. Then the dog howled again,
much nearer; and this time he was joined by a second, a third, and
a fourth, until the night was filled with a din that made Philip
stare wonderingly off into the blackness. There were fifty dogs if
there was one in that yelping, howling horde, he told himself, and
they were coming with the swiftness of the wind in their
direction.

From his canoe Croisset broke the silence.

"The wind has given the pack our scent, ma Josephine, and they are
coming to meet you," he said.

The girl made no reply, but Philip could see now that she was
sitting tense and erect. As suddenly as it had begun the cry of
the pack ceased. The dogs had reached the water, and were waiting.
Not until Jean swung his canoe toward shore and the bow of it
scraped on a gravelly bar did they give voice again, and then so
close and fiercely that involuntarily Philip held his canoe back.
In another moment Josephine had stepped lightly over the side in a
foot of water. He could not see what happened then, except that
the bar was filled with a shadowy horde of leaping, crowding,
yelping beasts, and that Josephine was the centre of them. He
heard her voice clear and commanding, crying out their names--
Tyr, Captain, Bruno, Thor, Wamba--until their number seemed
without end; he heard the metallic snap of fangs, quick, panting
breaths, the shuffling of padded feet; and then the girl's voice
grew more clear, and the sounds less, until he heard nothing but
the bated breath of the pack and a low, smothered whine.

In that moment the wind-blown clouds above them broke in a narrow
rift across the skies, and for an instant the moon shone through.
What he saw then drew Philip's breath from him in a wondering
gasp.

On the white bar stood Josephine. The wind on the lake had torn
the strands of her long braid loose and her hair swept in a damp
and clinging mass to her hips. She was looking toward him, as if
about to speak. But it was the pack that made him stare. A sea of
great shaggy heads and crouching bodies surrounded her, a fierce
yellow and green-eyed horde flattened like a single beast upon
their bellies their heads turned toward her, their throats
swelling and their eyes gleaming in the joyous excitement of her
return. An instant of that strange and thrilling picture, and the
night was black again. The girl's voice spoke softly. Bodies
shuffled out of her path. And then she said, quite near to him;

"Are you coming, Philip?"





CHAPTER EIGHT


Not without a slight twinge of trepidation did Philip step from
his canoe to her. He had not heard Croisset go ashore, and for a
moment he felt as if he were deliberately placing himself at the
mercy of a wolf-pack. Josephine may have guessed the effect of the
savage spectacle he had beheld from the canoe, for she was close
to the water's edge to meet him. She spoke, and in the pitch
darkness he reached out. Her hand was groping for him, and her
fingers closed firmly about his own.

"They are my bodyguard, and I have trained them all from puppies,"
she explained. "They don't like strangers, but will fight for
anything that I touch. So I will lead you." She turned with him
toward the pack, and cried in her clear, commanding voice:
"Marche, boys!--Tyr, Captain, Thor, Marche! Hoosh, hoosh, Marche!"

It seemed as if a hundred eyes gleamed out of the blackness; then
there was a movement, a whining, snarling, snapping movement, and
as they walked up the bar and into a narrow trail Philip could
hear the pack falling out to the side and behind them. Also he
knew that Jean was ahead of them now. He did not speak, nor did
Josephine offer to break the silence again. Still letting her hand
rest in his she followed close behind the half-breed. Her hand was
so cold that Philip involuntarily held it tighter in his own, as
if to give it warmth. He could feel her shivering, and yet
something told him that what he sensed in the darkness was not
caused by chill alone. Several times her fingers closed
shudderingly about his.

They had not walked more than a couple of hundred yards when a
turn brought them out of the forest trail, and the blackness ahead
was broken by a solitary light, a dimly lighted window in a pit of
gloom.

"Marja is not expecting us to-night," apologized the girl
nervously. "That is Adare House."

The loneliness of the spot, its apparent emptiness of life, the
silence save for the snuffling and whining of the unseen beasts
about them, stirred Philip with a curious sensation of awe. He had
at least expected light and life at Adare House. Here were only
the mystery of darkness and a deathlike quiet. Even the one light
seemed turned low. As they advanced toward it a great shadow grew
out of the gloom; and then, all at once, it seemed as if a curtain
of the forest had been drawn aside, and away beyond the looming
shadow Philip saw the glow of a camp-fire. From that distant fire
there came the challenging howl of a dog, and instantly it was
taken up by a score of fierce tongues about them. As Josephine's
voice rose to quell the disturbance the light in the window grew
suddenly brighter, and then a door opened and in it stood the
figures of a man and woman. The man was standing behind the woman,
looking over her shoulder, and for one moment Philip caught the
flash of the lamp-glow on the barrel of a rifle.

Josephine paused.

"You will forgive me if I ask you to let me go on alone, and you
follow with Jean?" she whispered. "I will try and see you again
to-night, when I have dressed myself, and I am in better condition
to show you hospitality."

Jean was so close that he overheard her. "We will follow," he said
softly. "Go ahead, ma cheri."

His voice was filled with an infinite gentleness, almost of pity;
and as Josephine drew her hand from Philip's and went on ahead of
them he dropped back close to the other's side.

"Something will happen soon which may turn your heart to stone and
ice, M'sieur," he said, and his voice was scarce above a whisper.
"I wanted her to tell you back there, two days ago, but she shrank
from the ordeal then. It is coming to-night. And, however it may
effect you, M'sieur, I ask you not to show the horror of it, but
to have pity. You have perhaps known many women, but you have
never known one like our Josephine. In her soul is the purity of
the blue skies, the sweetness of the wild flowers, the goodness of
our Blessed Lady, the Mother of Christ. You may disbelieve, and
what is to come may eat at the core of your heart as it has
devoured life and happiness from mine. But you will love L'Ange--
our Josephine--just the same."

Even as he felt himself trembling strangely at Jean Croisset's
words, Philip replied:

"Always, Jean, I swear that."

In the open door Josephine had paused for a moment, and was
looking back. Then she disappeared.

"Come," said Jean. "And may God have pity on you if you fail to
keep your word in all you have promised, M'sieur Philip Darcambal.
For from this hour on you are Philip Darcambal, of Montreal, the
husband of Josephine Adare, our beloved lady of the forests. Come,
M'sieur!"





CHAPTER NINE


Without another word Jean led the way to the door, which had
partly closed after Josephine. For a moment he paused with his
hand upon it, and then entered. Philip was close behind him. His
first glance swept the room in search of the girl. She had
disappeared with her two companions. For a moment he heard voices
beyond a second door in front of him. Then there was silence.

In wonder he stared about him, and Jean did not interrupt his
gaze. He stood in a great room whose walls were of logs and axe-
hewn timbers. It was a room forty feet long by twenty in width,
massive in its build, with walls and ceiling stained a deep brown.
In one end was a fireplace large enough to hold a pile of logs six
feet in length, and in this a small fire was smouldering. In the
centre of the room was a long, massive table, its timber carved by
the axe, and on this a lamp was burning. The floor was strewn with
fur rugs, and on the walls hung the mounted heads of beasts. These
things impressed themselves upon Philip first. It was as if he had
stepped suddenly out of the world in which he was living into the
ancient hall of a wild and half-savage thane whose bones had
turned to dust centuries ago.

Not until Jean spoke to him, and led the way through the room, was
this first impression swept back by his swift and closer
observation of detail. About him extreme age was curiously blended
with the modern. His breath stopped short when he saw in the
shadow of the farther wall a piano, with a bronze lamp suspended
from the ceiling above it. His eyes caught the shadowy outline of
cases filled with books; he saw close to the fireplace wide, low-
built divans covered with cushions; and over the door through
which they passed hung a framed copy of da Vinci's masterpiece,
"La Joconde," the Smiling Woman.

Into a dimly lighted hall he followed Jean, who paused a moment
later before another door, which he opened. Philip waited while he
struck a match and lighted a lamp. He knew at a glance that this
was to be his sleeping apartment, and as he took in its ample
comfort, the broad low bed behind its old-fashioned curtains, the
easy chairs, the small table covered with books and magazines, and
the richly furred rugs on the floor, he experienced a new and
strange feeling of restfulness and pleasure which for the moment
overshadowed his more excited sensations. Jean was already on his
knees before a fireplace touching a match to a pile of birch, and
as the inflammable bark spurted into flame and the small logs
began to crackle he rose to his feet and faced Philip. Both were
soaked to the skin. Jean's hair hung lank and wet about his face,
and his hollow cheeks were cadaverous. In spite of the hour and
the place, Philip could not restrain a laugh.

"I'm glad Josephine was thoughtful enough to come in ahead of us,
Jean," he chuckled. "We look like a couple of drowned water-rats!"

"I will bring up your sack, M'sieur," responded Jean. "If you
haven't dry clothes of your own you will find garments behind the
curtains. I think some of them will fit you. After we are warmed
and dried we will have supper."

A few moments after Jean left him an Indian woman brought him a
pail of hot water. He was half stripped and enjoying a steaming
sponge bath when Croisset returned with his dunnage sack. The
Arctic had not left him much to choose from, but behind the
curtains which Jean had pointed out to him he found a good-sized
wardrobe. He glowed with warmth and comfort when he had finished
dressing. The chill was gone from his blood. He no longer felt the
ache in his arms and back. He lighted his pipe, and for a few
moments stood with his back to the crackling fire, listening and
waiting. Through the thick walls no sound came to him. Once he
thought that he heard the closing of a distant door. Even the
night was strangely silent, and he walked to the one large window
in his room and stared out into the darkness. On this side the
edge of the forest was not far away, for he could hear the
soughing of the wind in the treetops.

For an hour he waited with growing impatience for Jean's return or
some word from Josephine. At last there came another knock at the
door. He opened it eagerly. To his disappointment neither Jean nor
the girl stood there, but the Indian woman who had brought him the
hot water, carrying in her hands a metal server covered with
steaming dishes. She moved silently past him, placed the server on
the table, and was turning to go when he spoke to her.

"Tan'se a itumuche hooyun?" he asked in Cree.

She went out as if she had not heard him, and the door closed
behind her. With growing perplexity, Philip directed his attention
to the food. This manner of serving his supper partly convinced
him that he would not see Josephine again that night. He was
hungry, and began to do justice to the contents of the dishes. In
one dish he found a piece of fruit cake and half a dozen pickles,
and he knew that at least Josephine had helped to prepare his
supper. Half an hour later the Indian woman returned as silently
as before and carried away the dishes. He followed her to the door
and stood for a few moments looking down the hall. He looked at
his watch. It was after ten o'clock. Where was Jean? he wondered.
Why had Josephine not sent some word to him--at least an
explanation telling him why she could not see him as she had
promised? Why had Croisset spoken in that strange way just before
they entered the door of Adare House? Nothing had happened, and he
was becoming more and more convinced that nothing would happen--
that night.

He turned suddenly from the door, facing the window in his room.
The next instant he stood tense and staring. A face was glued
against the pane: dark, sinister, with eyes that shone with the
menacing glare of a beast. In a flash it was gone. But in that
brief space Philip had seen enough to hold him like one turned to
stone, still staring where the face had been, his heart beating
like a hammer. As the face disappeared he had seen a hand pass
swiftly through the light, and in the hand was a pistol. It was
not this fact, nor the suddenness of the apparition, that drew the
gasping breath from his lips. It was the face, filled with a
hatred that was almost madness--the face of Jean Jacques Croisset!

Scarcely was it gone when Philip sprang to the table, snatched up
his automatic, and ran out into the hall. The end of the hall he
believed opened outdoors, and he ran swiftly in that direction,
his moccasined feet making no sound. He found a door locked with
an iron bar. It took him but a moment to throw this up, open the
door, and leap out into the night. The wind had died away, and it
was snowing. In the silence he stood and listened, his eyes trying
to find some moving shadow in the gloom. His fighting blood was
up. His one impulse now was to come face to face with Jean
Croisset and demand an explanation. He knew that if he had stood
another moment with his back to the window Jean would have killed
him. Murder was in the half-breed's eyes. His pistol was ready.
Only Philip's quick turning from the door had saved him. It was
evident that Jean had fled from the window as quickly as Philip
had run out into the hall. Or, if he had not fled, he was hiding
in the gloom of the building. At the thought that Jean might be
crouching in the shadows Philip turned suddenly and moved swiftly
and silently along the log wall of Adare House. He half expected a
shot out of the darkness, and with his thumb he pressed down the
safety lever of his automatic. He had almost reached his own
window when a sound just beyond the pale filter of light that came
out of it drew him more cautiously into the pitch darkness of the
deep shadow next the wall. In another moment he was sure. Some
other person was moving through the gloom beyond the streak of
light.

With his pistol in readiness, Philip darted through the
illuminated path. A startled cry broke out of the night, and with
that cry his hand gripped fiercely in the deep fur of a coat. In
the same breath an exclamation of astonishment came from his own
lips as he looked into the white, staring face of Josephine. His
pistol arm had dropped to his side. He believed that she had not
seen the weapon, and he thrust it in his trousers pocket.

"You, Josephine!" he gasped. "What are you doing here?"

"And you?" she counter demanded. "You have no coat, no hat ..."
Her hands gripped his arm. "I saw you run through the light. You
had a pistol."

An impulse which he could not explain prompted him to tell her a
falsehood.

"I came out--to see what the night looked like," he said. "When I
heard you in the darkness it startled me for a moment, and I drew
my pistol."

It seemed to him that her fingers clutched deeper and more
convulsively into his arm.

"You have seen no one else?" she asked.

Again he was prompted to keep his secret.

"Is it possible that any one else is awake and roaming about at
this hour?" he laughed. "I was just returning to my room to go to
bed, Josephine. I thought that you had forgotten me. And Jean--
where is he?"

"We hadn't forgotten you," shivered Josephine. "But unexpected
things have happened since we came to Adare House to-night. I was
on my way to you. And Jean is back in the forest. Listen!"

From perhaps half a mile away there came the howl of a dog, and
scarcely had that sound died away when there followed it the full-
throated voice of the pack whose silence Philip had wondered at. A
strange cry broke from Josephine.

"They are coming!" she almost sobbed. "Quick, Philip! My last hope
of saving you is gone, and now you must be good to me--if you care
at all!" She seized him by the hand and half ran with him to the
door through which they had entered a short time before. In the
great room she threw off her hood and the long fur cape that
covered her, and then Philip saw that she had not dressed for the
night and the storm. She had on a thin, shimmering dress of white,
and her hair was coiled in loose golden masses about her head. On
her breast, just below her white, bare throat, she wore a single
red rose. It did not seem remarkable that she should be wearing a
rose. To him the wonderful thing was that the rose, the clinging
beauty of her dress, the glowing softness of her hair had been for
him, and that something unexpected had taken her out into the
night. Before he could speak she led him swiftly through the hall
beyond, and did not pause until they had entered through another
door and stood in the room which he knew was her room. In a glance
he took in its exquisite femininity. Here, too, the bed was set
behind curtains, and the curtains were closely drawn.

She had faced him now, standing a few steps away. She was deathly
white, but her eyes had never met his more unflinchingly or more
beautiful. Something in her attitude restrained him from
approaching nearer. He looked at her, and waited. When she spoke
her voice was low and calm. He knew that at last she had come to
the hour of her greatest fight, and in that moment he was more
unnerved than she.

"In a few minutes my mother and father will be here, Philip," she
said. "The letter Jean brought me back there, where we first saw
each other, came up by way of Wollaston House, and told me I need
not expect them for a number of weeks. That was what made me happy
for a little while. They were in Montreal, and I didn't want them
to return. You will understand why--very soon. But my father
changed his mind, and almost with the mailing of the letter he and
my mother started home by way of Fond du Lac. Only an hour ago an
Indian ran to us with the news that they were coming down the
river. They are out there now--less than half a mile away--with
Jean and the dogs!"

She turned a little from him, facing the bed.

"You remember--I told you that I had spent a year in Montreal,"
she went on. "I was there--alone--when it happened. See--"

She moved to the bed and gently drew the curtains aside. Scarcely
breathing, Philip followed her.

"It's my baby," she whispered, "My little boy."

He could not see her face. She bowed her head and continued
softly, as if fearing to awaken the baby asleep on the bed:

"No one knows--but Jean. My mother came first, and then my father.
I lied to them. I told them that I was married, and that my
husband had gone into the North. I came home with the baby--to
meet this man I called Paul Darcambal, and whom they thought was
my husband. I didn't want it to happen down there, but I planned
on telling them the truth when we all got back in our forests. But
after I returned I found that--I couldn't. Perhaps you may
understand. Up here--among the forest people--the mother of a
baby--like that--is looked upon as the most terrible thing in the
world. She is called La bete noir--the black beast. Day by day I
came to realize that I couldn't tell the truth, that I must live a
great lie to save other hearts from being crushed as life has been
crushed out of mine. I thought of telling them that my husband had
died up here--in the North. And I was fearing suspicion ... the
chance that my father might learn the untruth of it, when you
came. That is all, Philip. You understand now. You know why--some
day--you must go away and never come back. It is to save the boy,
my father, my mother, and me!"

Not once in her terrible recital had the girl's voice broke. And
now, as if bowing herself in silent prayer, she kneeled beside the
bed and laid her head close to the baby's. Philip stood
motionless, his unseeing eyes staring straight through the log
walls and the black night to a city a thousand miles away. He
understood now. Josephine's story was not the strangest thing in
the world after all. It was perhaps the oldest of all stories. He
had heard it a hundred times before, but never had it left him
quite so cold and pulseless as he was now. And yet, even as the
palace of the wonderful ideal he had builded crumbled about him in
ruin, there rose up out of the dust of it a thing new-born and
tangible for him. Slowly his eyes turned to the beautiful head
bowed in its attitude of prayer. The blood began to surge back
into his heart. His hands unclenched. She had told him that he
would hate her, that he would want to leave her when he heard the
story of her despair. And instead of that he wanted to kneel
beside her now and take her close in his arms, and whisper to her
that the sun had not set for them, but that it had only begun to
rise.

And then, as he took a step toward her, there flashed through his
brain like a disturbing warning the words with which she had told
him that he would never know the real cause of her grief. "YOU MAY
GUESS, BUT YOU WOULD NOT GUESS THE TRUTH IF YOU LIVED A THOUSAND
YEARS." And could this that he had heard, and this that he looked
upon be anything but the truth? Another step and he was at her
side. For a moment all barriers were swept from between them. She
did not resist him as he clasped her close to his breast. He
kissed her upturned face again and again, and his voice kept
whispering: "I love you, my Josephine--I love you--I love you--"

Suddenly there came to them sounds from out of the night. A door
opened, and through the hall there came the great, rumbling voice
of a man, half laughter, half shout; and then there were other
voices, the slamming of the door, and THE voice again, this time
in a roar that reached to the farthest walls of Adare House.

"Ho, Mignonne--Ma Josephine!"

And Philip held Josephine still closer and whispered:

"I love you!"





CHAPTER TEN


Not until the sound of approaching steps grew near did Josephine
make an effort to free herself from Philip's arms. Unresisting she
had given him her lips to kiss; for one rapturous moment he had
felt the pressure of her arms about his shoulders; in the blue
depths of her eyes he had caught the flash of wonderment and
disbelief, and then the deeper, tenderer glow of her surrender to
him. In this moment he forgot everything except that she had bared
her secret to him, and in baring it had given herself to him. Even
as her hands pressed now against his breast he kissed her lips
again, and his arms tightened about her.

"They are coming to the door, Philip," she panted, straining
against him. "We must not be found like this!"

The voice was booming in the hall again, calling her name, and in
a moment Philip was on his feet raising Josephine to him. Her face
still was white. Her eyes were still on the verge of fear, and as
the steps came nearer he brushed back the warm masses of her hair
and whispered for the twentieth time, as if the words must
convince her: "I love you!" He slipped an arm about her waist, and
Josephine's fingers nervously caught his hand.

Then the door was flung open. Philip knew that it was the master
of Adare House who stood on the threshold--a great, fur-capped
giant of a man who seemed to stoop to enter, and in whose eyes as
they met Philip's there was a wild and half-savage inquiry. Such a
man Philip had not expected to see; awesome in his bulk, a
Thorlike god of the forests, gray-bearded, deep-chested, with
shaggy hair falling out from under his cap, and in whose eyes
there was the glare which Philip understood and which he met
unflinchingly.

For a moment he felt Josephine's fingers grip tighter about his
own; then with a low cry she broke from him, and John Adare opened
his arms to her and crushed his bearded face down to hers as her
arms encircled his neck. In the gloom of the hall beyond them
there appeared for an instant the thin, dark face of Jean Jacques
Croisset. In a flash it had come and gone. In that flash the half-
breed's eyes had met Philip's, and in them was a look that made
the latter take a quick step forward. His impulse was to pass John
Adare and confront Jean in the hall. He held himself back, and
looked at Josephine and her father. She had pushed the cap from
the giant's head and had taken his bearded face between her two
hands, and John Adare was smiling down into her white, pleading
face with the gentleness and worship of a woman. In a moment he
broke forth into a great rumbling laugh, and looked over her head
at Philip.

"God bless my soul, if I don't almost believe my little girl
thought I was coming home to murder her!" he cried. "I guess she
thought I'd hate you for stealing her away from me the way you
did. I have contemplated disliking you, quite seriously, too. But
you're not the sort of looking chap I thought you'd be with that
oily French name. You've shown good judgment. There isn't a man in
the world good enough for my Jo. And if you'll excuse my
frankness, I like your looks!"

As he spoke he held out a hand, and Josephine eagerly faced
Philip. A flush grew in her cheeks as the two men shook hands. Her
eyes were on Philip, and her heart beat a little quicker. She had
not hoped that he would rise to the situation so completely. She
had feared that there would be some betrayal in voice or action.
But he was completely master of himself, and the colour in her
face deepened beautifully. Before this moment she had not wholly
perceived how splendidly clear and fearless were his eyes. His
long blond hair, touched with its premature gray, was still
windblown from his rush out into the night, giving to his head a
touch of leonine strength as he faced her father.

Quietly she slipped aside and looked at them, and neither saw the
strange, proud glow that came like a flash of fire into her eyes.
They were wonderful, these two strong men who were hers. And in
this moment they WERE her own. Neither spoke for a space, as they
stood, hand clasping hand, and in that space, brief as it was, she
saw that they measured each other as completely as man ever
measured man; and that it was not satisfaction alone, but
something deeper and more wonderful to her, that began to show in
their faces. It was as if they had forgotten her presence in this
meeting, and for a moment she, too, forgot that everything was not
real. Moved by an impulse that made her breath quicken, she darted
to them and caught their two clasped hands in both her own. Her
face was glorious as she looked up at them,

"I'm glad, glad that you like each other," she cried softly. "I
knew that it would be so, because--"

The master of Adare House had drawn her to him again. She put out
a hand, and it rested on Philip's shoulder. Her eyes turned
directly to him, and he alone saw the swift ebbing of the joyous
light from them. John Adare's voice rumbled happily, and with his
grizzled face bowed in Josephine's hair he said:

"I guess I'm not sorry--but glad, Mignonne." He looked at Philip
again. "Paul, my son, you are welcome to Adare House!"

"Philip, Mon Pere," corrected Josephine. "I like that better than
Paul."

"And you?" said Philip, smiling straight into Adare's eyes. "I am
almost afraid to keep my promise to Josephine. It was that I
should call you mon pere, too."

"There was one other promise, Philip," replied Adare quickly.
"There must have been one other promise, that you would never take
my girl away from me. If you did not swear to that, I am your
enemy!"

"That promise was unnecessary," said Philip. "Outside of my
Josephine's world there is nothing for me. If there is room for me
in Adare House--"

"Room!" interrupted Adare, beginning to throw off his great fur
coat. "Why, I've dreamed of the day when there'd be half a dozen
babies under my feet. I--" His huge frame suddenly stiffened. He
looked at Josephine, and his voice dropped to a hoarse whisper:
"Where's the kid?" he asked.

Philip saw Josephine turn at the question. Silently she pointed to
the curtained bed. As her father moved toward it she went to the
door, but not before Philip had taken a step to intercept her. He
felt her shuddering.

"I must go to my mother," she whispered for him alone. "I will
return soon. If he asks--tell him that we named the baby after
him." With a swift glance in her father's direction she whispered
still lower: "He knows nothing about you, so you may tell him the
truth about yourself--except that you met me in Montreal eighteen
months ago, and married me there."

With this warning she was gone. From the curtains Philip heard a
deep breath. When he came to the other's side John Adare stood
staring down upon the sleeping baby.

"I came in like a monster and didn't wake 'im," he was whispering
to himself. "The little beggar!"

He reached out a great hand behind him, gropingly, and it touched
a chair. He drew it to him, still keeping his eyes on the baby,
and sat down, his huge, bent shoulders doubled over the edge of
the bed, his hands hovering hesitatingly over the counterpane. In
wonderment Philip watched him, and he heard him whisper again:

"You blessed little beggar!"

Then he looked up suddenly. In his face was the transformation
that might have come into a woman's. There was something awesome
in its animal strength and its tenderness. He seized one of
Philip's hands and held it for a moment in a grip that made the
other's fingers ache.

"You're sure it's a boy?" he asked anxiously.

"Quite sure," replied Philip. "We've named him John."

The master of the Adare House leaned over the bed again. Philip
heard him mumbling softly in his thick beard, and very cautiously
he touched the end of a big forefinger to one of the baby's tiny
fists. The little fingers opened, and then they closed tightly
about John Adare's thumb. The older man looked again at Philip,
and from him his eyes sought Josephine. His voice trembled with
ecstasy.

"Where is Josephine?"

"Gone to her mother," replied Philip.

"Bring her--quick!" commanded Adare. "Tell her to bring her mother
and wake the kid or I'll yell. I've got to hear the little beggar
talk." As Philip turned toward the door he flung after him in a
sibilant whisper: "Wait! Maybe you know how to do it--"

"We'd better have Josephine," advised Philip quickly, and before
Adare could argue his suggestion he hurried into the hall.

Where he would find her he had no idea, and as he went down the
hall he listened at each of the several doors he passed. The door
into the big living-room was partly ajar, and he looked in. The
room was empty. For a few moments he stood silent. From the size
and shape of the building whose outside walls he had followed in
his hunt for Jean he knew there must be many other rooms, and
probably other shorter corridors leading to some of them.

Just now his greatest desire was to come face to face with
Croisset--and alone. He had already determined upon a course of
action if such a meeting occurred. Next to that he wanted to see
Josephine's mother. It had struck him as singular that she had not
accompanied her husband to Josephine's room, and his curiosity was
still further aroused by the girl's apparent indifference to this
fact. Jean Croisset and the mistress of Adare House had hung
behind when the older man came into the room where they were
standing. For an instant Jean had revealed himself, and he was
sure that Adare's wife was not far behind him, concealed in the
deeper gloom.

Suddenly the sound of a falling object came to his ears, as if a
book had dropped from a table, or a chair had overturned. It was
from the end of the hall--almost opposite his room. At his own
door he stopped again and listened. This time he could hear
voices, a low and unintelligible murmur. It was quite easy for him
to locate the sound. He moved across to the other door, and
hesitated. He had already disobeyed Josephine's injunction to
remain with her father. Should he take a further advantage by
obeying John Adare's command to bring his wife and daughter? A
strange and subdued excitement was stirring him. Since the
appearance of the threatening face at his window--the knowledge
that in another moment he would have invited death from out of the
night--he felt that he was no longer utterly in the hands of the
woman he loved. And something stronger than he could resist
impelled him to announce his presence at the door.

At his knock there fell a sudden silence beyond the thick panels.
For several moments he waited, holding his breath. Then he heard
quick steps, the door swung slowly open, and he faced Josephine.

"Pardon me for interrupting you," he apologized in a low voice.
"Your father sent me for you and your mother. He says that you
must come and wake the baby."

Slowly Josephine held out a hand to him. He was startled by its
coldness.

"Come in, Philip," she said. "I want you to meet my mother."

He entered into the warm glow of the room. Slightly bending over a
table stood the slender form of a woman, her back toward him.
Without seeing her face he was astonished at her striking
resemblance to Josephine--the same slim, beautiful figure, the
same thick, glowing coils of hair crowning her head--but darker.
She turned toward him, and he was still more amazed by this
resemblance. And yet it was a resemblance which he could not at
first define. Her eyes were very dark instead of blue. Her heavy
hair, drawn smoothly back from her forehead, was of the deep brown
that is almost black in the shadow. Slimness had given her the
appearance of Josephine's height. She was still beautiful. Hair,
eyes, and figure gave her at first glance an appearance of almost
girlish loveliness.

And then, all at once, the difference swept upon him. She was like
Josephine as he had seen her in that hour of calm despair when she
had come to him at the canoe. Home-coming had not brought her
happiness. Her face was colourless, her cheeks slightly hollowed,
in her eyes he saw now the lustreless glow which frequently comes
with a fatal sickness. He was smiling and holding out his hand to
her even as he saw these things, and at his side he heard
Josephine say:

"Mother, this is Philip."

The hand she gave him was small and cold. Her voice, too, was
wonderfully like Josephine's.

"I was not expecting to see you to-night, Philip," she said. "I am
almost ill. But I am glad now that you joined us. Did I hear you
say that my husband sent you?"

"The baby is holding his thumb," laughed Philip. "He says that you
must come and wake him. I doubt if you can get him out of the
baby's room to-night."

The voice of Adare himself answered from the door: "Was holding
it," he corrected. "He's squirming like an eel now and making
grimaces that frightened me. Better hurry to him, Josephine!" He
went directly to his wife, and his voice was filled with an
infinite tenderness as he slipped an arm about her and caressed
her smooth hair with one of his big hands. "You're tired, aren't
you?" he asked gently. "The jaunt was almost too much for my
little girl, wasn't it? It will do you good to see the baby before
you go to bed. Won't you come, Miriam?"

Josephine alone saw the look in Philip's face. And for one moment
Philip forgot himself as he stared at John Adare and his wife.
Beside this flowerlike slip of a woman Adare was more than ever a
giant, and his eyes glowed with the tenderness that was in his
voice. Miriam's lips trembled in a smile as she gazed up at her
husband. In her eyes shone a responsive gentleness; and then
Philip turned to find Josephine looking at him from the door, her
lips drawn in a straight, tense line, her face as white as the bit
of lace at her throat. He hurried to her. Behind him rumbled the
deep, joyous voice of the master of Adare House, and passing
through the door he glanced behind and saw them following, Adare's
arm about his wife's waist. Josephine caught Philip's arm, and
whispered in a low voice:

"They are always like that, always lovers. They are like two
wonderful children, and sometimes I think it is too beautiful to
be true. And now that you have met them I am going to ask you to
go to your room. You have been my true knight--more than I dared
to hope, and to-morrow--"

She interrupted herself as Adare and his wife appeared at the
door.

"To-morrow?" he persisted.

"I will try and thank you," she replied. Then she said, and Philip
saw she spoke directly to her father: "You will excuse Philip,
won't you, Mon Pere? I will go with you, for I have taken the care
of baby from Moanne to-night. Her husband is sick."

Adare shook hands with Philip.

"I'm up mornings before the owls have gone to sleep," he said.
"Will you breakfast with me? I'm afraid that if you wait for
Miriam and Mignonne you will go hungry. They will sleep until noon
to make up for to-night."

"Nothing would suit me better," declared Philip. "Will you knock
at my door if I fail to show up?"

Adare was about to answer, but caught himself suddenly as he
looked from Philip to Josephine.

"What! this soon, Mignonne?" he demanded, chuckling in his beard.
"Your rooms at the two ends of the house already! That was never
the way with Miriam and me. Can you remember such a thing, Ma
Cheri?"

"It--it is the baby," gasped Josephine, backing from the light to
hide the wild rush of blood to her face. "Philip cannot sleep,"
she finished desperately.

"Then I disapprove of his nerves," rejoined her father. "Good-
night, Philip, my boy!"

"Good-night!" said Philip.

He was looking at Adare's wife as they moved away. In the dim
light of the hall a strange look had come into her face at her
husband's jesting words. Was it the effect of the shadows, or had
he seen her start--almost as if for an instant she had been
threatened by a blow? Was it imagination, or had he in that same
instant caught a sudden look of alarm, of terror, in her eyes?
Josephine had told him that her mother knew nothing of the tragedy
of the child's birth. If this were so, why had she betrayed the
emotions which Philip was sure he had seen?

A chaotic tangle of questions and of doubts rushed through his
mind. John Adare alone had acted a natural and unrestrained part
in the brief space that had intervened since his home-coming.
Philip had looked upon the big man's love and happiness, his
worship of the woman who was his wife, his ecstasy over the baby,
his affection for Josephine, and it seemed to him that he KNEW
this man now. The few moments he had stood in the room with mother
and daughter had puzzled him most. In their faces he had seen no
sign of gladness at their reunion, and he asked himself if
Josephine had told him all the truth--if her mother were not,
after all, a partner to her secret.

And then there swept upon him in all its overwhelming cloud of
mystery that other question which until now he had not dared to
ask himself: HAD JOSEPHINE HERSELF TOLD HIM ALL THE TRUTH? He did
not dare to tell himself that it was possible that she was NOT the
mother of the child which she had told him was her own. And yet he
could not kill the whispering doubt deep back in his brain. It had
come to him in the room, quick as a flashlight, when she had made
her confession; it was insistent now as he stood looking at the
closed door through which they had disappeared.

For him to believe wholly and unquestioned Josephine's confession
was like asking him to believe that da Vinci's masterpiece hanging
in the big room had been painted by a blind man. In her he had
embodied all that he had ever dreamed of as pure and beautiful in
a woman, and the thought came now. Had Josephine, for some
tremendous reason known only to herself and Jean, tried to destroy
his great love for her by revealing herself in a light that was
untrue?

Instantly he told himself that this could not be so. If he
believed in Josephine at all, he must believe that she had told
him the truth. And he did believe, in spite of the whispering
doubt. He felt that he could not sleep until he had seen Josephine
alone. In her room John Adare had interrupted them a minute too
soon. In spite of the mysterious and unsettling events of the
night his heart still beat with the wild and joyous hope that had
come with Josephine's surrender to his arms and lips.

Instead of accepting the confession of her misfortune as the final
barrier between them, he had taken it as the key that had unlocked
the chains of her bondage. If she had told him the truth--if this
were what separated them--she belonged to him; and he wanted to
tell her this again before he slept, and hear from her lips the
words that would give her to him forever.

Despairing of this, he opened the door to his room.





CHAPTER ELEVEN


Scarcely had he crossed the threshold when an exclamation of
surprise rose to Philip's lips. A few minutes before he had left
his room even uncomfortably warm. A cold draught of air struck his
face now, and the light was out. He remembered that he had left
the lamp burning. He groped his way through the darkness to the
table before he lighted a match.

As he touched the flame to the wick he glanced toward the window.
It was open. A film of snow had driven through and settled upon
the rug under it. Replacing the chimney, he took a step or two
toward the window. Then he stopped, and stared at the floor. Some
one had entered his room through the open window and had gone to
the door opening into the hall. At each step had fallen a bit of
snow, and close to the door was a space of the bare floor soppy
and stained. At that point the intruder had stood for some moments
without moving.

For several seconds Philip stared at the evidences of a prowling
visitor without making a move himself. It was not without a
certain thrill of uneasiness that he went to the window and closed
it. It did not take him long to assure himself that nothing in the
room had been touched. He could find no other marks of feet except
those which led directly from the window to the door, and this
fact was sufficient proof that whoever had visited his room had
come as a listener and a spy and not as a thief.

It occurred to Philip now that he had found his door unlatched and
slightly ajar when he entered. That the eavesdropper had seen them
in the hall and had possibly overheard a part of their
conversation he was quite certain from the fact that the window
had been left open in a hurried flight.

For some time the impulse was strong in him to acquaint both
Josephine and her father with what had happened, and with Jean
Croisset's apparent treachery. He did not need to ask himself if
it was the half-breed who had stolen into his room. He was as
certain of that as he was of the identity of the face he had seen
at the window some time before. And yet something held him from
communicating these events of the night to the master of Adare
House and the girl. He was becoming more and more convinced that
there existed an unaccountable and mysterious undercurrent of
tragic possibilities at Adare House of which Josephine was almost
ignorant, and her father entirely so. Josephine's motherhood and
the secret she was guarding were not the only things that were
clouding his mental horizon now. There was something else. And he
believed that Jean was the key to the situation.

He felt a clammy chill creep over him as he asked himself how
closely Jean Jacques Croisset himself was associated with the girl
he loved. It was a thought that almost made him curse himself for
giving it birth. And yet it clung to him like a grim and haunting
spectre that he would have crushed if he could. Josephine's
confession of motherhood had not made him love her less. In those
terrible moments when she had bared her soul to him, his own soul
had suffered none of the revulsion with which he might have
sympathized in others. It was as if she had fallen at his feet,
fluttering in the agony of a terrible wound, a thing as pure as
the heavens, hurt for him to cherish in his greater strength--such
was his love. And the thought that Jean loved her, and that a
jealousy darker than night was burning all that was human out of
his breast, was a possibility which he found unpleasant to admit
to himself.

So deeply was he absorbed in these thoughts that he forgot any
immediate danger that might be threatening himself. He passed and
repassed the window, smoking his pipe, and fighting with himself
to hit upon some other tangible reason for Jean's unexpected
change of heart. He could not forget his first impression of the
dark-faced half-breed, nor the grip in which they had pledged
their fealty. He had accepted Jean as one of ten thousand--a man
he would have trusted to the ends of the earth, and yet he
recalled moments now when he had seen strange fires smouldering
far back in the forest man's eyes. The change in Jean alone he
felt that he might have diagnosed, but almost simultaneously with
his discovery of this change he had met Adare's wife--and she had
puzzled him even more than the half-breed.

Restlessly he moved to his door again, opened it, and looked down
the hall. The door of Josephine's room was closed, and he
reentered his room. For a moment he stood facing the window. In
the same instant there came the report of a rifle and the crashing
of glass. A shower of shot-like particles struck his face. He
heard a dull smash behind him, and then a stinging, red-hot pain
shot across his arm, as if a whiplash had seared his naked flesh.
He heard the shot, the crashing glass, the strike of the bullet
behind him before he felt the pain--before he reeled back toward
the wall. His heel caught in a rug and he fell. He knew that he
was not badly hurt, but he crouched low, and with his right hand
drew his automatic and levelled it at the window.

Never in his life had his blood leaped more quickly through his
body than it did now. It was not merely excitement--the knowledge
that he had been close to death, and had escaped. From out of the
darkness Jean Croisset had shot at him like a coward. He did not
feel the burn of the scratch on his arm as he jumped to his feet.
Once more he ran swiftly through the hall. At the end door he
looked back. Apparently the shot had not alarmed the occupants of
Josephine's room, to whom the report of a rifle--even at night--
held no special significance.

Another moment and Philip was outside. It had stopped snowing, and
the clouds were drifting away from under the moon. Crouched low,
his pistol level at his side, he ran swiftly in the direction from
which the shot must have come. The moon revealed the dark edge of
the forest a hundred yards away, and he was sure that his
attempted murderer had stood somewhere between Adare House and the
timber when he fired. He was not afraid of a second shot. Even
caution was lost in his mad desire to catch Jean red-handed and
choke a confession of several things from his lips. If Jean had
suddenly risen out of the snow he would not have used his pistol
unless forced to do so. He wanted to be hand to hand with the
treacherous half-breed, and his breath came in panting eagerness
as he ran.

Suddenly he stopped short. He had struck the trail. Here Croisset
had stood, fifty yards from his window, when he fired. The snow
was beaten down, and from the spot his retreating footsteps led
toward the forest. Like a dog Philip followed the trail. The first
timber was thinned by the axe, and the moon lighted up the white
spaces ahead of him. He was half across the darker wall of the
spruce when his heart gave a sudden jump. He had heard the snarl
of a dog, the lash of a whip, a man's low voice cursing the beast
he was striking. The sounds came from the dense cover of the
spruce, and told him that Jean was not looking for immediate
pursuit. He slipped in among the shadows quietly, and a few steps
brought him to a smaller open space where a few trees had been
cut. In this little clearing a slim dark figure of a man was
straightening out the tangled traces of a sledge-team.

Philip could not see his face, but he knew that it was Jean. It
was Jean's figure, Jean's movement, his low, sharp voice as he
spoke to the dogs. Man and huskies were not twenty steps from him.
With a tense breath Philip replaced his pistol in its holster. He
did not want to kill, and he possessed a proper respect for the
hair-trigger mechanism of his automatic. In the fight he
anticipated with Jean the weapon would be safer in its holster
than in his hand. Jean was at present unarmed, except for his
hunting-knife. His rifle leaned against a tree, and in another
moment Philip was between the gun and the half-breed.

One of the sledge dogs betrayed him. At its low and snarling
warning the half-breed whirled about with the alertness of a lynx,
and he was half ready when Philip launched himself at his throat.
They went down free of the dogs, the forest man under. One of
Philip's hands had reached his enemy's throat, but with a swift
movement of his arm the half-breed wrenched it off and slipped out
from under his assailant with the agility of an eel. Both were on
their feet in an instant, facing each other in the tiny moonlit
arena a dozen feet from the silent and watchful dogs.

Even now Philip could not see the half-breed's features because of
a hood drawn closely about his face. The "breed" had made no
effort to draw a weapon, and Philip flung himself upon him again.
Thus in open battle his greater physical strength and advantage of
fifty pounds in weight would have won for Philip. But the forest
man's fighting is filled with the elusive ermine's trickery and
the lithe quickness of the big, fur-padded cat of the trap-lines.

The half-breed made no effort to evade Philip's assault. He met
the shock of attack fairly, and went down with him. But this time
his back was to the watchful semicircle of dogs, and with a sharp,
piercing command he pitched back among them, dragging Philip with
him. Too late Philip realized what the cry meant. He tried to
fling himself out of reach of the threatening fangs, and freed one
hand to reach for his pistol. This saved him from the dogs, but
gave the half-breed his opportunity. Again he was on his feet, the
butt of his dog whip in his hand. As the moonlight glinted on the
barrel of the automatic, he brought the whip down with a crash on
Philip's head--and then again and again, and Philip pitched
backward into the snow.

He was not wholly unconscious. He knew that as soon as he had
fallen the half-breed had turned again to the dogs. He could hear
him as he straightened out the traces. In a subconscious sort of
way, Philip wondered why he did not take advantage of his
opportunity and finish what he had failed to do with the bullet
through the window. Philip heard him run back for his gun, and
tried to struggle to his knees. Instead of the shot he half
expected there came the low "Hoosh--hoosh--marche!" of the forest
man's voice. Dogs and sledge moved. He fought himself up and
swayed on his knees, staring after the retreating shadows. He saw
his automatic in the snow and crawled to it. It was another minute
before he could stand on his feet, and then he was dizzy. He
staggered to a tree and for a space leaned against it.

It was some minutes before he was steady enough to walk, and by
that time he knew that it would be futile to pursue the half-breed
and his swift-footed dogs, weakened and half dressed as he was.
Slowly he returned to Adare House, cursing himself for not having
used his pistol to compel Jean's surrender. He acknowledged that
he had been a fool, and that he had deserved what he got. The hall
was still empty when he reentered it. His adventure had roused no
one, and with a feeling of relief he went to his room.

If the walls had fallen about his ears he could not have received
a greater shock than when he entered through the door.

Seated in a chair close to the table, looking at him calmly as he
entered, was Jean Jacques Croisset!





CHAPTER TWELVE


Unable to believe that what he saw was not an illusion, Philip
stood and stared at the half-breed. No word fell from his lips. He
did not move. And Jean met his eyes calmly, without betraying a
tremor of excitement or of fear. In another moment Philip's hand
went to his pistol. As he half drew it his confused brain saw
other things which made him gasp with new wonder.

Croisset showed no signs of the fight in the forest which had
occurred not more than ten minutes before. He was wearing a pair
of laced Hudson's Bay boots. In the struggle in the snow Philip's
hand had once gripped his enemy's foot, and he knew that he had
worn moccasins. And Jean was not winded. He was breathing easily.
And now Philip saw that behind the calmness in his eyes there was
a tense and anxious inquiry. Slowly the truth broke upon him. It
could not have been Jean with whom he had fought in the edge of
the forest! He advanced a step or two toward the half-breed, his
hand still resting uncertainly on his pistol. Not until then did
Jean speak, and there was no pretence in his voice:

"The Virgin be praised, you are not badly hurt, M'sieur?" he
exclaimed, rising. "There is a little blood on your face. Did the
glass cut you?"

"No," said Philip. "I overtook him in the edge of the forest."

Not for an instant had his eyes left Croisset. Now he saw him
start. His dark face took on a strange pallor. He leaned forward,
and his breath came in a quick gasp.

"The result?" he demanded. "Did you kill him?"

"He escaped."

The tense lines on Croisset's face relaxed. Philip turned and
bolted the door.

"Sit down, Croisset," he commanded. "You and I are going to square
things up in this room to-night. It is quite natural that you
should be glad he escaped. Perhaps if you had fired the shot in
place of putting the affair into the hands of a hired murderer the
work would have been better done. Sit down!"

Something like a smile flickered across Jean's face as he reseated
himself. There was in it no suggestion of bravado or of defiance.
It was rather the facial expression of one who was looking beyond
Philip's set jaws, and seeing other things--the betrayal which
comes at times when one has suffered quietly for another. It was a
look which made Philip uneasy as he seated himself opposite the
half-breed, and made him ashamed of the fact that he had exposed
his right hand on the table, with the muzzle of his automatic
turned toward Jean's breast. Yet he was determined to have it out
with Jean now.

"You are glad that the man who tried to kill me escaped?" he
repeated.

The promptness and quiet decisiveness of Jean's answer amazed him.

"Yes, M'sieur, I am. But the shot was not for you. It was intended
for the master of Adare House. When I heard the shot to-night I
did not know what it meant. A little later I came to your room and
found the broken window and the bullet mark in the wall. This is
M'sieur Adare's old room, and the bullet was intended for him. And
now, M'sieur Philip, why do you say that I am responsible for the
attempt to kill you, or the master?"

"You have convicted yourself," declared Philip, his eyes ablaze.
"A moment ago you said you were glad the assassin escaped!"

"I am, M'sieur," replied Jean in the same quiet voice. "Why I am
glad I will leave to your imagination. Unless I still had faith in
you and was sure of your great love for our Josephine, I would
have lied to you. You were told that you would meet with strange
things at Adare House. You gave your oath that you would make no
effort to discover the secret which is guarded here. And this
early, the first night, you threaten me at the end of a pistol!"

Like fire Jean's eyes were burning now. He gripped the edges of
the table with his thin fingers, and his voice came with a sudden
hissing fury.

"By the great God in Heaven, M'sieur, are you accusing me of
turning traitor to the Master and to her, to our Josephine, whom I
have watched and guarded and prayed for since the day she first
opened her eyes to the world? Do you accuse me of that--I, Jean
Jacques Croisset, who would die a thousand deaths by torture that
she might be freed from her own suffering?"

He leaned over the table as if about to spring. And then, slowly,
his fingers relaxed, the fire died out of his eyes, and he sank
back in his chair. In the face of the half-breed's outburst Philip
had remained speechless. Now he spoke:

"Call it threatening, if you like. I do not intend to break my
word to Josephine. I demand no answer to questions which may
concern her, for that is my promise. But between you and me there
are certain things which must be explained. I concede that I was
mistaken in believing that it was you with whom I fought in the
forest. But it was you who looked through my window earlier in the
night, with a pistol in your hand. You would have killed me if I
had not turned."

Genuine surprise shot into Jean's face.

"I have not been near your window, M'sieur. Until I returned with
M'sieur Adare I was waiting up the river, several miles from here.
Since then I have not left the house. Josephine and her father can
tell you this, if you need proof."

"Your words are impossible!" exclaimed Philip. "I could not have
been mistaken. It was you."

"Will you believe Josephine, M'sieur? She will tell you that I
could not have been at the window."

"If it was not you--who was it?"

"It must have been the man who shot at you," replied Jean.

"And you know who that man is, and yet refuse to tell me in order
that he may have another opportunity of finishing what he failed
to do to-night. The most I can do is to inform John Adare."

"You will not do that," said Jean confidently. Again he showed
excitement. "Do you know what it would mean?" he demanded.

"Trouble for you," volunteered Philip,

"And ruin for Josephine and every soul in the House of Adare!"
added Croisset swiftly. "As soon as Adare could lace his moccasins
he would take up that trail out there. He would come to the end of
it, and then--mon Dieu!--in that hour the world would smash about
his ears!"

"Either you are mad or I am," gasped Philip, staring into the
half-breed's tense face. "I don't think you are lying, Jean. But
you must be mad. And I am mad for listening to you. You insist on
giving this murderer another chance. You as much as say that by
giving him a second opportunity to kill John Adare you are proving
your loyalty to Josephine and her father. Can that be anything but
madness?"

An almost gentle smile nickered over Jean's lips. He looked at
Philip as if marvelling that the other could not understand.

"Within an hour it will be Jean Jacques Croisset who will take up
the trail," he replied softly, and without boastfulness. "It is I,
and not the master of Adare House, who will come to the end of
that trail. And there will be no other shot after that, and no one
will ever know--but you and me."

"You mean that you will follow and kill him--and that John Adare
must never know that an attempt has been made on his life?"

"He must never know, M'sieur. And what happens in the forest at
the end of the trail the trees will never tell."

"And the reason for this secrecy you will not confide in me?"

"I dare not, M'sieur."

Philip leaned across the table.

"Perhaps you will, Jean, when you know there is no longer anything
between Josephine and me," he said. "To-night she told me
everything. I have seen the baby. Her secret she has given to me
freely--and it has made no difference. I love her. Tomorrow I
shall ask her to end all this make-believe, and my heart tells me
that she will. We can be married secretly. No one will ever know."

His face was filled with the flush of hope. One of his hands
caught Jean's in the old grip of friendship--of confidence. Jean
did not reply. But his face betrayed what he did not speak. Once
or twice before Philip had seen the same look of anguish in his
eyes, the tightening of the lines about the corners of his mouth.
Slowly the half-breed rose from the table and turned a little from
Philip. In a moment Philip was at his side.

"Jean!" he cried softly, "you love Josephine!"

No sign of passion was in Jean's face as he met the other's eyes.

"How do you mean, M'sieur?" he asked quietly. "As a father and a
brother, or as a man?"

"A man," said Philip.

Jean smiled. It was a smile of deep understanding, as if suddenly
there had burst upon him a light which he had not seen before.

"I love her as the flowers love the sunshine, as the wood violets
love the rains," he said, touching Philip's arm. "And that,
M'sieur, is not what you understand as the love of a man. There is
one other whom I love in another way, whose voice is the sweetest
music in the world, whose heart beats with mine, whose soul leads
me day and night through the forests, and who whispers to me of
our sweet love in my dreams--Iowaka, my wife! Come, M'sieur; I
will take you to her."

"It is late--too late," voiced Philip wonderingly.

But as he spoke he followed Jean. The half-breed seemed to have
risen out of his world now. There was a wonderful light in his
face, a something that seemed to reach back through centuries that
were gone--and in this moment Philip thought of Marechal, of
Prince Rupert, of le Chevalier Grosselier--of the adventurous and
royal blood that had first come over to the New World to form the
Great Company, and he knew that of such men as these was Jean
Jacques Croisset, the forest man. He understood now the meaning of
the soft and faultless speech of this man who had lived always
under the stars and the open skies. He was not of to-day, but a
harkening back to that long-forgotten yesterday; in his veins ran
the blood red and strong of the First Men of the North. Out into
the night Philip followed him, bare-headed, with the moonlight
streaming down from above; and he stopped only when Jean stopped,
close to a little plot where a dozen wooden crosses rose above a
dozen snow-covered mounds.

Jean stopped, and his hand fell on Philip's arm.

"These are Josephine's," he said softly, with a sweep of his other
hand. "She calls it her Garden of Little Flowers. They are
children, M'sieur. Some are babies. When a little one dies--if it
is not too far away--she brings it to Le Jardin--her garden, so
that it may not sleep alone under the lonely spruce, with the
wolves howling over it on winter nights. They must be lonely in
the woodsy graves, she says. I have known her to bring an Indian
baby a hundred miles, and some of these I have seen die in her
arms, while she crooned to them a song of Heaven. And five times
as many little ones she has saved, M'sieur. That is why even the
winds in the treetops whisper her name, L'Ange! Does it not seem
to you that even the moon shines brighter here upon these little
mounds and the crosses?"

"Yes," breathed Philip reverently.

Jean pointed to a larger mound, the one guardian mound of them
all, rising a little above the others, its cross lifted watchfully
above the other crosses; and he said, as if the spirits themselves
were listening to him:

"M'sieur, there is my wife, my Iowaka. She died three years ago,
but she is with me always, and even now her beloved voice is
singing in my heart, telling me that it is not black and cold
where she and the little ones are waiting, but that all is light
and beautiful. M'sieur"--his voice dropped to a whisper--"Could I
sell my hereafter with her for the price of another woman's love
on earth?"

Philip tried to speak; and strange after a moment he succeeded in
saying:

"Jean, an hour ago, I thought I was a man. I see how far short of
that I have fallen. Forgive me, and let me be your brother. Such a
love as yours is my love for Josephine. And to-morrow--"

"Despair will open up and swallow you to the depths of your soul,"
interrupted Jean gently. "Return to your room, M'sieur. Sleep.
Fight for the love that will be yours in Heaven, as I live for my
Iowaka's. For that love will be yours, up there. Josephine has
loved but one man, and that is you. I have watched and I have
seen. But in this world she can never be more to you than she is
now, for what she told you to-night is the least of the terrible
thing that is eating away her soul on earth. Good-night, M'sieur!"

Straight out into the moonlight Jean walked, head erect, in the
face of the forest. And Philip stood looking after him over the
little garden of crosses until he had disappeared.





CHAPTER THIRTEEN


Alone and with the deadening depression that had come with Jean's
last words, Philip returned to his room. He had made no effort to
follow the half-breed who had shamed him to the quick beside the
grave of his wife. He felt no pleasure, no sense of exultation,
that his suspicions of Croisset's feelings toward Josephine had
been dispelled. Since the hour MacTavish had died up in the
madness of Arctic night, deep and hopeless gloom had not laid its
hand more heavily upon him,

He bolted his door, drew the curtain to the window, and added a
bit of wood to the few embers that still remained alive in the
grate. Then he sat down, with his face to the fire. The dry birch
burst into flame, and for half an hour he sat staring into it with
almost unseeing eyes. He knew that Jean would keep his word--that
even now he was possibly on the fresh trail that led through the
forest. For him there was something about the half-breed now that
was almost omniscient. In him Philip had seen incarnated the
things which made him feel like a dwarf in manhood. In those few
moments close to the graves, Jean had risen above the world. And
Philip believed in him. Yet with his belief, his optimism did not
quite die.

In the same breath Jean had told him that he could never possess
Josephine, and that Josephine loved him. This in itself, Jean's
assurance of her love, was sufficient to arouse a spirit like his
with new hope. At last he went to bed, and in spite of his mental
and physical excitement of the night, he fell asleep.

John Adare did not fail in his promise to rouse Philip early in
the day. When Philip jumped out of bed in response to Adare's
heavy knock at the door, he judged that it was not later than
seven o'clock, and the room was still dark. Adare's voice came
booming through the thick panels in reply to Philip's assurance
that he was getting up.

"This is the third time," he cried. "I've cracked the door trying
to rouse you. And we've got a caribou porterhouse two inches thick
waiting for us."

The giant was walking back and forth in the big living-room when
Philip joined him a few minutes later. He wore an Indian-made
jacket and was smoking a big pipe. That he had been up for some
time was evident from the logs fully ablaze in the fireplace. He
rubbed his hands briskly as Philip entered. Every atom of him
disseminated good cheer.

"You don't know how good it seems to get back home," he exclaimed,
as they shook hands. "I feel like a boy--actually like a boy,
Philip! Didn't sleep two winks after I went to bed, and Miriam
scolded me for keeping her awake. Bless my soul, I wouldn't live
in Montreal if they'd make me a present of the whole Hudson's Bay
Company."

"Nor I," said Philip. "I love the North."

"How long?"

"Four years--without a break."

"One can live a long time in the North in four years," mused the
master of Adare. "But Josephine said she met you in Montreal?"

"True," laughed Philip, catching himself. "That was a break--and I
thank God for it. Outside of that I spent all of the four years
north of the Hight of Land. For eighteen months I lived along the
edges of the Arctic trying to take an impossible census of the
Eskimo for the government."

"I knew something of the sort when I first looked at you," said
Adare. "I can tell an Arctic man, just as I can pick a Herschel
dog or an Athabasca country malemute from a pack of fifty. We have
much to talk about, my boy. We will be great friends. Just now we
are going to that caribou steak."

Out into the hall, through another door, and down a short
corridor, he led Philip. Here a third door was open, and Adare
stood aside while Philip entered.

"This is my private sanctuary," he said proudly. "What do you
think of it?"

Philip looked about him. He was in a room almost as large as the
one from which they had come. In a huge fireplace a pile of logs
were blazing. One end of the room was given up almost entirely to
shelves and weighted down with books. Philip was amazed at their
number. The other end was still partially hidden in glooms but he
could make out that it was fitted up as a laboratory, and on
shelves he caught the white gleam of scores of wild beast skulls.
Comfortably near to the fire was a large table scattered with
books, papers, and piles of manuscript, and behind this was a
small iron safe. Here, Philip thought, was the adytum of no
ordinary man; it was the study of a scholar and a scientist. He
marked the absence of mounted heads from the walls, but in spite
of that the very atmosphere of the room breathed of the forests
and the beast. Here and there he saw the articulated skeletons of
wild animals. From among the books themselves the jaws and ivory
fangs of skulls gleamed out at him. Before he had finished his
wondering survey of the strange room, John Adare stepped to the
table and picked up a skull.

"This is my latest specimen," he said, his voice eager with
enthusiasim. "It is perfect. Jean secured it for me while I was
away. It is the skull of a beaver, and shows in three distinct and
remarkable gradations how nature replaces the soft enamel as it is
worn from the beaver's teeth. You see, I am a hobbyist. For twenty
years I have been studying wild animals. And there--"

He replaced the skull on the table to point to an isolated shelf
filled with books and magazines.

"--there is my most remarkable collection," he added, a gleam of
humour in his eyes. "They are the books and magazine stories of
nature fakirs, the 'works' of naturalists who have never heard the
howl of a wolf or the cry of a loon; the wild dreams of
fictionists, the rot of writers who spend two weeks or a month
each year on some blazed trail and return to the cities to call
themselves students of nature. When I feel in bad humour I read
some of that stuff and laugh."

He leaned over to press a button under the table,

"One of my little electrical arrangements," he explained. "That
will bring our breakfast. To use a popular expression of the
uninformed, I'm as hungry as a bear. As a matter of fact, you
know, a bear is the lightest eater of all brute creation for his
size, strength, and fat supply. That row of naturalists over there
have made him out a pig. The beast's a genius, for it takes a
genius to grow fat on poplar buds!"

Then he laughed good humouredly.

"I suppose you are tired of this already. Josephine has probably
been filling you with a lot of my foolishness. She says I must be
silly or I would have my stuff published in books. But I am
waiting, waiting until I have come down to the last facts. I am
experimenting now with the black and the silver fox. And there are
many other experiments to come, many of them. But you are tired of
this."

"Tired!"

Philip had listened to him without speaking. In this room John
Adare had changed. In him he saw now the living, breathing soul of
the wild. His own face was flushed with a new enthusiasm as he
replied:

"Such things could never tire me. I only ask that I may be your
companion in your researches, and learn something of the wonders
which you must already have discovered. You have studied wild
animals--for twenty years?"

"Twenty and four, day and night; it has been my hobby."

"And you have written about them?"

"A score of volumes, if they were in print."

Philip drew a deep breath.

"The world would give a great deal for what you know," he said.
"It would give a great deal for those books, more than I dare to
estimate, undoubtedly it would be a vast sum in dollars."

Adare laughed softly in his beard.

"And what would I do with dollars?" he asked. "I have sufficient
with which to live this life here. What more could money bring me?
I am the happiest man in the world!"

For a moment a cloud overshadowed his face.

"And yet of late I have had a worry," he added thoughtfully. "It
is because of Miriam, my wife. She is not well. I had hoped that
the doctors in Montreal would help her. But they have failed. They
say she possesses no malady, no sickness that they can discover.
And yet she is not the old Miriam. God knows I hope the tonic of
the snows will bring her back to health this winter!"

"It will," declared Philip. "The signs point to a glorious winter,
crisp and dry--the sledge and dog kind, when you can hear the
crack of a whiplash half a mile away."

"You will hear that frequently enough if you follow Josephine,"
chuckled Adare. "Not a trail in these forests for a hundred miles
she does not know. She trains all of the dogs, and they are
wonderful."

It was on the point of Philip's tongue to ask a reason for the
silence of the fierce pack he had seen the night before, when he
caught himself. At the same moment the Indian woman appeared
through the door with a laden tray. Adare helped her arrange their
breakfast on a small table near the fire.

"I thought we would be more congenial here than alone in the
dining-room, Philip," he explained. "Unless I am mistaken the
ladies won't be up until dinner time. Did you ever see a steak
done to a finer turn than this? Marie, you are a treasure." He
motioned Philip to a seat, and began serving. "Nothing in the
world is better than a caribou porterhouse cut well back," he went
on. "Don't fry or roast it, but broil it. An inch and a half is
the proper thickness, just enough to hold the heart of it ripe
with juice. See it ooze from that cut! Can you beat it?"

"Not with anything I have had along the Arctic," confessed Philip.
"A steak from the cheek of a cow walrus is about the best thing
you find up in the 'Big Icebox'--that is, at first. Later, when
the aurora borealis has got into your marrow, you gorge on seal
blubber and narwhal fat and call it good. As for me, I'd prefer
pickles to anything else in the world, so with your permission
I'll help myself. Just now I'd eat pickles with ice cream."

It was a pleasant meal. Philip could not remember when he had
known a more agreeable host. Not until they had finished, and
Adare had produced cigars of a curious length and slimness, did
the older man ask the question for which Philip had been carefully
preparing himself.

"Now I want to hear about you," he said. "Josephine told me very
little--said that she wanted me to get my impressions first hand.
We'll smoke and talk. These cigars are clear Havanas. I have the
tobacco imported by the bale and we make the cigars ourselves.
Reduces the cost to a minimum, and we always have a supply. Go on,
Philip, I'm listening."

Philip remembered Josephine's words telling him to narrate the
events of his own life to her father--except that he was to leave
open, as it were, the interval in which he was supposed to have
known her in Montreal. It was not difficult for him to slip over
this. He described his first coming into the North, and Adare's
eyes glowed sympathetically when Philip quoted Hill's words down
at Prince Albert and Jasper's up at Fond du Lac. He listened with
tense interest to his experiences along the Arctic, his
descriptions of the death of MacTavish and the passing of Pierre
Radisson. But what struck deepest with him was Philip's physical
and mental fight for new life, and the splendid way in which the
wilderness had responded.

"And you couldn't go back now," he said, a tone of triumph in his
voice. "When the forests once claim you--they hold."

"Not alone the forests, Mon Pere."

"Ah, Mignonne. No, there is neither man nor beast in the world
that would leave her. Even the dogs are chained out in the deep
spruce that they may not tear down her doors in the night to come
near her. The whole world loves my Josephine. The Indians make the
Big Medicine for her in a hundred tepees when they learn she is
ill. They have trimmed five hundred lob-stick trees in her memory.
Mon Dieu, in the Company's books there are written down more than
thirty babes and children grown who bear her name of Josephine!
She is different than her mother. Miriam has been always like a
flower--a timid wood violet, loving this big world, yet playing no
part in it away from my side. Sometimes Josephine frightens me.
She will travel a hundred miles by sledge to nurse a sick child,
and only last winter she buried herself in a shack filled with
smallpox and brought six souls out of it alive! For two weeks she
was buried in that hell. That is Mignonne, whom Indian, breed, and
white man call L'Ange. Miriam they call La Fleurette. We are two
fortunate men, my son!"

A dozen questions burned on Philip's lips, but he held them back,
fearing that some accidental slip of the tongue might betray him.
He was convinced that Josephine's father knew absolutely nothing
of the trouble that was wrecking the happiness of Adare House, and
he was equally positive that all, even Miriam herself, were
fighting to keep the secret from him.

That Josephine's motherhood was not the sole cause of the
mysterious and tragic undercurrent that he had been made to feel
he was more than suspicious. A few hours would tell him if he was
right, for he would ask Josephine to become his wife. And he
already knew what John Adare did not know.

Miriam was not sick with a physical illness. The doctors whom
Adare had not believed were right. And he wondered, as he sat
facing her husband, if it was fear for his life that was breaking
her down. Were they shielding him from some great and ever-
menacing peril--a danger with which, for some inconceivable
reason, they dared not acquaint him?

In the short time he had known him, a strange feeling for John
Adare had found a place in Philip's heart. It was more than
friendship, more than the feeling which his supposed relationship
might have roused. This big-hearted, tender, rumbling voiced giant
of a man he had grown to love. And he found himself struggling
blindly now to keep from him what the others were trying to
conceal, for he knew that John Adare's heart would crumble down
like a pile of dust if he knew the truth. He was thinking of the
baby, and it seemed as if his thoughts flashed like fire to the
other.

Adare was laughing softly in his beard.

"You should have seen the kid last night, Philip. When they woke
'im he stared at me for a time as though I was an ogre, then he
grinned, kicked me, and grabbed my whiskers, I've just one fault
to find. I wish he was a dozen instead of me. The little rascal! I
wonder if he is awake?"

He half rose, as if about to investigate, then reseated himself.

"Guess I'd better not take a chance of waking him," he reflected.
"If Jean should catch me rousing Josephine or the baby he'd
throttle me."

"Jean is--a sort of guardian," ventured Philip.

"More than that. Sometimes I think he is a spirit," said Adare
impressively. "I have known him for twenty years. Since the day
Josephine was born he has been her watch-dog. He came in the heart
of a great storm, years and years ago, nearly dead from cold and
hunger. He never went away, and he has talked but little about
himself. See--"

Adare went to a shelf and returned with a bundle of manuscript.

"Jean gave me the idea for this," he went on.

There are two hundred and eighty pages here. I call it 'The
Aristocracy of the North.' It is true--and it is wonderful!

"You have seen a spring or New Year's gathering of the forest
people at a Company's post--the crowd of Indians, half-breeds, and
whites who follow the trap-lines? And would you guess that in that
average foregathering of the wilderness people there is better
blood than you could find in a crowded ballroom of New York's
millionaires? It is true. I have given fish to hungry half-breeds
in whose veins flows the blood of royalty. I have eaten with
Indian women whose lineage reaches back to names that were mighty
before the first Astors and the first Vanderbilts were born. The
descendant of a king has hunted me caribou meat at two cents a
pound. In a smoke-blackened tepee, over beyond the Gray Loon
waterway, there lives a girl with hair and eyes as black as a
raven's wing who could go to Paris to-morrow and say: 'I am the
descendant of a queen,' and prove it. And so it is all over the
Northland.

"I have hunted down many curious facts, and I have them here in my
manuscript. The world cannot sneer at me, for records have been
kept almost since the day away back in the seventeenth century
when Prince Rupert landed with his first shipload of gentlemen
adventurers. They intermarried with our splendid Crees--those
first wanderers from the best families of Europe. They formed the
English-Cree half-breed. Prince Rupert himself had five children
that can be traced to him. Le Chevalier Grosselier had nine. And
so it went on for a hundred years, the best blood in England
giving birth to a new race among the Crees, and the best of France
sowing new generations among the Chippewyans on their way up from
Quebec.

"And for another hundred years and more the English-Cree half-
breed and the French-Chippewyan half-breed have been meeting and
intermarrying, forming the 'blood,' until in all this Northland
scarce a man or a woman cannot call back to names that have long
become dust in history.

"From the blood of some mighty king of France--of some splendid
queen--has come Jean Croisset. I have always felt that, and yet I
can trace him no farther than a hundred years back, to the
quarter-strain wife of the white factor at Monsoon. Jean has lost
interest in himself now--since his wife died three years ago. Has
Josephine told you of her?"

"Very little," said Philip.

The flush of enthusiasm faded from Adare's eyes. It was replaced
by a look that was grief deep and sincere.

"Iowaka's death was the first great blow that came to Adare
House," he said gently. "For nine years they were man and wife
lovers. God's pity they had no children. She was French--with a
velvety touch of the Cree, lovable as the wild flowers from which
she took her name. Since she went Jean has lived in a dream. He
says that she is constantly with him, and that often he hears her
voice. I am glad of that. It is wonderful to possess that kind of
a love, Philip!--the love that lives like a fresh flower after
death and darkness. And we have it--you and I."

Philip murmured softly that it was so. He felt that it was
dangerous to tread upon the ground which Adare was following. In
these moments, when this great bent-shouldered giant's heart lay
like an open book before him, he was not sure of himself. The
other's unbounded faith, his happiness, the idyllic fulness of his
world as he found it, were things which added to the heaviness and
fear at Philip's heart instead of filling him with similar
emotions. Of these things he was not a part. A voice kept
whispering to him with maddening insistence that he was a fraud.
One by one John Adare was unlocking for him hallowed pictures in
which Jean had told him he could never share possession. His
desire to see Josephine again was almost feverish, and filled him
with a restlessness which he knew he must hide from Adare. So when
Adare's eyes rested upon him in a moment's silence, he said:

"Last night Jean and I were standing beside her grave. It seemed
then as though he would have been happier if he had lain near her
--under the cross."

"You are wrong," said Adare quickly. "Death is beautiful when
there is a perfect love. If my Miriam should die it would mean
that she had simply gone from my SIGHT. In return for that loss
her hand would reach down to me from Heaven, as Iowaka reaches
down to Jean. I love life. My heart would break if she should go.
But it would be replaced by something almost like another soul.
For it must be wonderful to be over-watched by an angel."

He rose and went to the window, and with a queer thickening in his
throat Philip stared at his broad back. He thought he saw a
moment's quiver of his shoulders. Then Adare's voice changed.

"Winter brings close to our doors the one unpleasant feature of
this country," he said, turning to light a second cigar. "Thirty-
five miles to the north and west of us there is what the Indians
call 'Muchemunito Nek'--the Devil's Nest. It's a Free Trader's
house. A man down in Montreal by the name of Lang owns a string of
them, and his agent over at the Devil's Nest is a scoundrel of the
first water. His name is Thoreau. There are a score of half-breeds
and whites in his crowd, and not a one of them with an honest hair
in his head. It's the one criminal rendezvous I know of in all
this North country. Bad Indians who have lost credit at the
Hudson's Bay Company's posts go to Thoreau's. Whites and half-
breeds who have broken the laws are harboured there. A dozen
trappers are murdered each winter for their furs, and the
assassins are among Thoreau's men. One of these days there is
going to be a big clean-up. Meanwhile, they are unpleasant
company. There is a deep swamp between our house and Thoreau's, so
that during the open water seasons it means we are a hundred miles
away from them by canoe. When winter comes we are only thirty-five
miles, as the sledge-dogs run. I don't like it. You can snow-shoe
the distance in a few hours."

"I know of such a place far to the west," replied Philip. "Both
the Hudson's Bay Company and Reveillon Freres have threatened to
put it out of business, but it still remains. Perhaps that is
owned by Lang, too."

He had joined Adare at the window. The next moment both men were
staring at the same object in a mutual surprise. Into the white
snow space between the house and the forest there had walked
swiftly the slim, red-clad figure of Josephine, her face turned to
the forest, her hair falling in a long braid down her back.

The master of Adare chuckled exultantly.

"There goes our little Red Riding Hood!" he rumbled. "She beat us
after all, Philip. She is going after the dogs!"

Philip's heart was beating wildly. A better opportunity for seeing
Josephine alone could not have come to him. He feared that his
voice might betray him as he laid a hand on Adare's arm.

"If you will excuse me I will join her," he said. "I know it
doesn't seem just right to tear off in this way, but--you see--"

Adare interrupted him with one of his booming laughs.

"Go, my lad. I understand. If it was Miriam instead of Mignonne
running away like that, John Adare wouldn't be waiting this long."

Philip turned and left the room, every pulse in his body throbbing
with an excitement roused by the knowledge that the hour had come
when Josephine would give herself to him forever, or doom him to
that hopelessness for which Jean Croisset had told him to prepare
himself.





CHAPTER FOURTEEN


In his eagerness to join Josephine Philip had reached the outer
door before it occurred to him that he was without hat or coat and
had on only a pair of indoor moccasin slippers. He would still
have gone on, regardless of this utter incongruity of dress, had
he not known that John Adare would see him through the window. He
partly opened the hall door and looked out. Josephine was halfway
to the forest. He turned swiftly back to his room, threw on a
coat, put his moccasins on over the soft caribou skin slippers,
caught up his cap, and hurried back to the door. Josephine had
disappeared into the edge of the forest. He held himself to a walk
until he reached the cover of the spruce, but no sooner was he
beyond Adare's vision than he began to run. Three or four hundred
yards in the forest he overtook Josephine.

He had come up silently in the soft snow, and she turned, a little
startled, when be called her name.

"You, Philip!" she exclaimed, the colour deepening quickly in her
cheeks. "I thought you were with father in the big room."

She had never looked lovelier to him. From the top of her hooded
head to the hem of her short skirt she was dressed in a soft and
richly glowing red. Her eyes shone gloriously this morning, and
about her mouth there was a tenderness and a sweetness which had
not been there the night before. The lines that told of her strain
and grief were gone. She seemed like a different Josephine now,
confessing in this first thrilling moment of their meeting that
she, too, had been living in the memory of what had passed between
them a few hours before. And yet in the gentle welcome of her
smile there was a mingling of sadness and of pathos that tempered
Philip's joy as he came to her and took her hands.

"My Josephine," he cried softly.

She did not move as he bent down. Again he felt the warm, sweet
thrill of her lips. He would have kissed her again, have clasped
her close in his arms, but she drew away from him gently.

"I am glad you saw me--and followed, Philip," she said, her clear,
beautiful eyes meeting his. "It is a wonderful thing that has
happened to us. And we must talk about it. We must understand. I
was on my way to the pack. Will you come?"

She offered him her hand, so childishly confident, so free of her
old restraint now, that he took it without a word and fell in at
her side. He had rushed to her tumultuously. On his lips had been
a hundred things that he had wanted to say. He had meant to claim
her in the full ardour of his love--and now, quietly, without
effort, she had worked a wonderful change in him. It was as if
their experience had not happened yesterday, but yesteryear; and
the calm, sweet yielding of her lips to him again, the warm
pressure of her hand, the illimitable faith in him that shone in
her eyes, filled him with emotions which for a space made him
speechless. It was as if some wonderful spirit had come to them
while they slept, so that now there was no necessity for
explanation or speech. In all the fulness of her splendid
womanhood Josephine had accepted his love, and had given him her
own in return. Every fibre in his being told him that this was so.
And yet she had uttered no word of love, and he had spoken none of
the things that had been burning in his soul.

They had gone but a few steps when Josephine paused close to the
fallen trunk of a huge cedar. With her mittened hands she brushed
off the snow, seated herself, and motioned Philip to sit beside
her.

"Let us talk here," she said. And then she asked, a little
anxiously, "You left my father believing in you--in us?"

"Fully," replied Philip. He took her face between his two hands
and turned it up to him. Her fingers clasped his arms. But they
made no effort to pull down the hands that held her eyes looking
straight into his own.

"He believes in us," he repeated. "And you, Josephine, you love
me?"

He saw the tremulous forming of a word on her lips, but she did
not speak. A deeper glow came into her eyes. Gently her fingers
crept to his wrists, and she took down his hands from her face,
and drew him to the seat at her side.

"Yes, Philip," she said then, in a voice so low and calm that it
roused a new sense of fear in him. "There can be no sin in telling
you that--after last night. For we understand each other now. It
has filled me with a strange happiness. Do you remember what you
said to me in the canoe? It was this: 'In spite of all that may
happen, I will receive more than all else in the world could give
me. For I will have known you, and you will be my salvation.'
Those words have been ringing in my heart night and day. They are
there now. And I understand them; I understand you. Hasn't some
one said that it is better to have loved and lost than never to
have loved at all? Yes, it is a thousand times better. The love
that is lost is often the love that is sweetest and purest, and
leads you nearest Heaven. Such is Jean's love for his lost wife.
Such must be your love for me. And when you are gone my life will
still be filled with the happiness which no grief can destroy. I
did not know these things--until last night. I did not know what
it meant to love as Jean must love. I do now. And it will be my
salvation up in these big forests, just as you have said that it
will be yours down in that other world to which you will go."

He had listened to her like one stricken by a sudden grief. He
understood her, even before she had finished, and his voice came
in a sudden broken cry of protest and of pain.

"Then you mean--that after this--you will still send me away?
After last night? It is impossible! You have told me, and it makes
no difference, except to make me love you more. Become my wife. We
can be married secretly, and no one will ever know. My God, you
cannot drive me away now, Josephine! It is not justice. If you
love me--it is a crime!"

In the fierceness of his appeal he did not notice how his words
were driving the colour from her face. Still she answered him
calmly, in her voice a strange tenderness. Strong in her faith in
him, she put her hands to his shoulders, and looked into his eyes.

"Have you forgotten?" she asked gently. "Have you forgotten all
that you promised, and all that I told you? There has been no
change since then--no change that frees me. There can be no
change. I love you, Philip. Is that not more than you expected? If
one can give one's soul away, I give mine to you. It is yours for
all eternity. Is it not enough? Will you throw that away--because
--my body--is not free?"

Her voice broke in a dry sob; but she still looked into his eyes,
waiting for him to answer--for the soul of him to ring true. And
he knew what must be. His hands lay clenched between them. Jean
seemed to rise up before him again at the grave-sides, and from
his lips he forced the words:

"Then there is something more--than the baby?"

"Yes," she replied, and dropped her hands from his shoulders.
"There is that of which I warned you--something which you could
not know if you lived a thousand years."

He caught her to him now, so close that his breath swept her face.

"Josephine, if it was the baby alone, you would give yourself to
me? You would be my wife?"

"Yes."

Strength leaped back into him, the strength that made her love
him. He freed her and stood back from the log, his face ablaze
with the old fighting spirit. He laughed, and held out his arms
without taking her.

"Then you have not killed my hope!" he cried.

His enthusiasm, the strength and sureness of him as he stood
before her, sent the flush back into her own face. She rose, and
reached to one of his outstretched hands with her own.

"You must hope for nothing more than I have given you," she said.
"A month from to-day you will leave Adare House, and will never
return."

"A month!" He breathed the words as if in a dream.

"Yes, a month from to-day. You will go off on a snowshoe journey.
You will never return, and they will think that you have died in
the deep snows. You have promised me this. And you will not fail
me?"

"What I have promised I will do," he replied, and his voice was
now as calm as her own. "And for this one month--you are mine!"

"To love as I have given you love, yes."

For a moment he folded her in his arms; and then he drew back her
hood so that he might lay a hand on her shining hair, and his eyes
were filled with a wonderful illumination as he looked into her
upturned face.

"A month is a long time, my Josephine," he whispered. "And after
that month there are other months--years and years of them, and
through years, if it must be, my hope will live. You cannot
destroy it, and some day, somewhere, you will send word to me.
Will you promise to do that?"

"If such a thing becomes possible, yes."

"Then I am satisfied," he said. "I am going to fight for you,
Josephine. No man ever fought for a woman as I am going to fight
for you. I don't know what this strange thing is that separates
us. But I can think of nothing terrible enough to frighten me. I
am going to fight, mentally and physically, day and night--until
you are my own. I cannot lose you now. That will be what God never
meant to be. I shall keep all my promises to you. You have given
me a month, and much can happen in that time. If at the end of the
month I have failed--I will go. But you will not send me away. For
I shall win!"

So sure was he, so filled with the conviction of his final
triumph, so like a god to her in this moment of his greatest
strength, that Josephine drew slowly away from him, her breath
coming quickly, her eyes filled with the star-like pride and glory
of the Woman who has found a Master. For a moment they stood
facing each other in the white stillness of the forest, and in
that moment there came to them the low and mourning wail of a dog
beyond them. And then the full voice of the pack burst through the
wilderness, a music that was wild and savage, and yet through
which there ran a strange and plaintive note for Josephine.

"They have caught us in the wind," she said, holding out her hand
to him. "Come, Philip. I want you to love my beasts."





CHAPTER FIFTEEN


After a little the trail through the thick spruce grew narrow and
dark, and Josephine went ahead of Philip. He followed so close
that he could reach out a hand and touch her. She had not replaced
her hood. Her face was flushed and her lips parted and red when
she turned to him now and then. His heart beat with a tumultuous
joy as he followed. A few moments before he had not spoken to her
boastfully, or to keep up a falling spirit. He had given voice to
what was in his heart, what was there now, telling him that she
belonged to him, that she loved him, that there could be nothing
in the world that would long stand between them.

The voice of the pack came to them stronger each moment, yet for a
space it was unheard by him. His mind--all the senses he
possessed--travelled no farther than the lithesome red and gold
figure ahead of him. The thick strands of her braid had become
partly undone, covering her waist and hips in a shimmering veil of
gold. He wanted to touch that rare treasure with his hands. He was
filled with the desire to stop her, and hold her close in his
arms. And yet he knew that this was a thing which he must not do.
For him she had risen above a thing merely physical. The touching
of her hair, her lips, her face, were no longer the first passions
of love with him. And because Josephine knew these things rose the
joyous flush in her face and the wonder-light in her eyes. The
still, deep forests had long ago brought her dreams of this man.
And these same forests seemed to whisper to Philip that her beauty
was a part of her soul, and that it was not to be desecrated in
such moments of desire as he was fighting back in himself now.

Suddenly she ran a little ahead of him, and then stopped. A moment
later he stood at her side. They were peering into what looked
like a great, dimly lighted and carpeted hall. For the space of a
hundred feet in diameter the spruce had been thinned out. The
trees that remained were lopped of their lower branches, leaving
their upper parts crowding in a dense shelter that shut out cold
and storm. No snow had filtered through their tops, and on the
ground lay cedar and balsam needles two inches deep, a brown and
velvety carpet that shone with the deep lustre of a Persian rug.

The place was filled with moving shapes and with gleaming eyes
that were half fire in the gloom. Here were leashed the forty
fierce and wolfish beasts of the pack. The dogs had ceased their
loud clamour, and at sight of Josephine and sound of her voice, as
she cried out greeting to them, there ran through the whole space
a whining and a clinking of chains, and with that a snapping of
jaws that sent a momentary shiver up Philip's back.

Josephine took him by the hand now. With him she ran in among
them, calling out their names, laughing with them, caressing the
shaggy heads that were thrust against her--until it seemed to
Philip that every beast in the pit was straining at the end of his
chain to get at them and rend them into pieces. And yet, above
this thought, the nervousness that he could not fight it out of
himself, rose the wonder of it all.

Philip had seen a husky snap off a man's hand at a single lunge;
he knew it was a creature of the whip and the club, with the
hatred of men inborn in it from the wolf. What he looked on now
filled him with a sort of awe--and a fear for Josephine. He gave a
warning cry and half drew his pistol when she dropped on her knees
and flung her arms about the shaggy head of a huge beast that
could have torn the life from her in an instant. She looked up at
him, laughing, the inch-long fangs of Captain, the lead-dog,
gleaming in brute happiness close to her soft, flushed face.

"Don't be afraid, Philip!" she cried. "They are my pets--all of
them. This is Captain, who leads my sledge team. Isn't he
magnificent?"

"Good God!" breathed Philip, looking about him. "I know something
of sledge-dogs, Josephine. These are not from mongrel breeds.
There are no hounds, no malemutes, none of the soft-footed breeds
here. They are WOLF!"

She rose and stood beside him, panting, triumphant, glorious.

"Yes--they've all got the strain of wolf," she said. "That is why
I love them, Philip. They are of the forests. AND I HAVE MADE THEM
LOVE ME!"

A yellow beast, with small, dangerous eyes, was leaping fiercely
at the end of his chain close to them. Philip pointed to him.

"And you would trust yourself THERE?" he exclaimed, catching her
by the arm.

"That is Hero," she said. "Once his name was Soldier. Three years
ago a man from Thoreau's Place offered me an insult in the woods,
and Soldier almost killed him. He would have killed him if I had
not dragged him off. From that day I called him Hero. He is a
quarter-strain wolf."

She went to the husky, and the yellow giant leaped up against her,
so that her arms were about him, with his wolfish muzzle reaching
for her face. Under the cedars Philip's face was as white as the
snow out in the open. Josephine saw this, and came and put her arm
through his fondly.

"You are afraid for me, Philip?" she asked, with a little laugh of
pleasure at his anxiety. "You mustn't be, for you must love them--
for my sake. I have brought them all up from puppyhood. And they
would fight for me--just as you would fight for me, Philip. Once I
was lost in a storm. Father turned the dogs loose. And they found
me--miles and miles away. When you hear the wonderful stories I
have to tell about them you will love them. They will not harm
you. They will harm nothing that I have touched. I have taught
them that. I am going to unleash them now. Metoosin is coming
along the trail with their frozen fish."

Before she had moved, Philip went straight up to the yellow
creature that she had told him was a quarter wolf.

"Hero," he spoke softly. "Hero--"

He held out his hands. The giant husky's eyes burned a deeper
glow; for an instant his upper lip drew back, baring his stiletto-
like fangs, and the hair along his neck and back stood up like a
brush. Then, inch by inch, his muzzle drew nearer to Philip's
steady hands, and a low whine rose in his throat. His crest
drooped, his ears shot forward a little, and Philip's hand rested
on the wolfish head.

"That is proof," he laughed, turning to Josephine. "If he had
snapped off my hand I would say that you were wrong."

She passed quickly from one dog to another now, with Philip close
at her side, and from the collar of each dog she snapped the
chain. After she had freed a dozen, Philip began to help her. A
few of the huskies snarled at him. Others accepted him already as
a part of her. Yet in their eyes he saw the smouldering menace,
the fire that wanted only a word from her to turn them into a
horde of tearing demons.

At first he was startled by Josephine's confidence in them. Then
he was only amazed. She was not only unafraid herself; she was
unafraid for him. She knew that they would not touch him. When
they were all free the pack gathered in close about them, and then
Josephine came and stood at Philip's side, and put her hands to
his shoulders. Thus she stood for a few moments, half facing the
dogs, calling their names again; and they crowded up still closer
about them, until Philip fancied he could feel their warm breath.

"They have all seen me with you now," she cried after that. "They
have seen me touch you. Not one of them will snap at you after
this."

The dogs swept on ahead of them in a great wave as they left the
spruce shelter. Out in the clear light Philip drew a deep breath.
He had never seen anything like this pack. They crowded shoulder
to shoulder, body to body, in the open trail. Most of them were
the tawny dun and gray and yellow of the wolf. There were a few
blacks, and a few pure whites, but none that wore the mongrel
spots of the soft-footed and softer-throated dogs from the south.

He shivered as he measured the pent-up power, the destructive
possibilites of the whining, snapping, living sea of sinew and
fang ahead of them. And they were Josephine's! They were her
slaves! What need had she of his protection? What account would be
the insignificant automatic at his side in the face of this wild
horde that awaited only a word from her? What could there be in
these forests that she feared, with them at her command? Ten men
with rifles could not have stood in the face of their first mad
rush--and yet she had told him that everything depended upon his
protection. He had thought that meant physical protection. But it
could not be. He spoke his thoughts aloud, pointing to the dogs:

"What danger can there be in this world that you need fear--with
them?" he asked. "I don't understand. I can't guess."

She knew what he meant. The hand on his arm pressed a little
closer to him.

"Please don't try to understand," she answered in a low voice.
"They would fight for me. I have seen them tear a wolf-pack into
shreds. And I have called them back from the throat of a wind-run
deer, so that not a hair of her was harmed. But, Philip, I guess
that sometimes mistakes were made in the creation of things. They
have a brain. But it isn't REASON!"

"You mean--" he cried.

"That you, a man, unarmed, alone, are still their master," she
interrupted him. "In the face of reason they are powerless. See,
there comes Metoosin with the frozen fish! What if he were a
stranger and the fish were poisoned?"

"I understand," he replied. "But others drive them besides you?"

"Only those very near to the family. Twenty of them are used in
the traces. The others are my companions--my bodyguard, I call
them."

Metoosin approached them now, weighted down under a heavy load in
a gunny-sack, and Philip believed that he recognized in the silent
Indian the man whom he had first seen at the door of Adare House
with a rifle in his hands. At a few commands from Josephine the
dogs gathered about them, and Metoosin opened the bag.

"I want you to throw them the fish, Philip," said Josephine.
"Their brains comprehend the hand that feeds them. It is a sort of
pledge of friendship between you and them."

With Metoosin she drew a dozen steps back, and Philip found that
he had become the centre of interest for the pack. One by one he
pulled out the fish. Snapping jaws met the frozen feast in midair.
There was no fighting--no vengeful jealousy of fang. Once when a
gray and yellow husky snapped at a fish already in the jaws of
another, Josephine reprimanded him sharply, and at the sound of
his name he slunk back. One by one Philip threw out the fish until
they were all gone. Then he stood and looked down upon the flat-
bellied pack, listening to the crunching of bones and frozen
flesh, and Josephine came and stood beside him again.

Suddenly he felt her start. He looked up, and saw that her face
was turned down the trail. He had caught the quick change in her
eyes, the swift tenseness that flashed for an instant in her
mouth. The vivid colour in her face had paled. She looked again as
he had seen her for that short space at the door in Miriam's room.
He followed the direction of her eyes.

A hundred yards away two figures were advancing toward them. One
was her father, the master of Adare. And on his arm was Miriam his
wife.




CHAPTER SIXTEEN


The strange effect upon Josephine of the unexpected appearance of
Adare and his wife passed as quickly as it had come. When Philip
looked at her again she was waving a hand and smiling. Adare's
voice came booming up the trail. He saw Miriam laughing. Yet in
spite of himself--even as he returned Adare's greeting--he could
not keep himself from looking at the two women with curious
emotions.

"This is rank mutiny!" cried Adare, as they came up. "I told them
they must sleep until noon. I have already punished Miriam. And
you, Mignonne? Does Philip let you off too easily?"

Adare's wife had given Philip her hand. A few hours' rest had
brightened her eyes and brought colour into her face. She looked
still younger, still more beautiful. And Adare was riotous with
joy because of it.

"Look at your mother, Josephine," he commanded in a hoarse
whisper, meant for all to hear. "I said the forests would do more
than a thousand doctors in Montreal!"

"You do look splendid, Mikawe," said Josephine, slipping an arm
about her mother's waist.

Adare had turned into a sudden volley of greetings to the feasting
dogs, and for another moment Philip's eyes were on mother and
daughter. Josephine was the taller of the two by half a head. She
was more like her father. He noted that the colour had not
returned fully into her cheeks, while the flush in Miriam's face
had deepened. There was something forced in Josephine's laugh, a
note that was unreal and make-believe, as she turned to Philip.

"Isn't my mother wonderful, Philip? I call her Mikawe because that
means a little more than Mother in Cree--something that is almost
undying and spirit-like. You will never grow old, my little
mother!"

"Ponce de Leon made a great mistake when he didn't search in these
forests for his fountain of eternal youth," said Adare, laying a
hand on Philip's shoulder. "Would you guess that it was twenty-two
years ago a month from to-day that she came to be mistress of
Adare House? And you, Ma Cheri," added Adare tenderly, taking his
wife by the hand, "Do you remember that it was over this same
trail that we took our first walk--from home? We went to the
Chasm."

"Yes, I remember."

"And here--where we stand--the wood violets were so thick they
left perfume on our boots."

"And you made me a wreath of them--with the red bakneesh," said
Miriam softly.

"And braided it in your hair."

"Yes."

She was breathing a little more quickly. For a moment it seemed as
if these two had forgotten Philip and Josephine. Their eyes had
turned to each other.

"Twenty-two years ago--A MONTH FROM TO-DAY!" repeated Josephine.

It seemed as if she had spoken the words that Philip might catch
their hidden meaning.

Adare straightened with a sudden idea:

"On that day we shall have a great anniversary feast," he
declared. "We will ask every soul--red and white--for a hundred
miles about, with the exception of the rogues over at Thoreau's
Place! What do you say, Philip?"

"Splendid!" cried Philip, catching triumphantly at this straw in
the face of Josephine's plans for him. He looked straight into her
eyes as he spoke. "A month from to-day these forests shall ring
with our joy. And there will be a reason for it--MORE THAN ONE!"

She could not misunderstand that! And Philip's heart beat joyously
as Josephine turned quickly to her mother, the colour flooding to
the tips of her ears.

The dogs had eaten their fish and were crowding about them. For
the first time Adare seemed to notice Metoosin, who had stood
motionless twenty paces behind them.

"Where is Jean?" he asked.

Josephine shook her head.

"I haven't seen him since last night."

"I had almost forgotten what I believe he intended me to tell
you," said Philip. "He has gone somewhere in the forest. He may be
away all day."

Philip saw the anxious look that crept into Josephine's eyes. She
looked at him closely, questioningly, yet he guessed that beyond
what he had said she wanted him to remain silent. A little later,
when Adare and his wife were walking ahead of them, she asked:

"Where is Jean? What did he tell you last night?"

Philip remembered Jean's warning.

"I cannot tell you," he replied evasively. "Perhaps he has gone
out to reconnoitre for--game."

"You are true," she breathed softly. "I guess I understand. Jean
doesn't want me to know. But after I went to bed I lay awake a
long time and thought of you--out in the night with that gun in
your hand. I can't believe that you were there simply because of a
noise, as you said. A man like you doesn't hunt for a noise with a
pistol, Philip. What is the matter with your arm?"

The directness of her question startled him.

"Why do you ask that?" he managed to stammer.

"You have flinched twice when I touched it--this arm."

"A trifle," he assured her. "It should have healed by this time."

She smiled straight up into his eyes.

"You are too true to tell me fairy stories in a way that I must
believe them, Philip. Day before yesterday your sleeves were up
when you were paddling, and there was nothing wrong with this arm
--this forearm--then. But I'm not going to question you. You don't
want me to know." In the same breath she recalled his attention to
her father and mother. "I told you they were lovers. Look!"

As if she had been a little child John Adare had taken his wife up
in his arms and sat her high on the trunk of a fallen tree that
was still held four or five feet above the ground by a crippled
spruce. Philip heard him laugh. He saw the wife lean over, still
clinging for safety to her husband's shoulders.

"It is beautiful," he said.

Josephine spoke as if she had not heard him.

"I do not believe there is another man in the world quite like my
father. I cannot understand how a woman could cease to love such a
man as he even for a day--an hour. She couldn't forget, could
she?"

There was something almost plaintive in her question. As if she
feared an answer, she went on quickly:

"He has made her happy. She is almost forty--thirty-nine her last
birthday. She does not look that old. She has been happy. Only
happiness keeps one young. And he is fifty. If it wasn't for his
beard, I believe he would appear ten years younger. I have never
known him without a beard; I like him that way. It makes him look
'beasty'--and I love beasts."

She ran ahead of him, and John Adare lifted his wife down from the
tree when they joined them. This time Josephine took her mother's
arm. At the door to Adare House she turned to the two men, and
said:

"Mother and I have a great deal to talk over, and we are scheming
not to see you again until dinner time. Little Daddy, you can go
to your foxes. And please keep Philip out of mischief."

The dogs had followed her close to the door. As the men entered
after Josephine and her mother, Philip paused for a moment to look
at the pack. A dozen of them had already settled themselves upon
their bellies in the snow.

"The Grand Guard," chuckled Adare, waiting for him. "Come, Philip.
I'm going to follow Mignonne's suggestion and do some work on my
foxes. Jean had a splendid surprise for me when I returned--a
magnificent black. This is the dull season, when I can amuse
myself only by writing and experimenting. A little later, when the
furs begin to come in, there will be plenty of life at Adare
House."

"Do you buy many furs?" asked Philip.

"Yes. But not because I am in the business for money. Josephine
got me into it because of her love for the forest people." He led
the way into his big study; and added, as he threw off his cap and
coat:

"You know in all the world no people have a harder struggle than
these men, women, and little children of the trap-lines. From
Labrador westward to the Mackenzie it is the land of the caribou,
the rabbit, and the fur-bearing animals, but the land is not
suitable for farming. It has been, it will always be, the country
of the hunter.

"To the south the Ojibway may grow a little corn and wheat. To the
north the Eskimo might seem to dwell in a more barren land, but
not so, for he has an ever abundant supply of game from the sea,
seal in winter, fish in summer, but here are only the rabbit, the
caribou, and small game. The Indians would starve if they could
not trade their furs for a little flour, traps, guns, and cloth to
fight the cold and aid the hunter. Even then it is hard. The
Indians cannot live in villages, except at a post, like Adare
House. Such a large number of people living in one spot could not
feed themselves, and in the winter each family goes to its own
allotted hunting grounds. From father to son for generations the
same district has been handed down, each territory rich enough in
fur to support one family. One--not two, for two would starve, and
if a strange trapper poaches the fight is to the death, even in
the normal year when game is plentiful and fur prime.

"But every seventh year there may be famine. Here in the North it
is the varying hare, the rabbit, that feeds the children of the
trap-lines and the marten and fox they trap, and every seventh
year there comes a mysterious disease. One year there are rabbits
in millions, the next there are none. The lynx and the wolf and
the fox starve, there are no fur bearers in the traps, the trapper
faces the blizzard and the cold to find empty deadfalls day after
day, and however skillfully he may hunt there is no game for his
gun. What would he do, but starve, if it were not for the fur
trader and the post, where there is flour, a little food to help
John the Trapper through the winter? The people about us are not
thin in the waist. Josephine has made a little oasis of plenty
where John the Trapper is safe in good years and bad. That's why I
buy fur."

The giant's eyes were flushed with enthusiasm again. He pushed the
cigars across the table to Philip, and one of his fists was
knotted.

"She wants me to publish a lot of these things," he went on. "She
says they are facts which would interest the whole world. Perhaps
that is so. Fur is gotten with hardship and danger and suffering.
It may be there are not many people who know that up here at the
top end of the world there is a country of forest and stream
twenty times as large as the State of Ohio, and in which the
population per square mile is less than that of the Great African
Desert. And it's all because everyone must live off the game.
Everything goes back to that. Let something happen, some little
thing--a migration of game, a case of measles. The Indians will
die if there are not white men near to help them. That's why
Josephine makes me buy fur."

He pointed to the wall behind Philip. Over the door through which
they had just come hung a huge, old-fashioned flint-lock six feet
in length. There was something like the snarl of an animal in John
Adare's voice when he spoke again.

"That's the tool of the Northland," he said. "That is the only
tool John the Trapper knows, all he can know in a land where even
trees are stunted and there are no plows. His clothes and the
blankets he weaves of twisted strips of rabbit fur are adapted to
the cold, he is a master of the canoe and the most skilful trapper
in the world, but in all else he must be looked after like a
child. He is still largely one of God's men, this John the
Trapper. He hasn't any measurements of value. He doesn't know what
the dollar means. He measures his wealth in 'skins,' and when he
trades the basis for whatever mental calculations he may make is
in the form of lead bullets taken from one tin-pan and transferred
to another. He doesn't keep track of figures. He trusts alone to
the white man's word, and only those who understand him, who have
dealt with him for years, can be trusted not to take advantage of
his faith. That's why I buy fur--to give John his chance to live."

Adare laughed, and ran a hand through his shaggy hair as if
rousing himself from thought of a relentless struggle. "But this
isn't working on my foxes, is it? On second thought I think I
shall postpone that until to-morrow, Philip. I have promised
Miriam that I will have Metoosin trim my hair and beard before
dinner. Shall I send him to you?"

"A hair cut would be a treat," said Philip, rising. He was
surprised at the sudden change in the other's mood. But he was not
sorry Adare had given him the opportunity to go. He had planned to
say other things to Josephine that morning if they had not been
interrupted, and he did not believe that she would be long with
her mother.

In this, however, he was doomed to disappointment. When he
returned to his room he found that Josephine had not forgotten the
condition of his wardrobe, and he guessed immediately why she had
surprised them all by rising so early. On his bed were spread
several changes of shirts and underwear, a pair of new corduroy
trousers, a pair of caribou skin leggings, and moccasins. In a box
were a dozen linen handkerchiefs and a number of ties for the
blue-gray soft shirts Josephine had chosen for him. He was not
much ahead of Metoosin, who came in a few minutes later and
clipped his hair. When this was done and he had clad himself in
his new raiment he looked at himself in the mirror. Josephine had
shown splendid judgment. Everything fitted him.

For an hour he listened for footsteps in the hall, and
occasionally looked out of the window. He wondered if Josephine
had seen the small round hole with its myriad of out-shooting
cracks where the bullet had pierced the glass. He had made up his
mind that she had not, for no one could mistake it, and she would
surely have spoken to him of it. He found that the hole was so
high up on the pane that he could draw the curtain over it without
shutting out much light. He did this.

Later he went outside, and found that the dogs regarded him with
certain signs of friendship. In him was a growing presentiment
that something had happened to Jean. He was sure that Croisset had
taken up the trail of the man who had shot at him soon after they
had separated at the gravesides. He was equally certain that the
chase would be short. Jean was quick. Dogs and sledge would be an
impediment for the other in the darkness of the night. Before
this, hours ago, they must have met. If Jean had come out of that
meeting unharmed, it was time for him to be showing up at Adare
House. Still greater perturbation filled Philip's mind when he
recalled the unpleasant skill of the mysterious forest man's
fighting. He had been more than his equal in swiftness and
trickery; he was certainly Jean's.

Should he make some excuse and follow Jean's trail? He asked
himself this question a dozen times without arriving at an answer.
Then it occurred to him that Jean might have some definite reason
for not returning to Adare House immediately. The longer he
reasoned with himself the more confident he became that Croisset
had been the victor. He knew Jean. Every advantage was on his
side. He was as watchful as a lynx. It was impossible to conceive
of him walking into a trap. So he determined to wait, at least
until that night.

It was almost noon when Adare sent word by Metoosin asking Philip
to rejoin him in the big room. A little later Josephine and her
mother came in. Again Philip noticed that in the face of Adare's
wife was that strange look which he had first observed in her
room. The colour of the morning had faded from her cheeks. The
glow in her eyes was gone. Adare noted the change, and spoke to
her tenderly.

Miriam and Josephine went ahead of them to the dining-room, and
with his hand on Philip's arm John Adare whispered:

"Sometimes I am afraid, Philip. She changes so suddenly. This
morning her cheeks and lips were red, her eyes were bright, she
laughed--she was the old Miriam. And now! Can you tell me what it
means? Is it some terrible malady which the doctors could not
find?"

"No, it is not that," Philip felt his heart beat a little faster.
Josephine had fallen a step behind her mother. She had heard
Adare's words, and at Philip she flung back a swift, frightened
look. "It is not that," he repeated. "See how much better she
looks to-day than yesterday! You understand, Mon Pere, that
oftentimes there comes a period of nervousness--of a sickness that
is not sickness--in a woman's life. The winter will build her up."

The dinner passed too swiftly for Philip. They sat at a long
table, and Josephine was opposite him. For a time he forgot the
strain he was under, that he was playing a part in which he must
not strike a single false key. Yet in another way he was glad when
it came to an end, for it gave him an opportunity of speaking a
few words with Josephine. Adare and Miriam went out ahead of them.
At the door Philip held Josephine back.

"You are not going to leave me alone this afternoon?" he asked.
"It is not quite fair, or safe, Josephine. I am travelling on thin
ice. I--"

"You are doing splendidly, Philip," she protested. "To-morrow I
will be different. Metoosin says there is a little half-breed girl
very sick ten miles back in the forest, and you may go with me to
visit her. There are reasons why I must be with my mother all of
to-day. She has had a long journey and is worn out and nervous.
Perhaps she will not want to appear at supper. If that is so, I
will remain with her. But we will be together to-morrow. All day.
Is that not recompense?"

She smiled up into his face as they followed Adare and his wife.

"You may help Metoosin with the dogs," she suggested. "I want you
to be good friends--you and my beasts."

The hours that followed proved to be more than empty ones for
Philip. Twice he went to the big room and found that Adare himself
had yielded to the exhaustion of the long trip up from
civilization, and was asleep. He accompanied Metoosin to the pit
and assisted in chaining the dogs, but Metoosin was taciturn and
uncommunicative. Josephine and her mother send down their excuses
at supper time, and he sat down alone with Adare, who was
delighted when he received word that they had been sleeping most
of the afternoon, and would join them a little later. His face
clouded, however, when he spoke of Jean.

"It is unusual," he said. "Jean is very careful to leave word of
his movements. Metoosin says it is possible he went after fresh
caribou meat. But that is not so. His rifle is in his room. He
left during the night, or he would have spoken to us. I saw him as
late as midnight, and he made no mention of it then. It has been
snowing for two or three hours or I would send Metoosin on his
trail."

"What possible cause for worry can you have?" asked Philip.

"Thoreau's cutthroats," replied Adare, a sudden fire in his eyes.
"This winter may see--things happen. The force behind Thoreau's
success in trade is whisky. That damnable stuff is his lure, or
all the fur in this country would come to Adare House. If he could
drive me out he would have nothing to fight against--his hands
would be at the throat of every living soul in these regions, and
all through whisky. Among those who were killed or turned up
missing last winter were four of my best hunters. Twice Jean was
shot at on the trail. I fear for him because he is my right arm."

When Philip left Adare he went to his room, put on heavier
moccasins, and went quietly from the house. Three inches of fresh
snow had fallen, and the air was thick with the white deluge. He
hurried into the edge of the forest. A few minutes futile
searching convinced him of the impossibility of following the
trail made by Jean and the man he had pursued. Through the
thickening darkness he returned to Adare House.

Again he changed his moccasins, and waited for the expected word
from Josephine or Adare. Half an hour passed, and during this time
his mind became still more uneasy. He had hoped that Croisset was
hanging in the edge of the forest, waiting for darkness. Each
minute now added to his fear that all had not gone well with the
half-breed. He paced up and down his room, smoking, and looking at
his watch frequently. After a time he went to the window and tried
to peer out into the white swirl of the night. The opening of his
door turned him about. He expected to see Adare. Words that were
on his lips froze in a moment of speechless horror.

He knew that it was Jean Croisset who stood before him. But it did
not look like Jean. The half-breed's cap was gone. He was swaying,
clutching at the partly opened door to support himself. His face
was disfigured with blood, the front of his coat was spattered
with frozen clots of it. His long hair had fallen in ropelike
strands over his eyes and frozen there. His lips were terrible.

"Good God!" gasped Philip.

He sprang forward and caught Jean as the half-breed staggered
toward him. Jean's body hung a weight in his arms. His legs gave
way under him, but for a moment the clutch of his fingers on
Philip's shoulder were viselike.

"A little help, M'sieur," he gasped. "I am faint, sick. Whatever
happens, as you love Our Lady, let no one know of this to-night!"

With a rattling breath his head dropped upon Philip's arm.





CHAPTER SEVENTEEN


Scarcely had Jean uttered the few words that preceded his lapse
into unconsciousness than Philip heard the laughing voice of Adare
at the farther end of the hall. Heavy footsteps followed the
voice. Impulse rather than reason urged him into action. He
lowered Jean to the floor, sprang to the partly open door, closed
it and softly locked it. He was not a moment too soon. A few steps
more and Adare was beating on the panel with his fist.

"What, ho!" he cried in his booming voice. "Josephine wants to
know if you have forgotten her?" Adare's hand was on the latch.

"I am--undressed," explained Philip desperately. "Offer a thousand
apologies for me, Mon Pere. I will finish my bath in a hurry!"

He dropped on his knees beside Jean as the master of Adare moved
away from the door. A brief examination showed him where Croisset
was hurt. The half-breed had received a scalp wound from which the
blood had flowed down over his face and breast. He breathed easier
when he discovered nothing beyond this. In a few minutes he had
him partially stripped and on his bed. Jean opened his eyes as he
bathed the blood from his face. He made an effort to rise, but
Philip held him back.

"Not yet, Jean," he said.

Jean's glance shifted in a look of alarm toward the door.

"I must, M'sieur," he insisted. "It was the last few hundred yards
that made me dizzy. I am better now. And there is no time to lose.
I must get into my room--into other clothes!"

"We will not be interrupted," Philip assured him. "Is this your
only hurt, Jean?"

"That alone, M'sieur. It was not bad until an hour ago. Then it
broke out afresh, and made me so dizzy that with my last breath I
stumbled into your room. The saints be praised that I managed to
reach you!"

Philip left him, to return in a moment with a flask. Jean had
pulled himself to a sitting posture on the side of the bed.

"Here's a drop of whisky, Jean. It will stir up your blood."

"Mon Dieu, it has been stirred up enough this night, tanike,"
smiled Jean feebly. "But it may give me voice, M'sieur. Will you
get me fresh clothes? They are in my room--which is next to this
on the right. I must be prepared for Josephine or Le M'sieur
before I talk."

Philip went to the door and opened it cautiously. He could hear
voices coming from the room through which he had first entered
Adare House. The hall was clear. He slipped out and moved swiftly
to Jean's room. Five minutes later he reentered his own room with
an armful of Jean's clothes. Already Croisset was something like
himself. He quickly put on the garments Philip gave him, brushed
the tangles from his hair, and called upon Philip to examine him
to make sure he had left no spot of blood on his face or neck.

"You have the time?" he asked then.

Philip looked at his watch.

"It is eight o'clock."

"And I must see Josephine--alone--before ten," said Jean quickly.
"You must arrange it, M'sieur. No one must know that I have
returned until I see her. It is important. It means--"

"What?"

"The great God alone can answer that," replied Jean in a strange
voice. "Perhaps it will mean that to-morrow, or the next day, or
the day after that M'sieur Weyman will know the secret we are
keeping from him now, and will fight shoulder to shoulder with
Jean Jacques Croisset in a fight that the wilderness will remember
so long as there are tongues to tell of it!"

There was nothing of boastfulness or of excitement in his words.
They were in the voice of a man who saw himself facing the final
arbiter of things--a voice dead to visible hope, yet behind which
there trembled a thing that made Philip face him with a new fire
in his eyes.

"Why to-morrow or the next day?" he demanded. "Why shroud me in
this damnable mystery any longer, Jean? If there is fighting to be
done, let me fight!"

Jean's hollowed cheeks took on a flush.

"I would give my life if we two could go out and fight--as I want
to fight," he said in a low, tense voice, "It would be worth your
life and mine--that fight. It would be glorious. But I am a
Catholic, M'sieur. I am a Catholic of the wilderness. And I have
taken the most binding oath in the world. I have sworn by the
sweet soul of my dead Iowaka to do only as Josephine tells me to
do in this. Over her grave I swore that, with Josephine kneeling
at my side. I have prayed that my Iowaka might come to me and tell
me if I am right. But in this her voice has been silent. I have
prayed Josephine to free me from my oath, and she has refused. I
am afraid. I dare reveal nothing. I cannot act as I want to act.
But to-night--"

His voice sank to a whisper. His fingers gripped deep into the
flesh of Philip's hand.

"To-night may mean--something," he went on, his voice filled with
an excitement strange to him. "The fight is coming, M'sieur. We
cannot much longer evade what we have been trying to evade! It is
coming. And then, shoulder to shoulder, we will fight!"

"And until then, I must wait?"

"Yes, you must wait, M'sieur."

Jean freed his hand and sat down in one of the chairs near the
table. His eyes turned toward the window.

"You need not fear another shot, M'sieur," he said quietly. "The
man who fired that will not fire again."

"You killed him?"

Jean bowed his head without replying. The movement was neither of
affirmation nor denial:

"He will not fire again."

"It was more than one against one," persisted Philip. "Does your
oath compel you to keep silent about that, too?"

There was a note of irritation in his voice which was almost a
challenge to Jean. It did not prick the half-breed. He looked at
Philip a moment before he replied:

"You are an unusual man, M'sieur," he said at last, as though he
had been carefully measuring his words. "We have known each other
only a few days, and yet it seems a long time. I had my suspicions
of you back there. I thought it was Josephine's beauty you were
after, and I have stood ready to kill you if I saw in you what I
feared. But you have won, M'sieur. Josephine loves you. I have
faith in you. And do you know why? It is because you have fought
the fight of a strong man. It does not take great soul in a man to
match knife against knife, or bullet against bullet. Not to keep
one's word, to play a hopeless part in the dark, to leap when the
numma wapew is over the eyes and you are blind--that takes a man.
And now, when Jean Jacques Croisset says for the first time that
there is a ray of hope for you, where a few hours ago no hope
existed, will you give me again your promise to play the part you
have been asked to play?"

"Hope!" Philip was at Jean's side in an instant. "Jean, what do
you mean? Is it that you, even YOU--now give me hope of
possessing Josephine?"

Slowly Jean rose from his chair.

"I am part Cree, M'sieur," he said. "And in our Cree there is a
saying that the God of all things, Kisamunito, the Great Spirit,
often sits on high and laughs at the tricks which he plays on men.
Perhaps this is one of those times. I am beginning to believe so.
Kisamunito has begun to run our destinies, not ourselves.
Yesterday we--our Josephine and I--had our hopes, our plans, our
schemes well laid. To-night they no longer exist. Before the night
is much older all that Josephine has done, all that she has made
you promise, will count for nothing. After that--a matter of
hours, perhaps of days--will come the great fight for you and me.
Until then you must know nothing, must see nothing, must ask
nothing. And when the crash comes--"

"It will give Josephine to me?" cried Philip eagerly.

"I did not say that, M'sieur," corrected Jean quietly. "Out of
fighting such as this strange things may happen. And where things
happen there is always hope. Is that not true?"

He moved to the door and listened. Quietly he opened it, and
looked out.

"The hall is clear," he whispered softly. "Go to Josephine. Tell
her that she must arrange to see me within an hour. And if you
care for that bit of hope I have shown you, let it happen without
the knowledge of the master of Adare. From this hour Jean Jacques
Croisset sacrifices his soul. Make haste, M'sieur--and use
caution!"

Without a word Philip went quietly out into the hall. Behind him
Jean closed and locked the door.





CHAPTER EIGHTEEN


For a few moments Philip stood without moving. Jean's return and
the strange things he had said had worked like sharp wine in his
blood. He was breathing quickly. He was afraid that his appearance
just now would betray the mental excitement which he must hide. He
drew back deeper into the shadow of the wall and waited, and while
he waited he thought of Jean. It was not the old Jean that had
returned this night, the Jean with his silence, his strange
repression, the mysterious something that had seemed to link him
with an age-old past. Out of that spirit had risen a new sort of
man--the fighting man. He had seen a new fire in Jean's eyes and
face; he had caught new meaning in his words, Jean was no longer
the passive Jean--waiting, watching, guarding. Out in the forest
something had happened to rouse in him what a word from Josephine
would set flaming in the savage breasts of her dogs. And the
excitement in Philip's blood was the thrill of exultation--the
joy of knowing that action was close at hand, for deep in him had
grown the belief that only through action could Josephine be freed
for him.

Suddenly, softly, there came floating to him the low, sweet tones
of the piano, and then, sweeter still, the voice of Josephine.
Another moment and Miriam's voice had joined her in a song whose
melody seemed to float like that of spirit-voices through the
thick fog walls of Adare House. Soundlessly he moved toward the
room where they were waiting for him, a deeper flush mounting into
his face now. He opened the door without being heard, and looked
in.

Josephine was at the piano. The great lamp above her head flooded
her in a mellow light in which the rich masses of her hair
shimmered in a glorious golden glow. His heart beat with the
knowledge that she had again dressed for him to-night. Her white
neck was bare. In her hair he saw for a second time a red rose.
For a space he saw no one but her. Then his eyes turned for an
instant to Miriam. She was standing a little back, and it seemed
to him that he had never seen her so beautiful. Against the wall,
in a great chair, sat the master of Adare, his bearded chin in the
palm of his hand, looking at the two with a steadiness of gaze
that was more than adoration. Philip entered. Still he was
unheard. He stood silent until the song was finished, and it was
Josephine, turning, who saw him first.

"Philip!" she cried.

Adare started, as if awakening from a dream. Josephine came to
Philip, holding out both her hands, her beautiful face smiling
with welcome. Even as their warm touch thrilled him he felt a
sudden chill creep over him. A swift glance showed him that Adare
had gone to Miriam. Instead of words of greeting, he whispered low
in Josephine's ear:

"I would have come sooner, but I have been with Jean. He returned
a few minutes ago. Strange things have happened, and he says that
he must see you within an hour, and that your father must not
know. He is in my room. You must get away without rousing
suspicion."

Her fingers gripped his tightly. The soft glow in her eyes faded
away. A look of fear leapt into them and her face went suddenly
white. He drew her nearer, until her hands were against his
breast.

"Don't look like that," he whispered. "Nothing can hurt you.
Nothing in the world. See--I must do this to bring your colour
back, or they will guess something is wrong!"

He bent and kissed her on the lips.

Adare's voice burst out happily:

"Good boy, Philip! Don't be bashful when we're around. That's the
first time I've seen you kiss your wife!"

There was none of the white betrayal in Josephine's cheeks now.
They were the colour of the rose in her hair. She had time to look
up into Philip's face, and whisper with a laughing break in her
voice:

"Thank you, Philip. You have saved me again."

With Philip's hand in hers she turned to her father and mother.

"Philip wants to scold me, Mon Pere," she said. "And I cannot
blame him. He has seen almost nothing of me to-day."

"And I have been scolding Miriam because they have given me no
chance with the baby," rumbled Adare. "I have seen him but twice
to-day--the little beggar! And both times he was asleep. But I
have forced them to terms, Philip. From to-morrow I am to have him
as much as I please. When they want him they will find him in the
big room."

Josephine led Philip to her mother, who had seated herself on one
of the divans.

"I want you to talk with Philip, Mikawe," she said. "I have
promised father that he should have a peep at the baby. I will
bring him back very soon."

Philip seated himself beside Miriam as Adare and Josephine left
the room. He noticed that her hair was dressed like Josephine's,
and that in the soft depths of it was partly buried a rose.

"Do you know--I sometimes think that I am half dreaming," he said.
"All this seems too wonderful to be true--you, and Josephine,
almost a thousand miles out of the world. Even flowers like that
which you wear in your hair--hot-house flowers!"

There was a strange sweetness in Miriam's smile, a smile softened
by something that was almost pathetic, a touch of sadness.

"That is the one thing we keep alive out of the world I used to
know--roses," she said. "The first roots came from my babyhood
home, and we have grown them here for more than twenty years. Of
course Josephine has shown you our little hot-house?"

"Yes." lied Philip. Then he added, finding her dear eyes resting
on him steadily. "And you have never grown lonesome up here?"

"Never. I am sorry that we ever went back into that other world,
even for a day. This has been paradise. We have always been happy.
And you?" she asked suddenly. "Do you sometimes wish for that
other world?"

"I have been out of it four years--with the exception of a short
break. I never want to go back. Josephine has made my paradise, as
you have made another man's."

He fancied, as she turned her face from him, that he heard a
little catch in her breath. But she faced him again quickly.

"We have been happy. No woman in the world has been happier than
I. And you--four years? In that time you have not heard much
music. Shall I play for you?"

She rose and went to the piano without waiting for him to reply.
Philip leaned back and partly closed his eyes as she began to
play. The spell of music held him silent, and neither spoke until
Josephine and her father returned. Philip did not catch the
laughing words Adare turned to his wife. In the door Josephine had
stopped. To his surprise she was dressed in her red coat and hood,
and her feet were moccasined. She made a quick little signal to
him.

"I am ready, Philip," she said.

He arose, fearing that his tongue might betray him if he replied
to her in words. Adare came unwittingly to his assistance.

"You'll get used to this before the winter is over, Philip," he
exclaimed banteringly. "Metoosin once called Josephine
'Wapikunoo'--the White Owl, and the name has stuck ever since. I
haven't known Mignonne to miss a walk on a moonlit winter night
since I can remember. But I prefer my airings in the day. Eh,
Miriam?"

"And there is no moon to-night," laughed his wife.

"Hush--but there is Philip!" whispered Adare loudly. "It may be
that our Josephine will prefer the darker nights after this. Can
you remember--"

Josephine was pulling Philip through the door, laughing back over
her shoulder. As soon as they were in the hall she caught his arm
excitedly.

"Let us hurry to your room," she urged. "You can dress and slip
out unseen, leaving Jean and me alone. You are sure--he wants to
see me--alone?"

There was a tremble in her voice now.

"Yes." They came to his door and he tapped on it lightly.
Instantly it was opened. Josephine stared at Jean as she darted
in.

"Jean--you have something to tell me?" she whispered, no longer
hiding the fear in her face. "You must see me--alone?"

"Oui, M'selle," murmured Jean, turning to Philip. "If M'sieur
Philip can arrange for us to be alone."

"I will be gone in a moment," said Philip, hastily beginning to
put on heavier garments. "Lock the door, Jean. It will not do to
be interrupted now."

When he was ready Josephine went to him, her eyes shining softly.
Jean turned to the window.

"You--your faith in me is beautiful," she said gratefully, so low
that only he could hear her. "I don't deserve it, Philip."

For a moment he pressed her hand, his face telling her more than
he could trust his lips to speak. Jean heard him turn the key in
the lock, and he turned quickly.

"I have thought it would be better for you to go out by the
window, M'sieur."

"You are right," agreed Philip, relocking the door.

Jean raised the window. As Philip dropped himself outside the
half-breed said:

"Go no farther than the edge of the forest, M'sieur. We will turn
the light low and draw the curtain. When the curtain is raised
again return to us as quickly as you can. Remember, M'sieur--and
go no farther than the edge of the forest."

The window dropped behind him, and he turned toward the dark wall
of spruce. There were six inches of fresh snow on the ground, and
the clouds were again drifting out of the sky. Here and there a
star shone through, but the moon was only a pallid haze beyond the
gray-black thickness above. In the first shelter of the spruce and
balsam Philip paused. He found himself a seat by brushing the snow
from a log, and lighted his pipe. Steadily he kept his eyes on the
curtained window. What was happening there now? To what was
Josephine listening in these tense minutes of waiting?

Even as he stared through the darkness to that one lighter spot in
the gloom he knew that the world was changing for the woman he
loved. He believed Jean, and he knew Jean was now telling her the
story of that day and the preceding night--the story which he had
said would destroy the hopes she had built up, throw their plans
into ruin, perhaps even disclose to him the secret which they had
been fighting to hide. What could that story be? And what effect
was it having on Josephine? The minutes passed slowly--with an
oppressive slowness. Three times he lighted matches to look at his
watch. Five minutes passed--ten, fifteen. He rose from the log and
paced back and forth, making a beaten path in the snow. It was
taking Jean a long time to tell the story!

And then, suddenly, a flood of light shot out into the night. The
curtain was raised! It was Jean's signal to him, and with a wildly
beating heart he responded to it.





CHAPTER NINETEEN


The window was open when Philip came to it, and Jean was waiting
to give him an assisting hand. The moment he was in the room he
turned to look at Josephine. She was gone. Almost angrily he
whirled upon the half-breed, who had lowered the window, and was
now drawing the curtain. It was with an effort that he held back
the words on his lips. Jean saw that effort, and shrugged his
shoulders with an appreciative gesture.

"It is partly my fault that she is not here, M'sieur," he
explained. "She would have told you nothing of what has passed
between us--not as much, perhaps, as I. She will see you in the
morning."

"And there's damned little consolation at the present moment in
that," gritted Philip, with clenched hands. "Jean--I'm ready to
fight now! I feel like a rat must feel when it's cornered. I've
got to jump pretty soon--in some direction--or I'll bust. It's
impossible--"

Jean's hand fell softly upon his arm.

"M'sieur, you would cut off this right arm if it would give you
Josephine?"

"I'd cut off my head!" exploded Philip.

"Do you remember that it was only a few hours ago that I said she
could never be yours in this world?" Croisset reminded him, in the
same quiet voice. "And now, when even I say there is hope, can you
not make me have the confidence in you that I must have--if we
win?"

Philip's face relaxed. In silence he gripped Jean's hand.

"And what I am going to tell you--a thing which Josephine would
not say if she were here, is this, M'sieur," went on Jean. "Before
you left us alone in this room I had a doubt. Now I have none. The
great fight is coming. And in that fight all the spirits of
Kisamunito must be with us. You will have fighting enough. And it
will be such fighting its you will remember to the end of your
days. But until the last word is said--until the last hour, you
must be as you have been. I repeat that. Have you faith enough in
me to believe?"

"Yes, I believe," said Philip. "It seems inconceivable, Jean--but
I believe."

Jean moved to the door.

"Good-night, M'sieur," he said.

"Good-night, Jean."

For a few moments after Croisset had left him Philip stood
motionless. Then he locked the door. Until he was alone he did not
know what a restraint he had put upon himself. Jean's words, the
mysterious developments of the evening, the half promise of the
fulfilment of his one great hope--had all worked him into a white
heat of unrest. He knew that he could not stay in his room, that
it would be impossible for him to sleep. And he was not in a
condition to rejoin Adare and his wife. He wanted to walk--to find
relief in physical exertion, Of a sudden his mind was made up. He
extinguished the light. Then he reopened the window, and dropped
out into the night again.

He made his way once more to the edge of the forest. He did not
stop this time, but plunged deeper into its gloom. Moon and stars
were beginning to lighten the white waste ahead of him. He knew he
could not lose himself, as he could follow his own trail back. He
paused for a moment in the shelter of a spruce to fill his pipe
and light it. Then he went on. Now that he was alone he tried to
discover some key to all that Jean had said to him. After all, his
first guess had not been so far out of the way: it was a physical
force that was Josephine's deadliest menace. What was this force?
How could he associate it with the baby back in Adare House?
Unconsciously his mind leaped to Thoreau, the Free Trader, as a
possible solution, but in the same breath he discarded that as
unreasonable. Such a force as Thoreau and his gang would be dealt
with by Adare himself, or the forest people. There was something
more. Vainly he racked his brain for some possible enlightenment.

He walked ten minutes without noting the direction he was taking
when he was brought to a standstill with a sudden shock. Not
twenty paces from him he heard voices. He dodged behind a tree,
and an instant later two figures hurried past him. A cry rose to
his lips, but he choked it back. One of the two was Jean. The
other was Josephine!

For a moment he stood staring after them, his hand clutching at
the bark of the tree. A feeling that was almost physical pain
swept over him as he realized the truth. Josephine had not gone to
her room. He understood now. She had purposely evaded him that she
might be with Jean alone in the forest. Three days before Philip
would not have thought so much of this. Now it hurt. Josephine had
given him her love, yet in spite of that she was placing greater
confidence in the half-breed than in him. This was what hurt--at
first. In the next breath his overwhelming faith in her returned
to HIM. There was some tremendous reason for her being here with
Jean. What was it? He stepped out from behind the tree as he
stared after them.

His eyes caught the pale glow of something that he had not seen
before. It was a campfire, the illumination of it only faintly
visible deeper in the forest. Toward this Josephine and Jean were
hurrying. A low exclamation of excitement broke from his lips as a
still greater understanding dawned upon him. His hand trembled.
His breath came quickly. In that camp there waited for Josephine
and Croisset those who were playing the other half of the game in
which he had been given a blind man's part! He did not reason or
argue with himself. He accepted the fact. And no longer with
hesitation his hand fell to his automatic, and he followed swiftly
after Josephine and the half-breed.

He began to see what Jean had meant. In the room he had simply
prepared Josephine for this visit. It was in the forest--and not
in Adare House, that the big test of the night was to come.

It was not curiosity that made him follow them now. More than ever
he was determined to keep his faith with Jean and the girl, and he
made up his mind to draw only near enough to give his assistance
if it should become necessary. Roused by the conviction that
Josephine and the half-breed were not making this mysterious tryst
without imperilling themselves, he stopped as the campfire burst
into full view, and examined his pistol. He saw figures about the
fire. There were three, one sitting, and two standing. The fire
was not more than a hundred yards ahead of him, and he saw no
tent. A moment later Josephine and Jean entered the circle of
fireglow, and the sitting man sprang to his feet. As Philip drew
nearer he noticed that Jean stood close to his companion, and that
the girl's hand was clutching his arm. He heard no word spoken,
and yet he could see by the action of the man who had been sitting
that he was giving the others instructions which took them away
from the fire, deeper into the gloom of the forest.

Seventy yards from the fire Philip dropped breathlessly behind a
cedar log and rested his arm over the top of it. In his hand was
his automatic. It covered the spot of gloom into which the two men
had disappeared. If anything should happen--he was ready.

In the fire-shadows he could not make out distinctly the features
of the third man. He was not dressed like the others. He wore
knickerbockers and high laced boots. His face was beardless.
Beyond these things he could make out nothing more. The three drew
close together, and only now and then did he catch the low murmur
of a voice. Not once did he hear Jean. For ten minutes he crouched
motionless, his eyes shifting from the strange tableau to the spot
of gloom where the others were hidden. Then, suddenly, Josephine
sprang back from her companions. Jean went to her side. He could
hear her voice now, steady and swift--vibrant with something that
thrilled him, though he could not understand a word that she was
speaking. She paused, and he could see that she was tense and
waiting. The other replied. His words must have been brief, for it
seemed he could scarcely have spoken when Josephine turned her
back upon him and walked quickly out into the forest. For another
moment Jean Croisset stood close to the other. Then he followed.

Not until he knew they were safe did Philip rise from his
concealment. He made his way cautiously back to Adare House, and
reentered his room through the window. Half an hour later, dressed
so that he revealed no evidence of his excursion in the snow, he
knocked at Jean's door. The half-breed opened it. He showed some
surprise when he saw his visitor.

"I thought you were in bed, M'sieur," he exclaimed. "Your room was
dark."

"Sleep?" laughed Philip. "Do you think that I can sleep to-night,
Jean?"

"As well as some others, perhaps," replied Jean, offering him a
chair. "Will you smoke, M'sieur?"

Philip lighted a cigar, and pointed to the other's moccasined
feet, wet with melting snow.

"You have been out," he said. "Why didn't you invite me to go with
you?"

"It was a part of our night's business to be alone," responded
Jean. "Josephine was with me. She is in her room now with the
baby."

"Does Adare know you have returned?"

"Josephine has told him. He is to believe that I went out to see a
trapper over on the Pipestone."

"It is strange," mused Philip, speaking half to himself. "A
strange reason indeed it must be to make Josephine say these false
things."

"It is like driving sharp claws into her soul," affirmed Jean.

"I believe that I know something of what happened to-night, Jean.
Are we any nearer to the end--to the big fight?"

"It is coming, M'sieur. I am more than ever certain of that. The
third night from this will tell us."

"And on that night--"

Philip waited expectantly.

"We will know," replied Jean in a voice which convinced him that
the half-breed would say no more. Then he added: "It will not be
strange if Josephine does not go with you on the sledge-drive to-
morrow, M'sieur. It will also be curious if there is not some
change in her, for she has been under a great strain. But make as
if you did not see it. Pass your time as much as possible with the
master of Adare. Let him not guess. And now I am going to ask you
to let me go to bed. My head aches. It is from the blow."

"And there is nothing I can do for you, Jean?'

"Nothing, M'sieur."

At the door Philip turned.

"I have got a grip on myself now, Jean," he said. "I won't fail
you. I'll do as you say. But remember, we are to have the fight at
the end!"

In his room he sat up for a time and smoked. Then he went to bed.
Half a dozen times during the night he awoke from a restless
slumber. Twice he struck a match to look at his watch. It was
still dark when he got up and dressed. From five until six he
tried to read. He was delighted when Metoosin came to the door and
told him that breakfast would be ready in half an hour. This gave
him just time to shave.

He expected to eat alone with Adare again this morning, and his
heart jumped with both surprise and joy when Josephine came out
into the hall to meet him. She was very pale. Her eyes told him
that she had passed a sleepless night. But she was smiling
bravely, and when she offered him her hand he caught her suddenly
in his arms and held her close to his breast while he kissed her
lips, and then her shining hair.

"Philip!" she protested. "Philip--"

He laughed softly, and for a moment his face was close against
hers.

"My brave little darling! I understand," he whispered. "I know
what a night you've had. But there's nothing to fear. Nothing
shall harm you. Nothing shall harm you, nothing, nothing!"

She drew away from him gently, and there was a mist in her eyes.
But he had brought a bit of colour into her face. And there was a
glow behind the tears. Then, her lip quivering, she caught his
arm.

"Philip, the baby is sick--and I am afraid. I haven't told father.
Come!"

He went with her to the room at the end of the hall. The Indian
woman was crooning softly over a cradle. She fell silent as
Josephine and Philip entered, and they bent over the little
flushed face on the pillow. Its breath came tightly, gaspingly,
and Josephine clutched Philip's hand, and her voice broke in a
sob.

"Feel, Philip--its little face--the fever--"

"You must call your mother and father," he said after a moment.
"Why haven't you done this before, Josephine?"

"The fever came on suddenly--within the last half hour," she
whispered tensely. "And I wanted you to tell me what to do,
Philip. Shall I call them--now?"

He nodded.

"Yes."

In an instant she was out of the room. A few moments later she
returned, followed by Adare and his wife. Philip was startled by
the look that came into Miriam's face as she fell on her knees
beside the cradle. She was ghastly white. Dumbly Adare stood and
gazed down on the little human mite he had grown to worship. And
then there came through his beard a great broken breath that was
half a sob.

Josephine lay her cheek against his arm for a moment, and said:

"You and Philip go to breakfast, Mon Pere. I am going to give the
baby some of the medicine the Churchill doctor left with me. I was
frightened at first. But I'm not now. Mother and I will have him
out of the fever shortly."

Philip caught her glance, and took Adare by the arm. Alone they
went into the breakfast-room. Adare laughed uneasily as he seated
himself opposite Philip.

"I don't like to see the little beggar like that," he said, taking
to shake off his own and Philip's fears with a smile. "It was
Mignonne who scared me--her face. She has nursed so many sick
babies that it frightened me to see her so white. I thought he
might be--dying."

"Cutting teeth, mebby," volunteered Philip.

"Too young," replied Adare.

"Or a touch of indigestion, That brings fever."

"Whatever it is, Josephine will soon have him kicking and pulling
my thumb again," said Adare with confidence. "Did she ever tell
you about the little Indian baby she found in a tepee?"

"No."

"It was in the dead of winter. Mignonne was out with her dogs, ten
miles to the south. Captain scented the thing--the Indian tepee.
It was abandoned--banked high with snow--and over it was the
smallpox signal. She was about to go on, but Captain made her go
to the flap of the tepee. The beast knew, I guess. And Josephine--
my God, I wouldn't have let her do it for ten years of my life!
There had been smallpox in that tent; the smell of it was still
warm. Ugh! And she looked in! And she says she heard something
that was no louder than the peep of a bird. Into that death-hole
she went--and brought out a baby. The parents, starving and half
crazed after their sickness, had left it--thinking it was dead.

"Josephine brought it to a cabin close to home, in two weeks she
had that kid out rolling in the snow. Then the mother and father
heard something of what had happened, and came to us as fast as
their legs could bring them. You should have seen that Indian
mother's gratitude! She didn't think it so terrible to leave the
baby unburied. She thought it was dead. Pasoo is the Indian
father's name. Several times a year they come to see Josephine,
and Pasoo brings her the choicest furs of his trap-line. And each
time he says: 'Nipa tu mo-wao,' which means that some day he hopes
to be able to kill for her. Nice, isn't it--to have friends who'll
murder your enemies for you if you just give 'em the word?"

"One never can tell," began Philip cautiously. "A time might come
when she would need friends. If such a day should happen--"

He paused, busying himself with his steak. There was a note of
triumph, of exultation, in Adare's low laugh.

"Have you ever seen a fire run through a pitch-dry forest?" he
asked. "That is the way word that Josephine wanted friends would
sweep through a thousand square miles of this Northland. And the
answer to it would be like the answer of stray wolves to the cry
of the hunt-pack!"

All over Philip there surged a warm glow.

"You could not have friends like that down there, in the cities,"
he said.

Adare's face clouded.

"I am not a pessimist," he answered, after a moment. "It has been
one of my few Commandments always to look for the bright spot, if
there is one. But, down there, I have seen so many wolves, human
wolves. It seems strange to me that so many people should have the
same mad desire for the dollar that the wolves of the forest have
for warm, red, quivering flesh. I have known a wolf-pack to kill
five times what it could eat in a night, and kill again the next
night, and still the next--always more than enough. They are like
the Dollar Hunters--only beasts. Among such, one cannot have solid
friends--not very many who will not sell you for a price. I was
afraid to trust Josephine down among them. I am glad that it was
you she met, Philip. You were of the North--a foster-child, if not
born there."

That day was one of gloom in Adare House. The baby's fever grew
steadily worse, until in Josephine's eyes Philip read the terrible
fear. He remained mostly with Adare in the big room. The lamps
were lighted, and Adare had just risen from his chair, when Miriam
came through the door. She was swaying, her hands reaching out
gropingly, her face the gray of ash that crumbles from an ember.
Adare sprung to meet her, a strange cry on his lips, and Philip
was a step behind her. He heard her moaning words, and as he
rushed past them into the hall he knew that she had fallen
fainting into her husband's arms.

In the doorway to Josephine's room he paused. She was there,
kneeling beside the little cradle, and her face as she lifted it
to him was tearless, but filled with a grief that went to the
quick of his soul. He did not need to look into the cradle as she
rose unsteadily, clutching a hand at her heart, as if to keep it
from breaking. He knew what he would see. And now he went to her
and drew her close in his strong arms, whispering the pent-up
passion of the things that were in his heart, until at last her
arms stole up about his neck, and she sobbed on his breast like a
child. How long he held her there, whispering over and over again
the words that made her grief his own, he could not have told; but
after a time he knew that some one else had entered the room, and
he raised his eyes to meet those of John Adare. The face of the
great, grizzled giant had aged five years. But his head was erect.
He looked at Philip squarely. He put out his two hands, and one
rested on Josephine's head, the other on Philip's shoulder.

"My children," he said gently, and in those two words were
weighted the strength and consolation of the world.

He pointed to the door, motioning Philip to take Josephine away,
and then he went and stood at the crib-side, his great shoulders
hunched over, his head bowed down.

Tenderly Philip led Josephine from the room. Adare had taken his
wife to her room, and when they entered she was sitting in a
chair, staring and speechless. And now Josephine turned to Philip,
taking his face between her two hands, and her soul looking at him
through a blinding mist of tears.

"My Philip," she whispered, and drew his face down and kissed him.
"Go to him now. We will come--soon."

He returned to Adare like one in a dream--a dream that was grief
and pain, with its one golden thread of joy. Jean was there now,
and the Indian woman; and the master of Adare had the still little
babe huddled up against his breast. It was some time before they
could induce him to give it to Moanne. Then, suddenly, he shook
himself like a great bear, and crushed Philip's shoulders in his
hands.

"God knows I'm sorry for you, Boy," he cried brokenly. "It's hurt
me--terribly. But YOU--it must be like the cracking of your soul.
And Josephine, Mignonne, my little flower! She is with her
mother?"

"Yes," replied Philip. "Come. Let us go. We can do nothing here.
And Josephine and her mother will be better alone for a time."

"I understand," said Adare almost roughly, in his struggle to
steady himself. "You're thinking of ME, Boy. God bless you for
that. You go to Josephine and Miriam. It is your place. Jean and I
will go into the big room."

Philip left them at Adare's room and went to his own, leaving the
door open that he might hear Josephine if she came out into the
hall. He was there to meet her when she appeared a little later.
They went to Moanne. And at last all things were done, and the
lights were turned low in Adare House. Philip did not take off his
clothes that night, nor did Jean and Metoosin. In the early dawn
they went out together to the little garden of crosses. Close to
the side of Iowaka, Jean pointed out a plot.

"Josephine would say the little one will sleep best there, close
to HER," he said. "She will care for it, M'sieur. She will know,
and understand, and keep its little soul bright and happy in
Heaven."

And there they digged. No one in Adare House heard the cautious
fall of pick and spade.

With morning came a strangely clear sun. Out of the sky had gone
the last haze of cloud. Jean crossed himself, and said:

"She knows--and has sent sunshine instead of storm."

Hours later it was Adare who stood over the little grave, and said
words deep and strong, and quivering with emotion, and it was Jean
and Metoosin who lowered the tiny casket into the frozen earth.
Miriam was not there, but Josephine clung to Philip's side, and
only once did her voice break in the grief she was fighting back.
Philip was glad when it was over, and Adare was once more in his
big room, and Josephine with her mother. He did not even want
Jean's company. In his room he sat alone until supper time. He
went to bed early, and strangely enough slept more soundly than he
had been able to sleep for some time.

When he awoke the following morning his first thought was that
this was the day of the third night. He had scarcely dressed when
Adare's voice greeted him from outside the door. It was different
now--filled with the old cheer and booming hopefulness, and
Philip smiled as he thought how this stricken giant of the
wilderness was rising out of his own grief to comfort Josephine
and him. They were all at breakfast, and Philip was delighted to
find Josephine looking much better than he had expected. Miriam
had sunk deepest under the strain of the preceding hours. She was
still white and wan. Her hands trembled. She spoke little.
Tenderly Adare tried to raise her spirits.

During the rest of that day Philip saw but little of Josephine,
and he made no effort to intrude himself upon her. Late in the
afternoon Jean asked him if he had made friends with the dogs, and
Philip told him of his experience with them. Not until nine
o'clock that night did he know why the half-breed had asked.

At that hour Adare House had sunk into quiet. Miriam and her
husband had gone to bed, the lights were low. For an hour Philip
had listened for the footsteps which he knew he would hear to-
night. At last he knew that Josephine had come out into the hall.
He heard Jean's low voice, their retreating steps, and then the
opening and closing of the door that let them out into the night.
There was a short silence. Then the door reopened, and some one
returned through the hall. The steps stopped at his own door--a
knock--and a moment later he was standing face to face with
Croisset.

"Throw on your coat and cap and come with me, M'sieur," he cried
in a low voice. "And bring your pistol!"

Without a word Philip obeyed. By the time they stood out in the
night his blood was racing in a wild anticipation. Josephine had
disappeared. Jean gripped his arm.

"To-night something may happen," he said, in a voice that was as
hard and cold as the blue lights of the aurora in the polar sky.
"It is--possible. We may need your help. I would have asked
Metoosin, but it would have made him suspicious of something--and
he knows nothing. You have made friends with the dogs? You know
Captain?"

"Yes!"

"Then go to them--go as fast as you can, M'sieur. And if you hear
a shot to-night--or a loud cry from out there in the forest, free
the dogs swiftly, Captain first, and run with them to our trail,
shouting 'KILL! KILL! KILL!' with every breath you take, and don't
stop so long as there is a footprint in the snow ahead of you or a
human bone to pick! Do you understand, M'sieur?"

His eyes were points of flame in the gloom.

"Do you understand?"

"Yes," gasped Philip. "But--Jean--"

"If you understand--that is all," interrupted Jean, "If there is a
peril in what we are doing this night the pack will be worth more
to us than a dozen men. If anything happens to us they will be our
avengers. Go! There is not one moment for you to lose. Remember--a
shot--a single cry!"

His voice, the glitter in his eyes, told Philip this was no time
for words. He turned and ran swiftly across the clearing in the
direction of the dog pit, Ten minutes later he came into a gloom
warm with the smell of beast. Eyes of fire glared at him. The
snapping of fangs and the snarling of savage throats greeted him.
One by one he called the names of the dogs he remembered--called
them over and over again, advancing fearlessly among them, until
he dropped upon his knees with his hand on the chain that held
Captain. From there he talked to them, and their whines answered
him.

Then he fell silent--listening. He could hear his own heart beat.
Every fibre in his body was aquiver with excitement and a strange
fear. The hand that rested on Captain's collar trembled. In the
distance an owl hooted, and the first note of it sent a red-hot
fire through him. Still farther away a wolf howled. Then came a
silence in which he thought he could hear the rush of blood
through his own throbbing veins.

With his fingers at the steel snap on Captain's collar he waited.





CHAPTER TWENTY


In the course of nearly every human life there comes an hour which
stands out above all others as long as memory lasts. Such was the
one in which Philip crouched in the dog pit, his hand at Captain's
collar, waiting for the sound of cry or shot. So long as he lived
he knew this scene could not be wiped out of his brain. As he
listened, he stared about him and the drama of it burning into his
soul. Some intuitive spirit seemed to have whispered to the dogs
that these tense moments were heavy with tragic possibilities for
them as well as the man. Out of the surrounding darkness they
stared at him without a movement or a sound, every head turned
toward him, forty pairs of eyes upon him like green and opal
fires. They, too, were waiting and listening. They knew there was
some meaning in the attitude of this man crouching at Captain's
side. Their heads were up. Their ears were alert. Philip could
hear them breathing. And he could feel that the muscles of
Captain's splendid body were tense and rigid.

Minutes passed. The owl hooted nearer; the wolf howled again,
farther away. Slowly the tremendous strain passed and Philip began
to breathe easier. He figured that Josephine and the half-breed
had reached last night's meeting-place. He had given them a margin
of at least five minutes--and nothing had happened. His knees were
cramped, and he rose to his feet, still holding Captain's chain.
The tension was broken among the beasts. They moved; whimpering
sounds came to him; eyes shifted uneasily in the gloom. Fully half
an hour had passed when there was a sudden movement among them.
The points of green and opal fire were turned from Philip, and to
his ears came the clink of chains, the movement of bodies, a
subdued and menacing rumble from a score of throats. Captain
growled. Philip stared out into the darkness and listened.

And then a voice came, quite near:

"Ho, M'sieur Philip!"

It was Jean! Philip's hand relaxed its clutch at Captain's collar,
and almost a groan of relief fell from his lips. Not until Jean's
voice came to him, quiet and unexcited, did he realize under what
a strain he had been.

"I am here," he said, moving slowly out of the pit.

On the edge of it, where the light shone down through an opening
in the spruce tops, he found Jean. Josephine was not with him.
Eagerly Philip caught the other's arm, and looked beyond him.

"Where is she?"

"Safe," replied Jean. "I left her at Adare House, and came to you.
I came quickly, for I was afraid that some one might shout in the
night, or fire a shot. Our business was done quickly to-night,
M'sieur!"

He was looking straight into Philip's eyes, a cold, steady look
that told Philip what he meant before he had spoken the words.

"Our business was done quickly!" he repeated. "And it is coming!"

"The fight?"

"Yes."

"And Josephine knows? She understands?"

"No, M'sieur. Only you and I know. Listen: To-night I kneeled down
in darkness in my room, and prayed that the soul of my Iowaka
might come to me. I felt her near, M'sieur! It is strange--you
may not believe--but some day you may understand. And we were
there together for an hour, and I pleaded for her forgiveness, for
the time had come when I must break my oath to save our Josephine.
And I could hear her speak to me, M'sieur, as plainly as you hear
that breath of wind in the tree-tops yonder. Praise the Holy
Father, I heard her! And so we are going to fight the great fight,
M'sieur."

Philip waited. After a moment Jean said, as quietly as if he were
asking the time of day:

"Do you know whom we went out to see last night--and met again to-
night?" he asked.

"I have guessed," replied Philip. His face was white and hard.

Jean nodded.

"I think you have guessed correctly, M'sieur. It was the baby's
father!"

And then, in amazement, he stared at Philip. For the other had
flung off his arm, and his eyes were blazing in the starlight.

"And you have had all this trouble, all this mystery, all this
fear because of HIM?" he demanded. His voice rang out in a harsh
laugh. "You met him last night, and again to-night, and LET HIM
GO? You, Jean Croisset? The one man in the whole world I would
give my life to meet--and YOU afraid of him? My God, if that is
all--"

Jean interrupted him, laying a firm, quiet hand on his arm.

"What would you do, M'sieur?"

"Kill him," breathed Philip. "Kill him by inches, slowly,
torturingly. And to-night, Jean. He is near. I will follow him,
and do what you have been afraid to do."

"Yes, that is it, I have been afraid to kill him," replied Jean.
Philip saw the starlight on the half-breed's face. And he knew, as
he looked, that he had called Jean Jacques Croisset the one thing
in the world that he could not be: a coward.

"I am wrong," he apologized quickly. "Jean, it is not that. I am
excited, and I take back my words. It is not fear. It is something
else. Why have you not killed him?"

"M'sieur, do you believe in an oath that you make to your God?"

"Yes. But not when it means the crushing of human souls. Then it
is a crime."

"Ah!" Jean was facing him now, his eyes aflame. "I am a Catholic,
M'sieur--one of those of the far North, who are different from the
Catholics of the south, of Montreal and Quebec. Listen! To-night I
have broken a part of my oath; I am breaking a part of it in
telling you what I am about to say. But I am not a coward, unless
it is a coward who lives too much in fear of the Great God. What
is my soul compared to that in the gentle breast of our Josephine?
I would sacrifice it to-night--give it to Wetikoo--lend it
forever to hell if I could undo what has been done. And you ask me
why I have not killed, why I have not taken the life of a beast
who is unfit to breathe God's air for an hour! Does it not occur
to you, M'sieur, that there must be a reason?"

"Besides the oath, yes!"

"And now, I will tell you of the game I played, and lost, M'sieur.
In me alone Josephine knew that she could trust, and so it was to
me that she bared her sorrow. Later word came to me that this man,
the father of the baby, was following her into the North, That was
after I had given my oath to Josephine. I thought he would come by
the other waterway, where we met you. And so we went there, alone.
I made a camp for her, and went on to meet him. My mind was made
up, M'sieur. I had determined upon the sacrifice: my soul for
hers. I was going to kill him. But I made a mistake. A friend I
had sent around by the other waterway met me, and told me that I
had missed my game. Then I returned to the camp--and you were
there. You understand this far, M'sieur?"

"Yes. Go on."

"The friend I had sent brought a letter for Josephine," resumed
Jean. "A runner on his way north gave it to him. It was from Le
M'sieur Adare, and said they were not starting north. But they did
start soon after the letter, and this same friend brought me the
news that the master had passed along the westward waterway a few
days behind the man I had planned to kill. Then we returned to
Adare House, and you came with us. And after that--the face at
the window, and the shot!"

Philip felt the half-breed's arm quiver.

"I must tell you about him or you will not understand," he went
on, and there was effort in his voice now. "The man whose face you
saw was my brother. Ah, you start! You understand now why I was
glad you failed to kill him. He was bad, all that could be bad,
M'sieur, but blood is thicker than water, and up here one does not
forget those early days when childhood knows no sin. And my
brother came up from the south as canoe-man for the man I wanted
to kill! A few hours before you saw his face at the window I met
him in the forest. He promised to leave. Then came the shot--and I
understood. The man I was going to kill had sent him to
assassinate the master of Adare. That is why I followed his trail
that night. I knew that I would find the man I wanted not far
away."

"And you found him?"

"Yes. I came upon my brother first. And I lied. I told him he had
made a mistake, and killed you, that his life was not worth the
quill from a porcupine's back if he remained in the country. I
made him believe it was another who fought him in the forest. He
fled. I am glad of that. He will never come back. Then I followed
over the trail he had made to Adare House, and far back in the
swamp I came upon them, waiting for him. I passed myself off as my
brother, and I tricked the man I was after. We went a distance
from the camp--alone--and I was choking the life from him, when
the two others that were with him came upon us. He was dying,
M'sieur! He was black in the face, and his tongue was out. Another
second--two or three at the most--and I would have brought ruin
upon every soul at Adare House. For he was dying. And if I had
killed him all would have been lost!"

"That is impossible!" gasped Philip, as the half-breed paused. "If
you had killed him--"

"All would have been lost," repeated Jean, in a strange, hard
voice. "Listen, M'sieur. The two others leaped upon me. I fought.
And then I was struck on the head, and when I came to my senses I
was in the light of the campfire, and the man I had come to kill
was over me. One of the other men was Thoreau, the Free Trader. He
had told who I was. It was useless to lie. I told the truth--that
I had come to kill him, and why. And then--in the light of that
campfire, M'sieur--he proved to me what it would have meant if I
had succeeded. Thoreau carried the paper. It was in an envelope,
addressed to the master of Adare. They tore this open, that I
might read. And in that paper, written by the man I had come to
kill, was the whole terrible story, every detail--and it made me
cold and sick. Perhaps you begin to understand, M'sieur. Perhaps
you will see more clearly when I tell you--"

"Yes, yes," urged Philip.

"--that this man, the father of the baby, is the Lang who owns
Thoreau, who owns that freebooters' hell, who owns the string of
them from here to the Athabasca, and who lives in Montreal!"

Philip could only stare at Jean, who went on, his face the colour
of gray ash in the starlight.

"I must tell you the rest. You must understand before the great
fight comes. You know--the terrible thing happened in Montreal.
And this man Lang--all the passion of hell is in his soul! He is
rich. He has power up here, for he owns Thoreau and all his
cutthroats. And he is not satisfied with the ruin he worked down
there. He has followed Josephine. He is mad with passion--with the
desire--"

"Good God, don't tell me more of that!" cried Philip. "I
understand. He has followed. And Josephine is to be the price of
his silence!"

"Yes, just that. He knows what it means up here for such a thing
to happen. His love for her is not love. It is the passion that
fills hell with its worst. He laid his plans before he came. That
letter, the paper I read, M'sieur! He meant to see Josephine at
once, and show it to her. There are two of those papers: one at
Thoreau's place and one in Thoreau's pocket. If anything happens
to Lang, one of them is to be delivered to the master of Adare by
Thoreau. If I had killed him it would have gone to Le M'sieur. It
is his safeguard. And there are two copies--to make the thing
sure. So we cannot kill him.

"Josephine listened to all this to-night, from Lang's own lips.
And she pleaded with him, M'sieur. She called upon him to think of
the little child, letting him believe that it was still alive; and
he laughed at her. And then, almost as I was ready to plunge my
knife into his heart, she threw up her head like an angel and told
him to do his worst--that she refused to pay the price. I never
saw her stronger than in that moment, M'sieur--in that moment when
there was no hope! I would have killed him then for the paper he
had, but the other is at Thoreau's. He has gone back there. He
says that unless he receives word of Josephine's surrender within
a week--the crash will come, the paper will be given to the master
of Adare. And now, M'sieur Philip, what do you have to say?"

"That there never was a game lost until it was played to the end,"
replied Philip, and he drew nearer to look straight and steadily
into the half-breed's eyes. "Go on, Jean. There is something more
which you have not told me. And that is the biggest thing of all.
Go on!"

For a space there was a startled look in Jean's eyes. Then he
shrugged his shoulders and smiled.

"Of course there is more," he said. "You have known that, M'sieur.
There is one thing which you will never know--that which Josephine
said you would not guess if you lived a thousand years. You must
forget that there is more than I have told you, for it will do you
no good to remember."

Expectancy died out of Philip's eyes.

"And yet I believe that what you are holding back from me is the
key to everything."

"I have told you enough, M'sieur--enough to make you see why we
must fight."

"But not how."

"That will come soon," replied Jean, a little troubled.

The men were silent. Behind them they heard the restless movement
of the dogs. Out of the gloom came a wailing whine. Again Philip
looked at Jean.

"Do you know, your story seems weak in places, Jean," he said. "I
believe every word you have said. And yet, when you come to think
of it all, the situation doesn't seem to be so terribly alarming
to me after all. Why, for instance, do you fear those letters--
this scoundrel Lang's confession? Kill him. Let the letter come to
Adare. Cannot Josephine swear that she is innocent? Can she not
have a story of her own showing how foully Lang tried to blackmail
her into a crime? Would not Adare believe her word before that of
a freebooter? And am I not here to swear--that the child--was
mine?"

There was almost a pitying look in the half-breed's eyes.

"M'sieur, what if in that letter were named people and places: the
hospital itself, the doctors, the record of birth? What if it
contained all those many things by which the master of Adare might
trail back easily to the truth? With those things in the letter
would he not investigate? And then--" He made a despairing
gesture.

"I see," said Philip. Then he added, quickly "But could we not
keep the papers from Adare, Jean? Could we not watch for the
messenger?"

"They are not fools, M'sieur. Such a thing would be easy--if they
sent a messenger with the papers. But they have guarded against
that. Le M'sieur is to be invited to Thoreau's. The letter will be
given to him there."

Philip began pacing back and forth, his head bowed in thought, his
hands deep in his pockets.

"They have planned it well--like very devils!" he exclaimed. "And
yet--even now I see a flaw. Is Lang's threat merely a threat?
Would he, after all, actually have the letter given to Adare? If
these letters are his trump cards, why did he try to have him
killed? Would not Adare's death rob him of his greatest power?"

"In a way, M'sieur. And yet with Le M'sieur gone, both Josephine
and Miriam would be still more hopelessly in his clutches. For I
know that he had planned to kill me after the master. My brother
had not guessed that. And then the women would be alone. Holy
Heaven, I cannot see the end of crime that might come of that!
Even though they escaped him to go back to civilization, they
would be still more in his power there."

Philip's face was upturned to the stars. He laughed, but there was
no mirth in the laugh. And then he faced Jean again, and his eyes
were filled with the merciless gleam that came into those of the
wolf-beasts back in the pit.

"It is the big fight then, Jean. But, before that, just one
question more. All of this trouble might have been saved if
Josephine had married Lang. Why didn't she?"

For an instant every muscle in Jean's body became as taut as a
bowstring. He hunched a little forward, as if about to leap upon
the other, and strike him down. And then, all at once, he relaxed.
His hands unclenched. And he answered calmly:

"That is the one story that will never be told, M'sieur. Come!
They will wonder about us at Adare House. Let us return."

Philip fell in behind him. Not until they were close to the door
of the house did Jean speak again.

"You are with me, M'sieur--to the death, if it must be?"

"Yes, to the death," replied Philip.

"Then let no sleep come to your eyes so long as Josephine is
awake," went on Jean quickly. "I am going to leave Adare House to-
night, M'sieur, with team and sledge. The master must believe I
have gone over to see my sick friend on the Pipestone. I am going
there--and farther!" His voice became a low, tense whisper. "You
understand, M'sieur? We are preparing."

The two clasped hands.

"I will return late to-morrow, or to-morrow night," resumed Jean.
"It may even be the next day. But I shall travel fast--without
rest. And during that time you are on guard. In my room you will
find an extra rifle and cartridges. Carry it when you go about.
And spend as much of your time as you can with the master of
Adare. Watch Josephine. I will not see her again to-night. Warn
her for me. She must not go alone in the forests--not even to the
dog pit."

"I understand," said Philip.

They entered the house. Twenty minutes later, from the window of
his room, Philip saw a dark figure walking swiftly back toward the
forest. Still later he heard the distant wail of a husky coming
from the direction of the pit, and he knew that the first gun in
the big fight had been fired--that Jean Jacques Croisset was off
on his thrilling mission into the depths of the forests. What that
mission was he had not asked him. But he had guessed. And his
blood ran warm with a strange excitement.





CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE


Again there filled Philip the desire to be with Jean in the
forest. The husky's wail told him that the half-breed had begun
his journey. Between this hour and to-morrow night he would be
threading his way swiftly over the wilderness trails on his
strange mission. Philip envied him the action, the exhaustion that
would follow. He envied even the dogs running in the traces. He
was a living dynamo, overcharged, with every nerve in him drawn to
the point that demanded the reaction of physical exertion. He knew
that he could not sleep. The night would be one long and tedious
wait for the dawn. And Jean had told him not to sleep as long as
Josephine was awake!

Was he to take that literally? Did Jean mean that he was to watch
her? He wondered if she was in bed now. At least the half-breed's
admonition offered him an excuse. He would go to her room. If
there was a light he would knock, and ask her if she would join
him in the piano-room. He looked at his watch. It was nearly
midnight. Probably she had retired.

He opened his door and entered the hall. Quietly he went to the
end room. There was no light--and he heard no sound. He was
standing close to it, concealed in the shadows, when his heart
gave a sudden jump. Advancing toward him down the hall was a
figure clad in a flowing white night-robe.

At first he did not know whether it was Josephine or Miriam. And
then, as she came under one of the low-burning lamps, he saw that
it was Miriam. She had turned, and was looking back toward the
room where she had left her husband. Her beautiful hair was loose,
and fell in lustrous masses to her hips. She was listening. And in
that moment Philip heard a low, passionate sob. She turned her
face toward him again, and he could see it drawn with agony. In
the lamp-glow her hands were clasped at her partly bared breast.
She was barefoot, and made no sound as she advanced. Philip drew
himself back closer against the wall. He was sure she had not seen
him. A moment later Miriam turned into the corridor that led into
Adare's big room.

Philip felt that he was trembling. In Miriam's face he had seen
something that had made his heart beat faster. Quietly he went to
the corridor, turned, and made his way cautiously to the door of
Adare's room. It was dark inside, the corridor was black. Hidden
in the gloom he listened. He heard Miriam sink in one of the big
chairs, and from her movement, and the sound of her sobbing, he
knew that she had buried her head in her arms on the table. He
listened for minutes to the grief that seemed racking her soul.
Then there was silence. A moment later he heard her, and she was
so close to the door that he dared not move. She passed him, and
turned into the main hall. He followed again.

She paused only for an instant at the door of the room in which
she and her husband slept. Then she passed on, and scarcely
believing his eyes Philip saw her open the door that led out into
the night!

She was full in the glow of the lamp that hung over the door now,
and Philip saw her plainly. A biting gust of wind flung back her
hair. He saw her bare arms; she turned, and he caught the white
gleam of a naked shoulder. Before he could speak--before he could
call her name, she had darted out into the night!

With a gasp of amazement he sprang after her. Her bare feet were
deep in the snow when he caught her. A frightened cry broke from
her lips. He picked her up in his arms as if she had been a child,
and ran back into the hall with her, closing the door after them.
Panting, shivering with the cold, she stared at him without
speaking.

"Why were you going out there?" he whispered. "Why--like that?"

For a moment he was afraid that from her heaving bosom and
quivering lips would burst forth the strange excitement which she
was fighting back. Something told him that Adare must not discover
them in the hall. He caught her hands. They were cold as ice.

"Go to your room," he whispered gently. "You must not let him know
you were out there in the snow--like this. You--were partly
asleep."

Purposely he gave her the chance to seize upon this explanation.
The sobbing breath came to her lips again.

"I guess--it must have been--that," she said, drawing her hands
from him. "I was going out--to--the baby. Thank you, Philip. I--I
will go to my room now."

She left him, and not until her door had closed behind her did he
move. Had she spoken the truth? Had she in those few moments been
temporarily irresponsible because of grieving over the baby's
death? Some inner consciousness answered him in the negative. It
was not that. And yet--what more could there be? He remembered.
Jean's words, his insistent warnings. Resolutely he moved toward
Josephine's room, and knocked softly upon her door. He was
surprised at the promptness with which her voice answered. When he
spoke his name, and told her it was important for him to see her,
she opened the door. She had unbound her hair. But she was still
dressed, and Philip knew that she had been sitting alone in the
darkness of her room.

She looked at him strangely and expectantly. It seemed to Philip
as if she had been waiting for news which she dreaded, and which
she feared that he was bringing her.

"May I come in?" he whispered. "Or would you prefer to go into the
other room?"

"You may come in, Philip," she replied, letting him take her hand.
"I am still dressed. I have been so dreadfully nervous to-night
that I haven't thought of going to bed. And the moon is so
beautiful through my window. It has been company." Then she asked:
"What have you to tell me, Philip?"

She had stepped into the light that flooded through the window. It
transformed her hair into a lustrous mantle of deep gold; into her
eyes it put the warm glow of the stars. He made a movement, as if
to put his arms about her, but he caught himself, and a little
joyous breath came to Josephine's lips. It was her room, where she
slept--and he had come at a strange hour. She understood the
movement, his desire to take her in his arms, and his big, clean
thoughts of her as he drew a step back. It sent a flush of
pleasure and still deeper trust into her cheeks.

"You have something to tell me?" she asked.

"Yes--about your mother."

Her hand had touched his arm, and he felt her start. Briefly he
told what had happened. Josephine's face was so white that it
startled him when he had finished.

"She said--she was going to the baby!" she breathed, as if
whispering the words to herself. "And she was in her bare feet,
with her hair down, and her gown open to the snow and wind! Oh my
God!"

"Perhaps she was in her sleep," hurried Philip. "It might have
been that, Josephine."

"No, she wasn't in her sleep," replied Josephine, meeting his
eyes. "You know that, Philip. She was awake. And you have come to
tell me so that I may watch her. I understand."

"She might rest easier with you--if you can arrange it," he
agreed. "Your father worries over her now. It will not do to let
him know this."

She nodded.

"I will bring her to my room, Philip. I will tell my father that I
am nervous and cannot sleep. And I will say nothing to her of what
has happened. I will go as soon as you have returned to your
room."

He went to the door, and there for a moment she stood close to
him, gazing up into his face. Still he did not put his hands to
her. To-night--in her own room--it seemed to him something like
sacrilege to touch her. And then, suddenly, she raised her two
arms up through her shimmering hair to his shoulders. and held her
lips to him.

"Good-night, Philip!"

He caught her to him. Her arms tightened about his shoulders. For
a moment he felt the thrill of her warm lips. Then she drew back,
whispering again:

"Good-night, Philip!"

The door closed softly, and he returned to his room. Again the
song of life, of love, of hope that pictured but one glorious end
filled his soul to overflowing. A little later and he knew that
Adare's wife had gone with Josephine to her room. He went to bed.
And sleep came to him now, filled with dreams in which he lived
with Josephine always at his side, laughing and singing with him,
and giving him her lips to kiss in their joyous paradise.





CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO


Out of these dreams he was awakened by a sound that had slowly and
persistently become a part of his mental consciousness. It was a
tap, tap, tap at his window. At last he sat up and listened. It
was in the gray gloom of dawn. Again the sound was repeated: tap,
tap, tap on the pane of glass.

He slipped out of bed, his hand seeking the automatic under his
pillow. He had slept with the window partly open. Covering it with
his pistol, he called:

"Who is there?"

"A runner from Jean Croisset," came back a cautious voice. "I have
a written message for you, M'sieur."

He saw an arm thrust through the window, in the hand a bit of
paper. He advanced cautiously until he could see the face that was
peering in. It was a thin, dark, fur-hooded face, with eyes black
and narrow like Jean's, a half-breed. He seized the paper, and,
still watching the face and arm, lighted a lamp. Not until he had
read the note did his suspicion leave him.



This is Pierre Langlois, my friend of the Pipestone. If anything
should happen that you need me quickly let him come after me. You
may trust him. He will put up his tepee in the thick timber close
to the dog pit. We have fought together. L'Ange saved his wife
from the smallpox. I am going westward.

JEAN.



Philip sprang back to the window and gripped the mittened hand
that still hung over the sill.

"I'm glad to know you, Pierre! Is there no other word from Jean?"

"Only the note, Ookimow."

"You just came?"

"Aha. My dogs and sledge are back in the forest."

"Listen!" Philip turned toward the door. In the hall he heard
footsteps. "Le M'sieur is awake," he said quickly to Pierre. "I
will see you in the forest!"

Scarcely were the words out of his mouth when the half-breed was
gone. A moment later Philip knew that it was Adare who had passed
his door. He dressed and shaved himself before he left his room.
He found Adare in his study. Metoosin already had a fire burning,
and Adare was standing before this alone, when Philip entered.
Something was lacking in Adare's greeting this morning. There was
an uneasy, searching look in his eyes as he looked at Philip. They
shook hands, and his hand was heavy and lifeless. His shoulders
seemed to droop a little more, and his voice was unnatural when he
spoke.

"You did not go to bed until quite late last night, Philip?"

"Yes, it was late, Mon Pere."

For a moment Adare was silent, his head bowed, his eyes on the
floor. He did not raise his gaze when he spoke again.

"Did you hear anything--late--about midnight?" he asked. He
straightened, and looked steadily into Philip's eyes. "Did you see
Miriam?"

For an instant Philip felt that it was useless to attempt
concealment under the searching scrutiny of the older man's eyes.
Like an inspiration came to him a thought of Josephine.

"Josephine was the last person I saw after leaving you," he said
truthfully. "And she was in her room before eleven o'clock."

"It is strange, unaccountable," mused Adare. "Miriam left her bed
last night while I was asleep. It must have been about midnight,
for it is then that the moon shines full into our window. In
returning she awakened me. And her hair was damp, there was snow
on her gown! My God, she had been outdoors, almost naked! She said
that she must have walked in her sleep, that she had awakened to
find herself in the open door with the wind and snow beating upon
her. This is the first time. I never knew her to do it before. It
disturbs me."

"She is sleeping now?"

"I don't know. Josephine came a little later and said that she
could not sleep. Miriam went with her."

"It must have been the baby," comforted Philip, placing a hand on
Adare's arm. "We can stand it, Mon Pere. We are men. With them it
is different. We must bear up under our grief. It is necessary for
us to have strength for them as well as ourselves."

"Do you think it is that?" cried Adare with sudden eagerness. "If
it is, I am ashamed of myself, Philip! I have been brooding too
much over the strange change in Miriam. But I see now. It must
have been the baby. It has been a tremendous strain. I have heard
her crying when she did not know that I heard. I am ashamed of
myself. And the blow has been hardest on you!"

"And Josephine," added Philip.

John Adare had thrown back his shoulders, and with a deep feeling
of relief Philip saw the old light in his eyes.

"We must cheer them up," he added quickly. "I will ask Josephine
if they will join us at breakfast, Mon Pere."

He closed the door behind him when he left the room, and he went
at once to rouse Josephine if she was still in bed. He was
agreeably surprised to find that both Miriam and Josephine were up
and dressing. With this news he returned to Adare.

Three quarters of an hour later they met in the breakfast-room. It
took only a glance to tell him that Josephine was making a last
heroic fight. She had dressed her hair in shining coils low over
her neck and cheeks this morning in an effort to hide her pallor.
Miriam seemed greatly changed from the preceding night. Her eyes
were clearer. A careful toilette had taken away the dark circles
from under them and had added a touch of colour to her lips and
cheeks. She went to Adare when the two men entered, and with a
joyous rumble of approval the giant held her off at arm's length
and looked at her.

"It didn't do you any harm after all," Philip heard him say. "Did
you tell Mignonne of your adventure, Ma Cheri?"

He did not hear Miriam's reply, for he was looking down into
Josephine's face. Her lips were smiling. She made no effort to
conceal the gladness in her eyes as he bent and kissed her.

"It was a hard night, dear."

"Terrible," she whispered. "Mother told me what happened. She is
stronger this morning. We must keep the truth from HIM."

"The TRUTH?"

He felt her start.

"Hush!" she breathed. "You know--you understand what I mean. Let
us sit down to breakfast now."

During the hour that followed Philip was amazed at Miriam. She
laughed and talked as she had not done before. The bit of
artificial colour she had given to her cheeks and lips faded under
the brighter flush that came into her face. He could see that
Josephine was nearly as surprised as himself. John Adare was
fairly boyish in his delight. The meal was finished and Philip and
Adare were about to light their cigars when a commotion outside
drew them all to the window that overlooked one side of the
clearing. Out of the forest had come two dog-teams, their drivers
shouting and cracking their long caribou-gut whips. Philip stared,
conscious that Josephine's hand was clutching his arm. Neither of
the shouting men was Jean.

"An Indian, and Renault the quarter-blood," grunted Adare. "Wonder
what they want here in November. They should be on their trap-
lines."

"Perhaps, Mon Pere, they have come to see their friends,"
suggested Josephine. "You know, it has been a long time since some
of them have seen us. I would be disappointed if our people didn't
show they were glad because of your home-coming!"

"Of course, that's it!" cried Adare. "Ho, Metoosin!" he roared,
turning toward the door. "Metoosin! Paitoo ta! Wawep isewin!"

Metoosin appeared at the door.

"Build a great fire in the una kah house," commanded Adare. Feed
all who come in from the forests, Metoosin. Open up tobacco and
preserves, and flour and bacon. Nothing in the storeroom is too
good for them. And send Jean to me! Where is he?"

"Numma tao, ookimow."

"Gone!" exclaimed Adare.

"He didn't want to disturb you last night," explained Philip. "He
made an early start for the Pipestone."

"If he was an ordinary man, I'd say he was in love with one of the
Langlois girls," said Adare, with a shrug of his shoulders. "Neah,
Metoosin! Make them comfortable, and we will all see them later."
As Metoosin went Adare turned upon the others: "Shall we all go
out now?" he asked.

"Splendid!" accepted Josephine eagerly. "Come, Mikawe, we can be
ready in a moment!"

She ran from the room, leading her mother by the hand. Philip and
Adare followed them, and shortly the four were ready to leave the
house. The una kah, or guest house, was in the edge of the timber.
It was a long, low building of logs, and was always open with its
accommodations to the Indians and half-breeds--men, women, and
children--who came in from the forest trails. Renault and the
Indian were helping Metoosin build fires when they entered. Philip
thought that Renault's eyes rested upon him in a curious and
searching glance even as Adare shook hands with him. He was more
interested in the low words both the Indian and the blood muttered
as they stood for a moment with bowed heads before Josephine and
Miriam. Then Renault raised his head and spoke direct to
Josephine:

"I breeng word for heem of Jan Breuil an' wewimow over on Jac'
fish ma Kichi Utooskayakun," he said in a low voice. "Heem lee'l
girl so seek she goin' die."

"Little Marie? She is sick--dying, you say?" cried Josephine.

"Aha. She ver' dam' seek. She burn up lak fire."

Josephine looked up at Philip.

"I knew she was sick," she said. "But I didn't think it was so
bad. If she dies it will be my fault. I should have gone." She
turned quickly to Renault. "When did you see her last?" she asked.
"Listen! Papak-oo-moo?"

"Aha."

"It is a sickness the children have each winter," she explained,
looking questioningly into Philip's eyes again. "It kills quickly
when left alone. But I have medicine that will cure it. There is
still time. We must go, Philip. We must!"

Her face had paled a little. She saw the gathering lines in
Philip's forehead. He thought of Jean's words--the warning they
carried. She pressed his arm, and her mouth was firm.

"I am going, Philip," she said softly. "Will you go with me?"

"I will, if you must go," he said. "But it is not best."

"It is best for little Marie," she retorted, and left him to tell
Adare and her mother of Renault's message.

Renault stepped close to Philip. His back was to the others. He
spoke in a low voice:

"I breeng good word from Jean Croisset, M'sieur. Heem say Soomin
Renault good man lak Pierre Langlois, an' he fight lak devil when
ask. I breeng Indian an' two team. We be in forest near dog
watekan, where Pierre mak his fire an' tepee. You understand?
Aha?"

"Yes--I understand," whispered Philip, "And Jean has gone on--to
see others?"

"He go lak win' to Francois over on Waterfound. Francois come in
one hour--two, t'ree, mebby."

Josephine and Adare approached them.

"Mignonne is turning nurse again," rumbled Adare, one of his great
arms thrown affectionately about her waist. "You'll have a jolly
run on a clear morning like this, Philip. But remember, if it is
the smallpox I forbid her to expose herself!"

"I shall see to that, Mon Pere. When do we start, Josephine?"

"As soon as I can get ready and Metoosin brings the dogs," replied
Josephine. "I am going to the house now. Will you come with me?"

It was an hour before Metoosin had brought the dogs up from the
pit and they were ready to start. Philip had armed himself with a
rifle and his automatic, and Josephine had packed both medicine
and food in a large basket. The new snow was soft, and Metoosin
had brought a toboggan instead of a sledge with runners. In the
traces were Captain and five of his team-mates.

"Isn't the pack going with us?" asked Philip.

"I never take them when there is very bad sickness, like this,"
explained Josephine. "There is something about the nearness of
death that makes them howl. I haven't been able to train that out
of them."

Philip was disappointed, but he said nothing more. He tucked
Josephine among the furs, cracked the long whip Metoosin had given
him, and they were off, with Miriam and her husband waving their
hands from the door of Adare House. They had scarcely passed out
of view in the forest when with a sudden sharp command Josephine
stopped the dogs. She sprang out of her furs and stood laughingly
beside Philip.

"Father always insists that I ride. He says it's not good for a
woman to run," she said. "But I do. I love to run. There!"

As she spoke she had thrown her outer coat on the sledge, and
stood before him, straight and slim. Her hair was in a long braid.

"Now, are you ready?" she challenged.

"Good Lord, have mercy on me!" gasped Philip. "You look as if you
might fly, Josephine!"

Her signal to the dogs was so low he scarcely heard it, and they
sped along the white and narrow trail into which Josephine had
directed them. Philip fell in behind her. It had always roused a
certain sense of humour in him to see a woman run. But in
Josephine he saw now the swiftness and lithesome grace of a fawn.
Her head was thrown back, her mittened hands were drawn up to her
breast as the forest man runs, and her shining braid danced and
rippled in the early sun with each quick step she took.

Ahead of her the gray and yellow backs of the dogs rose and fell
with a rhythmic movement that was almost music. Their ears aslant,
their crests bristling, their bushy tails curling like plumes over
their hips, they responded with almost automatic precision to the
low words that fell from the lips of the girl behind them.

With each minute that passed Philip wondered how much longer
Josephine could keep up the pace. They had run fully a mile and
his own breath was growing shorter when the toe of his moccasined
foot caught under a bit of brushwood and he plunged head foremost
into the snow. When he had brushed the snow out of his eyes and
ears Josephine was standing over him, laughing. The dogs were
squatted on their haunches, looking back.

"My poor Philip!" she laughed, offering him an assisting hand. "We
almost lost you, didn't we? It was Captain who missed you first,
and he almost toppled me over the sled!"

Her face was radiant. Lips, eyes, and cheeks were glowing. Her
breast rose and fell quickly.

"It was your fault!" he accused her. "I couldn't keep my eyes off
you, and never thought of my feet. I shall have my revenge--here!"

He drew her into his arms, protesting. Not until he had kissed her
parted, half-smiling lips did he release her.

"I'm going to ride now," she declared. "I'm not going to run the
danger of being accused again."

He wrapped her again in the furs on the toboggan. It was eight
miles to Jac Breuil's, and they reached his cabin in two hours.
Breuil was not much more than a boy, scarcely older than the dark-
eyed little French girl who was his wife, and their eyes were big
with terror. With a thrill of wonder and pleasure Philip observed
the swift change in them as Josephine sprang from the toboggan.
Breuil was almost sobbing as he whispered to Philip:

"Oh, ze sweet Ange, M'sieur! She cam jus' in time."

Josephine was bending over little Marie's cot when they followed
her and the girl mother into the cabin. In a moment she looked up
with a glad smile.

"It is the same sickness, Marie," she said to the mother. "I have
medicine here that will cure it. The fever isn't as bad as I
thought it would be."

Noon saw a big change in the cabin. Little Marie's temperature was
falling rapidly. Breuil and his wife were happy. After dinner
Josephine explained again how they were to give the medicine she
was leaving, and at two o'clock they left on their return journey
to Adare House. The sun had disappeared hours before. Gray banks
of cloud filled the sky, and it had grown much colder.

"We will reach home only a little before dark," said Philip. "You
had better ride, Josephine."

He was eager to reach Adare House. By this time he felt that Jean
should have returned, and he was confident that there were others
of the forest people besides Pierre, Renault, and the Indian in
the forest near the pit. For an hour he kept up a swift pace.
Later they came to a dense cover of black spruce two miles from
Adare House. They had traversed a part of this when the dogs
stopped. Directly ahead of them had fallen a dead cedar, barring
the trail. Philip went to the toboggan for the trail axe.

"I haven't noticed any wind, have you?" he asked. "Not enough to
topple over a cedar."

He went to the tree and began cutting. Scarcely had his axe fallen
half a dozen times when a scream of terror turned him about like a
flash. He had only time to see that Josephine had left the sledge,
and was struggling in the arms of a man. In that same instant two
others had leaped upon him. He had not time to strike, to lift his
axe. He went down, a pair of hands gripping at his throat. He saw
a face over him, and he knew now that it was the face of the man
he had seen in the firelight, the face of Lang, the Free Trader.
Every atom of strength in him rose in a superhuman effort to throw
off his assailants. Then came the blow. He saw the club over him,
a short, thick club, in the hand of Thoreau himself. After that
followed darkness and oblivion, punctuated by the CRACK, CRACK,
CRACK of a revolver and the howling of dogs--sounds that grew
fainter and fainter until they died away altogether, and he sank
into the stillness of night.

It was almost dark when consciousness stirred Philip again. With
an effort he pulled himself to his knees, and stared about him.
Josephine was gone, the dogs were gone. He staggered to his feet,
a moaning cry on his lips. He saw the sledge. Still in the traces
lay the bodies of two of the dogs, and he knew what the pistol
shots had meant. The others had been cut loose; straight out into
the forest led the trails of several men; and the meaning of it
all, the reality of what had happened, surged upon him in all its
horror. Lang and his cutthroats had carried off Josephine. He knew
by the thickening darkness that they had time to get a good start
on their way to Thoreau's.

One thought filled his dizzy brain now. He must reach Jean and the
camp near the pit. He staggered as he turned his face homeward. At
times the trail seemed to reach up and strike him in the face.
There was a blinding pain back of his eyes. A dozen times in the
first mile he fell, and each time it was harder for him to regain
his feet. The darkness of night grew heavier about him, and now
and then he found himself crawling on his hands and knees. It was
two hours before his dazed senses caught the glow of a fire ahead
of him. Even then it seemed an age before he reached it. And when
at last he staggered into the circle of light he saw half a dozen
startled faces, and he heard the strange cry of Jean Jacques
Croisset as he sprang up and caught him in his arms. Philip's
strength was gone, but he still had time to tell Jean what had
happened before he crumpled down into the snow.

And then he heard a voice, Jean's voice, crying fierce commands to
the men about the fire; he heard excited replies, the hurry of
feet, the barking of dogs. Something warm and comforting touched
his lips. He struggled to bring himself back into life. He seemed
to have been fighting hours before he opened his eyes. He pulled
himself up, stared into the dark, livid face of Jean, the half-
breed.

"The hour--has come--" he murmured.

"Yes, the hour has come, M'sieur!" cried Jean. "The swiftest teams
and the swiftest runners in this part of the Northland are on the
trail, and by morning the forest people will be roused from here
to the Waterfound, from the Cree camp on Lobstick to the Gray Loon
waterway! Drink this, M'sieur. There is no time to lose. For it is
Jean Jacques Croisset who tells you that not a wolf will howl this
night that does not call forth the signal to those who love our
Josephine! Drink!"





CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE


Jean's thrilling words burned into Philip's consciousness like
fire. They roused him from his stupor, and he began to take in
deep breaths of the chill night air, and to see more clearly. The
camp was empty now. The men were gone. Only Jean was with him, his
face darkly flushed and his eyes burning. Philip rose slowly to
his feet. There was no longer the sickening dizziness in his head,
He inhaled still deeper breaths, while Jean stood a step back and
watched. Far off in the forest he heard the faint barking of dogs.

"They are running like the wind!" breathed Jean. "Those are
Renault's dogs. They are two miles away!"

He took Philip by the arm.

"I have made a comfortable bed for you in Pierre's tepee, M'sieur.
You must lie down, and I will get your supper. You will need all
of your strength soon."

"But I must know what is happening," protested Philip. "My God, I
cannot lie down like a tired dog--with Josephine out there with
Lang! I am ready now, Jean. I am not hungry. And the pain is gone.
See--I am as steady as you!" he cried excitedly, gripping Jean's
hand. "God in Heaven, who knows what may be happening out there!"

"Josephine is safe for a time, M'sieur," assured Jean. "Listen to
me, Netootam! I feared this. That is why I warned you. Lang is
taking her to Thoreau's. He believes that we will not dare to
pursue, and that Josephine will send back word she is there of her
own pleasure. Why? Because he has sworn to give Le M'sieur the
confession if we make him trouble. Mon Dieu, he thinks we will not
dare! and even now, Netootam, six of the fastest teams and
swiftest runners within a hundred miles are gone to spread the
word among the forest people that L'Ange, our Josephine, has been
carried off by Thoreau and his beasts! Before dawn they will begin
to gather where the forks meet, twelve miles off there toward the
Devil's Nest, and to-morrow--"

Jean crossed himself.

"Our Lady forgive us, if it is a sin to take the lives of twenty
such men," he said softly. "Not one will live to tell the story.
And not a log of Thoreau House will stand to hold the secret which
will die forever with to-morrow's end."

Philip came near to Jean now. He placed his two hands on the half-
breed's shoulders, and for a moment looked at him without
speaking. His face was strangely white.

"I understand--everything, Jean," he whispered huskily, and his
lips seemed parched. "To-morrow, we will destroy all evidence, and
kill. That is the one way. And that secret which you dread, which
Josephine has told me I could not guess in a thousand years, will
be buried forever. But Jean--I HAVE GUESSED IT. I KNOW! It has
come to me at last, and--my God!--I understand!"

Slowly, with a look of horror in his eyes, Jean drew back from
him. Philip, with bowed head, saw nothing of the struggle in the
half-breed's face. When Jean spoke it was in a strange voice and
low.

"M'sieur!"

Philip looked up. In the fire-glow Jean was reaching out his hand
to him. In the faces of the two men was a new light, the birth of
a new brotherhood. Their hands clasped. Silently they gazed into
each other's eyes, while over them the beginning of storm moaned
in the treetops and the clouds raced in snow-gray armies under the
moon.

"Breathe no word of what may have come to you to-night," spoke
Jean then. "You will swear that?"

"Yes."

"And to-morrow we fight! You see now--you understand what that
fight means, M'sieur?"

"Yes. It means that Josephine--"

"Tsh! Even I must not hear what is on your lips, M'sieur! I cannot
believe that you have guessed true. I do not want to know. I dare
not. And now, M'sieur, will you lie down? I will go to Le M'sieur
and tell him I have received word that you and Josephine are to
stay at Breuil's overnight. He must not know what has happened. He
must not be at the big fight to-morrow. When it is all over we
will tell him that we did not want to terrify him and Miriam over
Josephine. If he should be at the fight, and came hand to hand
with Lang or Thoreau--"

"He must not go!" exclaimed Philip. "Hurry to him, Jean. I will
boil some coffee while you are gone. Bring another rifle. They
robbed me of mine, and the pistol."

Jean prepared to leave.

"I will return soon," he said. "We should start for the Forks
within two hours, M'sieur. In that time you must rest."

He slipped away into the gloom in the direction of the pit. For
several minutes Philip stood near the fire staring into the
flames. Then he suddenly awoke into life. The thought that had
come to him this night had changed his world for him. And he
wondered now if he was right. Jean had said: "I cannot believe
that you have guessed true," and yet in the half-breed's face, in
his horror-filled eyes, in the tense gathering of his body was
revealed the fear that he HAD! But if he had made a mistake! If he
had guessed wrong! The hot blood surged in his face. If he had
guessed wrong--his thought would be a crime. He had made up his
mind to drive the guess out of his head, and he went into the
tepee to find food and coffee. When Jean returned, an hour later,
supper was waiting in the heat of the fire. The half-breed had
brought Philip's rifle along with his own.

"What did he say?" asked Philip, as they sat down to eat. "He had
no suspicions?"

"None, M'sieur," replied Jean, a strange smile on his lips. "He
was with Miriam. When I entered they were romping like two
children in the music-room. Her hair was down. She was pulling
his beard, and they were laughing so that at first they did not
hear me when I spoke to them. Laughing, M'sieur!"

His eyes met Philip's.

"Has Josephine told you what the Indians call them?" he asked
softly.

"No."

"In every tepee in these forests they speak of them as Kah
Sakehewawin, 'the lovers.' Ah, M'sieur, there is one picture in my
brain which I shall never forget. I first came to Adare House on a
cold, bleak night, dying of hunger, and first of all I looked
through a lighted window. In a great chair before the fire sat Le
M'sieur, so that I could see his face and what was gathered up
close in his arms. At first I thought it was a sleeping child he
was holding. And then I saw the long hair streaming to the floor,
and in that moment La Fleurette--beautiful as the angels I had
dreamed of--raised her face and saw me at the window. And during
all the years that have passed since then it has been like that,
M'sieur. They have been lovers. They will be until they die."

Philip was silent. He knew that Jean was looking at him. He felt
that he was reading the thoughts in his heart. A little later he
drew out his watch and looked at it.

"What time is it, M'sieur?"

"Nine o'clock," replied Philip. "Why wait another hour, Jean? I am
ready."

"Then we will go," replied Jean, springing to his feet. "Throw
these things into the tepee, M'sieur, while I put the dogs in the
traces."

They moved quickly now. Over them the gray heavens seemed to drop
lower. Through the forest swept a far monotone, like the breaking
of surf on a distant shore. With the wind came a thin snow, and
the darkness gathered so that beyond the rim of fire-light there
was a black chaos in which the form of all things was lost. It was
not a night for talk. It was filled with the whisperings of storm,
and to Philip those whisperings were an oppressive presage of the
tragedy that lay that night ahead of them. The dogs were
harnessed, five that Jean had chosen from the pack; and straight
out into the pit of gloom the half-breed led them. In that
darkness Philip could see nothing. But not once did Jean falter,
and the dogs followed him, occasionally whining at the strangeness
and unrest of the night; and close behind them came Philip. For a
long time there was no sound but the tread of their feet, the
scraping of the toboggan, the patter of the dogs, and the wind
that bit down from out of the thick sky into the spruce tops. They
had travelled an hour when they came to a place where the
smothering weight of the darkness seemed to rise from about them.
It was the edge of a great open, a bit of the Barren that reached
down like a solitary finger from the North: treeless, shrubless,
the playground of the foxes and the storm winds. Here Jean fell
back beside Philip for a moment.

"You are not tiring, M'sieur?"

"I am getting stronger every mile," declared Philip. "I feel no
effects of the blow now, Jean. How far did you say it was to the
place where our people are to meet?"

"Eight miles. We have come four. In this darkness we could make it
faster without the dogs, but they are carrying a hundred pounds of
tepee, guns, and food."

He urged the dogs on in the open space. Another hour and they had
come again to the edge of forest. Here they rested.

"There will be some there ahead of us," said Jean. "Renault and
the other runners will have had more than four hours. They will
have visited a dozen cabins on the trap-lines. Pierre reached old
Kaskisoon and his Swamp Crees in two hours. They love Josephine
next to their Manitou. The Indians will be there to a man!"

Philip did not reply. But his heart beat like a drum at the
sureness and triumph that thrilled in the half-breed's voice. As
they went on, he lost account of time in the flashing pictures
that came to him of the other actors in this night's drama; of
those half-dozen Paul Reveres of the wilderness speeding like
shadows through the mystery of the night, of the thin-waisted,
brown-faced men who were spreading the fires of vengeance from
cabin to cabin and from tepee to tepee. Through his lips there
came a sobbing breath of exultation, of joy. He did not tire. At
times he wanted to run on ahead of Jean and the dogs. Yet he saw
that no such desire seized upon Jean. Steadily--with a precision
that was almost uncanny--the half-breed led the way. He did not
hurry, he did not hesitate. He was like a strange spirit of the
night itself, a voiceless and noiseless shadow ahead, an automaton
of flesh and blood that had become more than human to Philip. In
this man's guidance he lost his fear for Josephine.

At last they came to the foot of a rock ridge. Up this the dogs
toiled, with Jean pulling at the lead-trace. They came to the
top. There they stopped. And standing like a hewn statue, his
voice breaking in a panting cry, Jean Jacques Croisett pointed
down into the plain below.

Half a mile away a light stood out like a glowing star in the
darkness. It was a campfire.

"It is a fire at the Forks," spoke Jean above the wind. "Mon Dieu,
M'sieur--is it not something to have friends like that!"

He led the way a short distance along the face of the ridge, and
then they plunged down the valley of deeper gloom. The forest was
thick and low, and Philip guessed that they were passing through a
swamp. When they came out of it the fire was almost in their
faces. The howling of dogs greeted them. As they dashed into the
light half a dozen men had risen and were facing them, their
rifles in the crooks of their arms. From out of the six there
strode a tall, thin, smooth-shaven man toward them, and from
Jean's lips there fell words which he tried to smother.

"Mother of Heaven, it is Father George, the Missioner from
Baldneck!" he gasped.

In another moment the Missioner was wringing the half-breed's
mittened hand. He was a man of sixty. His face was of cadaverous
thinness, and there was a feverish glow in his eyes.

"Jean Croisset!" he cried. "I was at Ladue's when Pierre came with
the word. Is it true? Has the purest soul in all this world been
stolen by those Godless men at Thoreau's? I cannot believe it! But
if it is so, I have come to fight!"

"It is true, Father," replied Jean. "They have stolen her as the
wolves of white men stole Red Fawn from her father's tepee three
years ago. And to-morrow--"

"The vengeance of the Lord will descend upon them," interrupted
the Missioner. "And this, Jean, your friend?"

"Is M'sieur Philip Darcambal, the husband of Josephine," said
Jean.

As the Missioner gripped Philip's hand his thin fingers had in
them the strength of steel.

"Ladue told me that she had found her man," he said. "May God
bless you, my son! It was I, Father George, who baptized her years
and years ago. For me she made Adare House a home from the time
she was old enough to put her tiny arms about my neck and lisp my
name. I was on my way to see you when night overtook me at
Ladue's. I am not a fighting man, my son. God does not love their
kind. But it was Christ who flung the money-changers from the
temple--and so I have come to fight."

The others were close about them now, and Jean was telling of the
ambush in the forest. Purple veins grew in the Missioner's
forehead as he listened. There were no questions on the lips of
the others. With dark, tense faces and eyes that burned with
slumbering fires they heard Jean. There were the grim and silent
Foutelles, father and son, from the Caribou Swamp. Tall and
ghostlike in the firelight, more like spectre than man, was
Janesse, a white beard falling almost to his waist, a thick marten
skin cap shrouding his head, and armed with a long barrelled
smooth-bore that shot powder and ball. From the fox grounds out on
the Barren had come "Mad" Joe Horn behind eight huge malemutes
that pulled with the strength of oxen. And with the Missioner had
come Ladue, the Frenchman, who could send a bullet through the
head of a running fox at two hundred yards four times out of five.
Kaskisoon and his Crees had not arrived, and Philip knew that Jean
was disappointed.

"I heard three days ago of a big caribou herd to the west," said
Janesse in answer to the half-breed's inquiry. "It may be they
have gone for meat."

They drew close about the fire, and the Foutelles dragged in a
fresh birch log for the flames. "Mad" Joe Horn, with hair and
beard as red as copper, hummed the Storm Song under his breath.
Janesse stood with his back to the heat, facing darkness and the
west. He raised a hand, and all listened. For sixty years his
world had been bounded by the four walls of the forests. It was
said that he could hear the padded footfall of the lynx--and so
all listened while the hand was raised, though they heard nothing
but the wailing of the wind, the crackling of the fire, and the
unrest of the dogs in the timber behind them. For many seconds
Janesse did not lower his hand; and then, still unheard by the
others, there came slowly out of the gloom a file of dusky-faced,
silent, shadowy forms. They were within the circle of light before
Jean or his companions had moved, and at their head was Kaskisoon,
the Cree: tall, slender as a spruce sapling, and with eyes that
went searchingly from face to face with the uneasy glitter of an
ermine's. They fell upon Jean, and with a satisfied "Ugh!" and a
hunch of his shoulders he turned to his followers. There were
seven. Six of them carried rifles. In the hands of the seventh was
a shotgun.

After this, one by one, and two by two, there were added others to
the circle of waiting men about the fire. By two o'clock there
were twenty. They came faster after that. With Bernard, from the
south, came Renault, who had gone to the end of his run. From the
east, west, and south they continued to come--but from out of the
northwest there led no trail. Off there was Thoreau's place. Pack
after pack was added to the dogs in the timber. Their voices rose
above and drowned all other sound. Teams strained at their leashes
to get at the throats of rival teams, and from the black shelter
in which they were fastened came a continuous snarling and
gnashing of fangs. Over the coals of a smaller fire simmered two
huge pots of coffee from which each arrival helped himself; and on
long spits over the larger fire were dripping chunks of moose and
caribou meat from which they cut off their own helpings.

In the early dawn there were forty who gathered about Father
George to listen to the final words he had to say. He raised his
hands. Then he bowed his head, and there was a strange silence.
Words of prayer fell solemnly from his lips. Partly it was in
Cree, partly in French, and when he had finished a deep breath ran
through the ranks of those who listened to him. Then he told them,
beginning with Cree, in the three languages of the wilderness,
that they were to be led that day by Jean Jacques Croisset and
Philip Darcambal, the husband of Josephine. Two of the Indians
were to remain behind to care for the camp and dogs. Beyond that
they needed no instructions.

They were ready, and Jean was about to give the word to start when
there was an interruption. Out of the forest and into their midst
came a figure--the form of a man who rose above them like a giant,
and whose voice as it bellowed Jean's name had in it the wrath of
thunder.

It was the master of Adare!





CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR


For a moment John Adare stood like an avenging demon in the midst
of the startled faces of the forest men. His shaggy hair blew out
from under his gray lynx cap. His eyes were red and glaring with
the lights of the hunting wolf. His deep chest rose and fell in
panting breaths. Then he saw Jean and Philip, side by side. Toward
them he came, as if to crush them, and Philip sprang toward him,
so that he was ahead of Jean. Adare stopped. The wind rattled in
his throat.

"And you came WITHOUT ME--"

His voice was a rumble, deep, tense, like the muttering vibration
before an explosion. Philip's hands gripped his arms, and those
arms were as hard as oak. In one hand Adare held a gun. His other
fist was knotted, heavy.

"Yes, Mon Pere, we came without you," said Philip. "It is
terrible. We did not want you two to suffer. We did not want you
to know until it was all over, and Josephine was back in your
arms. We thought it drive her mother mad. And you, Mon Pere, we
wanted to save you!"

Adare's face relaxed. His arm dropped. His red eyes shifted to the
faces about him, and he said, as he looked:

"It was Breuil. He said you and Josephine were not at his cabin.
He came to tell Mignonne the child was so much better. I cornered
Metoosin, and he told me. I have been coming fast, running."

He drew in a deep breath. Then suddenly he became like a tiger. He
sprang among the men, and threw up his great arms. His voice rose
more than human, fierce and savage, above the growing tumult of
the dogs and the wailing of the wind.

"Ye are with me, men?"

A rumble of voice answered him.

"Then come!"

He had seen that they were ready, and he strode on ahead of them.
He was leader now, and Philip saw Father George close at his side,
clutching his arm, talking. In Jean's face there was a great fear.
He spoke low to Philip.

"If he meets Lang, if he fights face to face with Thoreau, or if
they call upon us to parley, all is lost! M'sieur, for the love of
God, hold your fire for those two! We must kill them. If a parley
is granted, they will come to us. We will kill them--even as they
come toward us with a white flag, if we must!"

"No truce will be granted!" cried Philip.

As if John Adare himself had heard his words, he stopped and faced
those behind him. They were in the shelter of the forest. In the
gray gloom of dawn they were only a sea of shifting shadows.

"Men, there is to be no mercy this day!" he said, and his voice
rumbled like an echo through the aisles of the forest. "We are not
on the trail of men, but of beasts and murderers. The Law that is
three hundred miles away has let them live in our midst. It has
let them kill. It said nothing when they stole Red Fawn from her
father's tepee and ravaged her to death. It has said: 'Give us
proof that Thoreau killed Reville, and that his wife did not die a
natural death.' We are our own law. In these forests we are
masters. And yet with this brothel at our doors we are not safe,
our wives and daughters are within the reach of monsters. To-day
it is my daughter--her husband's wife. To-morrow it may be yours.
There can be no mercy. We must kill--kill and burn! Am I right,
men?"

This time it was not a murmur but a low thunder of voice that
answered. Philip and Jean forged ahead to his side. Shoulder to
shoulder they led the way.

From the camp at the Forks it was eighteen miles to the Devil's
Nest, where hung on the edge of a chasm the log buildings that
sheltered Lang and his crew. To these men of the trails those
eighteen miles meant nothing. White-bearded Janesse's trapline was
sixty miles long, and he covered it in two days, stripping his
pelts as he went. Renault had run sixty miles with his dogs
between daybreak and dusk, and "Mad" Joe Horn had come down one
hundred and eighty miles from the North in five days. These were
not records. They were the average. Those who followed the master
of Adare were thin-legged, small-footed, narrow-waisted--but
their sinews were like rawhide, and their lungs filled chests that
were deep and wide.

With the break of day the wind fell, the sky cleared, and it grew
colder. In silence John Adare, Jean, and Philip broke the trail.
In silence followed close behind them the Missioner with his
smooth-bore. In silence followed the French and half-breeds and
Crees. Now and then came the sharp clink of steel as rifle barrel
struck rifle barrel. Voices were low, monosyllabic; breaths were
deep, the throbbing of hearts like that of engines. Here were
friends who were meeting for the first time in months, yet they
spoke no word of each other, of the fortunes of the "line," of
wives or children. There was but one thought in their brains,
pumping the blood through their veins, setting their dark faces in
lines of iron, filling their eyes with the feverish fires of
excitement. Yet this excitement, the tremendous passion that was
working in them, found no vent in wild outcry.

It was like the deadly undertow of the maelstroms in the spring
floods. It was there, unseen--silent as death. And this thought,
blinding them to all else, insensating them to all emotions but
that of vengeance, was thought of Josephine.

John Adare himself seemed possessed of a strange madness. He said
no word to Jean or Philip. Hour after hour he strode ahead, until
it seemed that tendons must snap and legs give way under the
strain. Not once did he stop for rest until, hours later, they
reached the summit of a ridge, and he pointed far off into the
plain below. They could see the smoke rising up from the Devil's
Nest. A breath like a great sigh swept through the band.

And now, silently, there slipped away behind a rock Kaskisoon and
his Indians. From under his blanket-coat the chief brought forth
the thing that had bulged there, a tom-tom. Philip and the waiting
men heard then the low Te-dum--Te-dum--Te-dum of it, as Kaskisoon
turned his face first to the east and then the west, north and
then south, calling upon Iskootawapoo to come from out of the
valley of Silent Men and lead them to triumph. And the waiting men
were silent--deadly silent--as they listened. For they knew that
the low Te-dum was the call to death. Their hands gripped harder
at the barrels of their guns, and when Kaskisoon and his braves
came from behind the rock they faced the smoke above the Devil's
Nest, wiped their eyes to see more clearly, and followed John
Adare down into the plain.

And to other ears than their own the medicine-drum had carried the
Song of Death. Down in the thick spruce of the plain a man on the
trail of a caribou had heard. He looked up, and on the cap of the
ridge he saw. He was old in the ways and the unwritten laws of the
North, and like a deer he turned and sped back unseen in the
direction of the Devil's Nest. And as the avengers came down into
the plain Kaskisoon chanted in a low monotone:

    Our fathers--come!
    Come from out of the valley.
    Guide us--for to-day we fight,
    And the winds whisper of death!

And those who heard did not laugh. Father George crossed himself,
and muttered something that might have been a prayer. For in this
hour Kaskisoon's God was very near.





CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE


Many years before, Thoreau had named his aerie stronghold the
Eagle's Nest. The brown-faced people of the trails had changed it
to Devil's Nest. It was not built like the posts, on level ground
and easy of access. Its northern wall rose sheer up with the wall
of Eagle Chasm, with a torrent two hundred feet below that rumbled
and roared like distant thunder when the spring floods came. John
Adare knew that this chasm worked its purpose. Somewhere in it
were the liquor caches which the police never found when they came
that way on their occasional patrols. On the east and south sides
of the Nest was an open, rough and rocky, filled with jagged
outcrops of boulders and patches of bush; behind it the thick
forest grew up to the very walls.

The forest people were three quarters of a mile from this open
when they came upon the trail of the lone caribou hunter. Where he
had stood and looked up at them the snow was beaten down; from
that spot his back-trail began first in a cautious, crouching
retreat that changed swiftly into the long running steps of a man
in haste. Like a dog, Kaskisoon hovered over the warm trail. His
eyes glittered, and he held out his hands, palms downward, and
looked at Adare.

"The snow still crumbles in the footmarks," he said in Cree. "They
are expecting us."

Adare turned to the men behind him.

"You who have brought axes cut logs with which to batter in the
doors," he said. "We will not ask them to surrender. We must make
them fight, so that we may have an excuse to kill them. Two logs
for eight men each. And you others fill your pockets with birch
bark and spruce pitch-knots. Let no man touch fire to a log until
we have Josephine. Then, burn! And you, Kaskisoon, go ahead and
watch what is happening!"

He was calmer now. As the men turned to obey his commands he laid
a hand on Philip's shoulder.

"I told you this was coming, Boy," he said huskily. "But I didn't
think it meant HER. My God, if they have harmed her--"

His breath seemed choking him.

"They dare not!" breathed Philip.

John Adare looked into the white fear of the other's face. There
was no hiding of it: the same terrible dread that was in his own.

"If they should, we will kill them by inches, Philip!" he
whispered. "We will cut them into bits that the moose-birds can
carry away. Great God, they shall roast over fires!" He hurried
toward the men who were already chopping at spruce timber. Philip
looked about for Jean. He had disappeared. A hundred yards ahead
of them he had caught up with Kaskisoon, and side by side the
Indian and the half-breed were speeding now over the man-trail.
Perhaps in the hearts of these two, of all those gathered in this
hour of vengeance, there ran deepest the thirst for blood. With
Kaskisoon it was the dormant instinct of centuries of forebears,
roused now into fierce desire. With Jean it was necessity.

In the face of John Adare's words that there was to be no quarter,
Jean still feared the possibility of a parley, a few minutes of
truce, the meaning of which sent a shiver to the depths of his
soul. He said nothing to the Cree. And Kaskisoon's lips were as
silent as the great flakes of snow that began to fall about them
now in a mantle so thick that it covered their shoulders in the
space of two hundred yards. When the timber thinned out Kaskisoon
picked his way with the caution of a lynx. At the edge of the
clearing they crouched side by side behind a low windfall, and
peered over the top.

Three hundred yards away was the Nest. The man whose trail they
had followed had disappeared. And then, suddenly, the door opened,
and there poured out a crowd of excited men. The lone hunter was
ahead of them, talking and pointing toward the forest. Jean
counted--eight, ten, eleven--and his eyes searched for Lang and
Thoreau. He cursed the thick snow now. Through it he could not
make them out. He had drawn back the hammer of his rifle.

At the click of it Kaskisoon moved. He looked at the half-breed.
His breath came in a low monosyllable of understanding. Over the
top of the windfall he poked the barrel of his gun. Then he looked
again at Jean. And Jean turned. Their eyes met. They were eyes red
and narrowed by the beat of storm. Jean Croisset knew what that
silence meant. He might have spoken. But no word moved his lips.
Unseen, his right hand made a cross over his heart. Deep in his
soul he thought a prayer.

Jean looked again at the huddled group about the door. And beside
him there was a terrible silence. He held his breath, his heart
ceased to beat, and then there came the crashing roar of the
Cree's heavy gun, and one of the group staggered out with a shriek
and fell face downward in the snow. Even then Jean's finger
pressed lightly on the trigger of his rifle as he tried to
recognize Lang. Another moment, and half a dozen rifles were
blazing in their direction. It was then that he fired. Once,
twice--six times, as fast as he could pump the empty cartridges
out of his gun and fresh ones into the chamber. With the sixth
came again the thunderous roar of the Cree's single-loader.

"Pa, Kaskisoon!" cried Jean then. The last of Thoreau's men had
darted back into the house. Three of their number they had carried
in their arms. A fourth stumbled and fell across the threshold.
"Pa! We have done. Quick--kistayetak!"

He darted back over their trail, followed by the Cree. There would
be no truce now! It was WAR. He was glad that he had come with
Kaskisoon.

Two hundred yards back in the forest they met Philip and Adare at
the head of their people.

"They were coming to ambush us when we entered the clearing!"
shouted Jean. "We drove them back. Four fell under our bullets.
The place is still full of the devils, M'sieur!"

"It will be impossible to rush the doors," cried Philip, seeing
the gathering madness in John Adare's face. "We must fight with
caution, Mon Pere! We cannot throw away lives. Divide our men. Let
Jean take twelve and you another twelve, and give Kaskisoon his
own people. That will leave me ten to batter in the doors. You can
cover the windows with your fire while we rush across the open
with the one log. There is no need for two."

"Philip is right," added the Missioner in a low voice. "He is
right, John. It would be madness to attempt to rush the place in a
body."

Adare hesitated for a moment. His clenched hands relaxed.

"Yes, he is right," he said. "Divide the men."

Fifteen minutes later the different divisions of the little army
had taken up their positions about the clearing. Philip was in the
centre, with eight of the youngest and strongest of the forest men
waiting for the signal to dash forward with the log. First, on his
right, was Jean and his men, and two hundred yards beyond him the
master of Adare, concealed in a clump of thick spruce, Kaskisoon
and his braves had taken the windfalls on the left.

As yet not a man had revealed himself to Thoreau and his band. But
the dogs had scented them, and they stood watchfully in front of
the long log building, barking and whining.

From where he crouched Philip could see five windows. Through
these would come the enemy's fire. He waited. It was Jean who was
to begin, and draw the first shots. Suddenly the half-breed and
his men broke from cover. They were scattered, darting low among
the boulders and bush, partly protected and yet visible from the
windows.

Philip drew himself head and shoulders over his log as he watched.
He forgot himself in this moment when he was looking upon men
running into the face of death. In another moment came the crash
of rifles muffled behind log walls. He could hear the whine of
bullets, the ZIP, ZIP, ZIP of them back in the spruce and cedar.

Another hundred yards beyond Jean, he saw John Adare break from
his cover like a great lion, his men spreading out like a pack of
wolves. Swiftly Philip turned and looked to the left. Kaskisoon
and his braves were advancing upon the Nest with the elusiveness
of foxes. At first he could not see them. Then, as Adare's voice
boomed over the open, they rose with the suddenness of a flight of
partridges, and ran swift-footed straight in the face of the
windows. Thus far the game of the attackers had worked without
flaw. Thoreau and his men would be forced to divide their fire,

It had taken perhaps three quarters of a minute for the first
forward rush of the three parties, and during this time the fire
from the windows had concentrated upon Jean and his men. Philip
looked toward them again. They were in the open. He caught his
breath, stared--and counted eight! Two were missing.

He turned to his own men, crouching and waiting. Eight were ready
with the log. Two others were to follow close behind, prepared to
take the place of the first who fell. He looked again out into the
open field. There came a long clear cry from the half-breed, a
shout from Adare, a screaming, animal-like response from
Kaskisoon, and at those three signals the forest people fell
behind rocks, bits of shrub, and upon their faces. In that same
breath the crash of rifles in the open drowned the sound of those
beyond the wall of the Nest. From thirty rifles a hail of bullets
swept through the windows. This was Philip's cue. He rose with a
sharp cry, and behind him came the eight with the battering-ram.
It was two hundred yards from their cover to the building. They
passed the last shelter, and struck the open on a trot. Now rose
from the firing men behind rock and bush a wild and savage cheer.
Philip heard John Adare roaring his encouragement. With each shot
of the Crees came a piercing yell.

Yard by yard they ran on, the men panting in their excitement.
Then came the screech of a bullet, and the shout on Philip's lips
froze into silence. At first he thought the bullet had struck. But
it had gone a little high. A second--a third--and the biting dust
of a shattered rock spat into their faces. With a strange thrill
Philip saw that the fire was not coming from the windows. Flashes
of smoke came from low under the roof of the building. Thoreau and
his men were firing through loopholes! John Adare and Jean saw
this, and with loud cries they led their men fairly out into the
open in an effort to draw the fire from Philip and the log-
bearers. Not a shot was turned in their direction.

A leaden hail enveloped Philip and his little band. One of the
log-bearers crumpled down without a moan. Instantly his place was
filled. Twenty yards more and a second staggered out from the
line, clutched a hand to his breast, and sank into the snow. The
last man filled his place. They were only a hundred yards from the
door now, but without a rock or a stump between them and death.
Another of the log-bearers rolled out from the line, and Philip
sprang into the vacancy. A fourth, a fifth--and with a wild cry
of horror John Adare called upon Philip to drop the log.

Nothing but the bullets could stop the little band now. Seventy
yards! Sixty! Only fifty more--and the man ahead of Philip fell
under his feet. The remaining six staggered over him with the log.
And now up from behind them came Jean Jacques Croisset and his
men, firing blindly at the loopholes, and enveloping the men along
the log in those last thirty yards that meant safety from the fire
above. And behind him came John Adare, and from the south
Kaskisoon and his Crees, a yelling, triumphant horde of avengers
now at the very doors of the Devil's Nest!

Philip staggered a step aside, winded, panting, a warm trickle of
blood running over his face. He heard the first thunder of the
battering-ram against the door, the roaring voice of John Adare,
and then a hand like ice smote his heart as he saw Jean huddled up
in the snow. In an instant he was on his knees at the half-breed's
side. Jean was not dead. But in his eyes was a fading light that
struck Philip with terror. A wan smile crept over his lips. With
his head in Philip's arm, he whispered:

"M'sieur, I am afraid I am struck through the lung. I do not know,
but I am afraid." His voice was strangely steady. But in his eyes
was that swiftly fading light! "If should go--you must know," he
went on, and Philip bent low to hear his words above the roar of
voices and the crashing of the battering-ram. "You must know--to
take my place in the fight for Josephine. I think--you have
guessed it. The baby was not Josephine's. IT WAS MIRIAM'S!"

"Yes, yes, Jean!" cried Philip into the fading eyes. "That was
what I guessed!"

"Don't blame her--too much," struggled Jean. "She went down into a
world she didn't know. Lang--trapped her. And Josephine, to save
her, to save the baby, to save her father--did as Munito the White
Star did to save the Cree god. You know. You understand. Lang
followed--to demand Josephine as the price of her mother. M'sieur,
YOU MUST KILL HIM! GO!"

The door had fallen in with a crash, and now over the crime-
darkened portals of the Devil's Nest poured the avengers, with
John Adare at their head.

"Go!" gasped Jean, almost rising to his knees. "You must meet this
Lang before John Adare!"

Philip sprang to his feet. The last of the forest people had
poured through the door. Alone he stood--and stared. But not
through the door! Two hundred yards away a man was flying along
the edge of the forest, and he had come FROM BEHIND THE WALLS OF
THE DEVIL'S NEST! He recognized him. It was Lang, the man he was
to kill!





CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX


In a moment the flying figure of the Free Trader had disappeared.
With a last glance at Jean, who was slowly sinking back into the
snow, Philip dashed in pursuit. Where Lang had buried himself in
the deeper forest the trees grew so thick that Philip, could not
see fifty yards ahead of him. But Lang's trail was distinct--and
alone. He was running swiftly. Philip had noticed that Lang had no
rifle, He dropped his own now, and drew his pistol. Thus
unencumbered he made swifter progress. He had expected to overtake
Lang within four or five hundred yards; but minute followed minute
in the mad race without another view of his enemy. He heard a few
faint shouts back in the direction of the Devil's Nest, the
barking of dogs, and half a dozen shots, the sounds growing
fainter and fainter. And then Lang's trail led him unexpectedly
into one of the foot-beaten aisles of the forest where there were
the tracks of a number of men.

At this point the thick spruce formed a roof over-head that had
shut out the fresh snow, and Philip lost several minutes before he
found the place where Lang had left the trail to bury himself
again in the unblazed forest. Half a mile farther he followed the
Free Trader's trail without catching a glimpse of the man. He was
at least a mile from the Devil's Nest when he heard sounds ahead
of him. Beyond a clump of balsam he heard the voices of men, and
then the whine of a cuffed dog. Cautiously he picked his way
through the thick cover until he crouched close to the edge of a
small open. In an instant it seemed as though his heart had leapt
from his breast into his throat, and was choking him. Within fifty
paces of him were both Lang and Thoreau. But for a moment he
scarcely saw them, or the powerful team of eight huskies,
harnessed and waiting. For on the sledge, a cloth bound about her
mouth, her hands tied behind her, was Josephine!

At sight of her Philip did not pause to plan an attack. The one
thought that leapt into his brain like fire was that Lang and
Thoreau had fooled the forest people--Josephine had not been taken
to the Devil's Nest, and the two were attempting to get away with
her.

A cry burst from his lips as he ran from cover. Instantly the pair
were facing him. Lang was still panting from his run. He held no
weapons. In the crook of Thoreau's arm rested a rifle. Swift as a
flash he raised it to his shoulder, the muzzle levelled at
Philip's breast. Josephine had turned. From her smothered lips
came a choking cry of agony. Philip had now raised his automatic.
It was level with his waistline. From that position he had trained
himself to fire with the deadly precision that is a part of the
training of the men of the Royal Northwest Mounted. Before
Thoreau's forefinger had pressed the trigger of his rifle a stream
of fire shot out from the muzzle of the automatic.

Thoreau did not move. Then a shudder passed through him. His rifle
dropped from his nerveless hands. Without a moan he crumpled down
into the snow. Three of the five bullets that had flashed like
lightning from the black-muzzled Savage had passed completely
through his body. It had all happened in a space so short that
Lang had not stirred. Now he found himself looking into that
little engine of death. With a cry of fear he staggered back.

Philip did not fire. He felt in himself now the tigerish madness
that had been in John Adare. To him Thoreau had been no more than
a wolf, one of the many at Devil's Nest. Lang was different. For
all things this monster was accountable. He had no desire to
shoot. He wanted to reach him with his HANDS--to choke the life
from him slowly, to hear from his own blackening lips the
confession that had come through Jean Croisset.

He knew that Josephine was on her feet now, that she was
struggling to free her hands, but it was only in a swift glance
that he saw this. In the same breath he had dropped his pistol and
was at Lang's throat. They went down together. Even Thoreau, a
giant in size and strength, would not have been a match for him
now. Every animal passion in him was roused to its worst.

Lang's jaws shot apart, his eyes protruded, his tongue came out--
the breath rattled in his throat. Then for a moment Philip's
death-grip relaxed. He bent down until his lips were close to the
death-filled face of his victim.

"The truth, Lang, or I'll kill you!" he whispered hoarsely.

And then he asked the question--and as he asked Josephine freed
her hands. She tore the cloth from her mouth, but before she could
rush forward, through Lang's mottling lips had come the choking
words:

"It was Miriam's."

Again Philip's fingers sank in their death-grip in Lang's throat.
Twenty seconds more and he would have fulfilled his pact with
Jean. A scream from Josephine turned his eyes for an instant from
his victim. Out of that same cover of balsam three men were
rushing upon him. A glance told him they were not of the forest
people. He had time to gain his feet before they were upon him.

It was a fight for life now, and his one hope lay in the fact that
his assailants, escaping from the Nest, did not want to betray
themselves by using firearms. The first man at him he struck a
terrific blow that sent him reeling. A second caught his arm
before he could recover himself--and then it was the hopeless
struggle of one against three.

Josephine stood free. She had seen Philip drop his pistol and she
sprang to the spot where it had fallen. It was buried under the
snow. The four men were on the ground now, Philip under. She heard
a gasping sound--and then, far away, something else: a sound that
thrilled her, that sent her voice back through the forest in cry
after cry.

What she heard was the wailing cry of the dog pack, her pack,
following over the trail which her abductors had made in their
flight from Adare House! A few steps away she saw a heavy stick in
the snow. Fiercely she tore it loose, ran back to the men, and
began striking blindly at those who were choking the life from
Philip.

Lang had risen to his knees, clutching his throat, and now
staggered toward her. She struck at him, and he caught the club.
The dogs heard her cries now. Half a mile back in the forest they
were coming in a gray, fierce horde. Only Josephine knew, as she
struggled with Lang. Under his assailants, Philip's strength was
leaving him. Iron fingers gripped at his throat. A flood of fire
seemed bursting his head. Josephine's cries were drifting farther
and farther away, and his face was as Lang's face had been a few
moments before.

Nearer and nearer swept the pack, covering that last half mile
with the speed of the wind, the huge yellow form of Hero leading
the others by a body's length. They made no sound now. When they
shot out of the forest into the little opening they had come so
silently that even Lang did not see them. In another moment they
were upon him. Josephine staggered back, her eyes big and wild
with horror. She saw him go down, and then his shrieks rang out
like a madman's. The others were on their feet, and not until she
saw Philip lying still and white on the snow did the power of
speech return to her lips. She sprang toward the dogs.

"KILL! KILL! KILL!" she cried. "Hero--KILL! NIPA HAO, boys!
Beaver--Wolf--Hero--Captain--KILL--KILL--KILL!"

As her own voice rang out, Lang's screams ceased, and then she saw
Philip dragging himself to his knees. At her calls there came a
sudden surge in the pack, and those who could not get at Lang
leaped upon the remaining three. With a cry Josephine fell upon
her knees beside Philip, clasping his head in her arms, holding
him in the protection of her own breast as they looked upon the
terrible scene.

For a moment more she looked, and then she dropped her face on
Philip's shoulder with a ghastly cry. Still partly dazed, Philip
stared. Screams such as he had never heard before came from the
lips of the dying men. From screams they turned to moaning cries,
and then to a horrible silence broken only by the snarling grind
of the maddened dogs.

Strength returned to Philip quickly. He felt Josephine limp and
lifeless in his arms, and with an effort he staggered to his feet,
half carrying her. A few yards away was a small tepee in which
Lang had kept her. He partly carried, partly dragged her to this,
and then he returned to the dogs.

Vainly he called upon them to leave their victims. He was seeking
for a club when through the balsam thicket burst John Adare and
Father George at the head of a dozen men. In response to Adare's
roaring voice the pack slunk off. The beaten snow was crimson.
Even Adare, as he faced Philip, could find no words in his horror.
Philip pointed to the tepee.

"Josephine--is there--safe," he gasped. As Adare rushed into the
tepee Philip swayed up to Father George.

"I am dizzy--faint," he said. "Help me--"

He went to Lang and dropped upon his knees beside him. The man was
unrecognizable. His head was almost gone. Philip thrust a hand
inside his fang-torn coat--and pulled out a long envelope. It was
addressed to the master of Adare. He staggered to his feet, and
went to Thoreau. In his pocket he found the second envelope.
Father George was close beside him as he thrust the two in his own
pocket. He turned to the forest men, who stood like figures turned
to stone, gazing upon the scene of the tragedy.

"Carry them--out there," said Philip, pointing into the forest.
"And then--cover the blood with fresh snow."

He still clung to Father George's arm as he staggered toward a
near birch.

"I feel weak--dizzy," he repeated again. "Help me--pull off some
bark."

A strange, inquiring look filled the Missioner's face as he tore
down a handful of bark, and at Philip's request lighted a match.
In an instant the bark was a mass of flame. Into the fire he put
the letters.

"It is best--to burn their letters," he said. Beyond this he gave
no explanation. And Father George asked no questions.

They followed Adare into the tepee. Josephine was sobbing in her
father's arms. John Adare's face was that of a man who had risen
out of black despair into day.

"Thank God she has not been harmed," he said.

Philip knelt beside them, and John Adare gave Josephine into his
arms. He held her close to his breast, whispering only her name--
and her arms crept up about him. Adare rose and stood beside
Father George.

"I will go back and attend to the wounded, Philip," he said. "Jean
is one of those hurt. It isn't fatal."

He went out. Father George was about to follow when Philip
motioned him back.

"Will you wait outside for a few minutes?" he asked in a low
voice. "We shall need you--alone--Josephine and I."

And now when they were gone, he raised Josephine's face, and said:

"They are all gone, Josephine--Lang, Thoreau, AND THE LETTERS.
Lang and Thoreau are dead, and I have burned the letters. Jean was
shot. He thought he was dying, and he told me the truth that I
might better protect you. Sweetheart, there is nothing more for me
to know. The fight is done. And Father George is waiting--out
there--to make us man and wife. No one will ever know but
ourselves--and Jean. I will tell Father George that it has been
your desire to have a SECOND marriage ceremony performed by him;
that we want our marriage to be consecrated by a minister of the
forests. Are you ready, dear? Shall I call him in?"

For a full minute she gazed steadily into his eyes, and Philip did
not break the wonderful silence. And then, with a deep sigh, her
head drooped to his breast. After a moment he heard her whisper:

"You may call him in, Philip. I guess--I've got to be--your wife."

And as the logs of the Devil's Nest sent up a pall of smoke that
rose to the skies, Metoosin crouched shiveringly far back in the
gloom of the pit, wondering if the dogs he had loosed had come to
the end of the trail.

THE END
The Project Gutenberg Etext of God's Country--And the Woman
by James Oliver Curwood
******This file should be named gcatw10.txt or gcatw10.zip******

Corrected EDITIONS of our etexts get a new NUMBER, gcatw11.txt
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, gcatw10a.txt

Robert Rowe, Charles Franks and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.

***

More information about this book is at the top of this file.


We are now trying to release all our eBooks one year in advance
of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.
Please be encouraged to tell us about any error or corrections,
even years after the official publication date.

Please note neither this listing nor its contents are final til
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg eBooks is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.

Most people start at our Web sites at:
http://gutenberg.net or
http://promo.net/pg

These Web sites include award-winning information about Project
Gutenberg, including how to donate, how to help produce our new
eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter (free!).


Those of you who want to download any eBook before announcement
can get to them as follows, and just download by date.  This is
also a good way to get them instantly upon announcement, as the
indexes our cataloguers produce obviously take a while after an
announcement goes out in the Project Gutenberg Newsletter.

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/eBook03 or
ftp://ftp.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/books/gutenberg/eBook03

Or /eBook02, 01, 00, 99, 98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90

Just search by the first five letters of the filename you want,
as it appears in our Newsletters.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
time it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hours
to get any eBook selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.   Our
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If the value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour in 2002 as we release over 100 new text
files per month:  1240 more eBooks in 2001 for a total of 4000+
We are already on our way to trying for 2000 more eBooks in 2002
If they reach just 1-2% of the world's population then the total
will reach over half a trillion eBooks given away by year's end.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away 1 Trillion eBooks!
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only about 4% of the present number of computer users.

Here is the briefest record of our progress (* means estimated):

eBooks Year Month

    1  1971 July
   10  1991 January
  100  1994 January
 1000  1997 August
 1500  1998 October
 2000  1999 December
 2500  2000 December
 3000  2001 November
 4000  2001 October/November
 6000  2002 December*
 9000  2003 November*
10000  2004 January*


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been created
to secure a future for Project Gutenberg into the next millennium.

We need your donations more than ever!

As of February, 2002, contributions are being solicited from people
and organizations in: Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas, Connecticut,
Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois,
Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Massachusetts,
Michigan, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New
Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, Ohio,
Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, South
Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, West
Virginia, Wisconsin, and Wyoming.

We have filed in all 50 states now, but these are the only ones
that have responded.

As the requirements for other states are met, additions to this list
will be made and fund raising will begin in the additional states.
Please feel free to ask to check the status of your state.

In answer to various questions we have received on this:

We are constantly working on finishing the paperwork to legally
request donations in all 50 states.  If your state is not listed and
you would like to know if we have added it since the list you have,
just ask.

While we cannot solicit donations from people in states where we are
not yet registered, we know of no prohibition against accepting
donations from donors in these states who approach us with an offer to
donate.

International donations are accepted, but we don't know ANYTHING about
how to make them tax-deductible, or even if they CAN be made
deductible, and don't have the staff to handle it even if there are
ways.

The most recent list of states, along with all methods for donations
(including credit card donations and international donations), may be
found online at http://www.gutenberg.net/donation.html

Donations by check or money order may be sent to:

Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
PMB 113
1739 University Ave.
Oxford, MS 38655-4109

Contact us if you want to arrange for a wire transfer or payment
method other than by check or money order.


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been approved by
the US Internal Revenue Service as a 501(c)(3) organization with EIN
[Employee Identification Number] 64-622154.  Donations are
tax-deductible to the maximum extent permitted by law.  As fund-raising
requirements for other states are met, additions to this list will be
made and fund-raising will begin in the additional states.

We need your donations more than ever!

You can get up to date donation information at:

http://www.gutenberg.net/donation.html


***

If you can't reach Project Gutenberg,
you can always email directly to:

Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

Prof. Hart will answer or forward your message.

We would prefer to send you information by email.


**The Legal Small Print**


(Three Pages)

***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here? You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this eBook, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault. So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you. It also tells you how
you may distribute copies of this eBook if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS EBOOK
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
eBook, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement. If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this eBook by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from. If you received this eBook on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM EBOOKS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBooks,
is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor Michael S. Hart
through the Project Gutenberg Association (the "Project").
Among other things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this eBook
under the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

Please do not use the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark to market
any commercial products without permission.

To create these eBooks, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works. Despite these efforts, the Project's eBooks and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects". Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other eBook medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] Michael Hart and the Foundation (and any other party you may
receive this eBook from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook) disclaims
all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this eBook within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from. If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy. If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS EBOOK IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS". NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE EBOOK OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold Michael Hart, the Foundation,
and its trustees and agents, and any volunteers associated
with the production and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
texts harmless, from all liability, cost and expense, including
legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the
following that you do or cause:  [1] distribution of this eBook,
[2] alteration, modification, or addition to the eBook,
or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this eBook electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     eBook or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this eBook in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word
     processing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The eBook, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The eBook may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the eBook (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          eBook in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the eBook refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Foundation of 20% of the
     gross profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation"
     the 60 days following each date you prepare (or were
     legally required to prepare) your annual (or equivalent
     periodic) tax return.  Please contact us beforehand to
     let us know your plans and to work out the details.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
Project Gutenberg is dedicated to increasing the number of
public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form.

The Project gratefully accepts contributions of money, time,
public domain materials, or royalty free copyright licenses.
Money should be paid to the:
"Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

If you are interested in contributing scanning equipment or
software or other items, please contact Michael Hart at:
hart@pobox.com

[Portions of this header are copyright (C) 2001 by Michael S. Hart
and may be reprinted only when these eBooks are free of all fees.]
[Project Gutenberg is a TradeMark and may not be used in any sales
of Project Gutenberg eBooks or other materials be they hardware or
software or any other related product without express permission.]

*END THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS*Ver.02/11/02*END*



End of The Project Gutenberg Etext of God's Country--And the Woman
by James Oliver Curwood

